NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME, THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT, AND INFANT HEALTH
Hilary W. Hoynes
Douglas L. Miller
David Simon
Working Paper 18206
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18206
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

We acknowledge support from the UC Davis Center for Poverty Research, which receives funding
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Doug Miller also thanks the Center for
Health and Wellbeing at Princeton University for support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Hilary W. Hoynes, Douglas L. Miller, and David Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant Health
Hilary W. Hoynes, Douglas L. Miller, and David Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 18206
July 2012
JEL No. H2,H51,I38
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the health impact of a central piece in the U.S. safety net for families with children:
the Earned Income Tax Credit. Using tax-reform induced variation in the federal EITC, we examine
the impact of the credit on infant health outcomes. We find that increased EITC income reduces the
incidence of low birth weight and increases mean birth weight. For single low education (<= 12 years)
mothers, a policy-induced treatment on the treated increase of $1000 in EITC income is associated
with 6.7 to 10.8% reduction in the low birth weight rate, with larger impacts for births to African American
mothers. These impacts are evident with difference-in-difference models and event study analyses.
Our results suggest that part of the mechanism for this improvement in birth outcomes is the result
of more prenatal care and less negative health behaviors (smoking). We find little role for changes
in health insurance. We contribute to the literature by establishing that an exogenous increase in income
can improve health, and illustrating a health impact of a non-health program. More generally, we
demonstrate the potential for positive external benefits of the social safety net.
Hilary W. Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu
Douglas L. Miller
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
dlmiller@ucdavis.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18206

David Simon
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
desimon@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
In the U.S. and Europe, legislators and voters are once again debating the role of government; and
in particular what the safety net should include. Evaluations of the costs and benefits of the safety net are
often limited to examinations of labor supply and poverty. In our research, we seek to illustrate and
quantify the potential for health impacts of non-health programs. In so doing, we hope to demonstrate the
potential for positive external benefits of the social safety net. In this paper, we examine the impact of the
Earned Income Tax Credit on a key marker of lifetime health and economic success—infant birth weight.
The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) provides a refundable transfer to lower income working
families through the tax system. As a consequence of legislated expansions in the EITC (in 1986, 1990,
and 1993) and the dismantling of welfare through the 1996 welfare reform, the EITC is now the most
important cash transfer program for these families (Bitler and Hoynes 2010). In 2008, the EITC reached
25 million families at a total cost of $51 billion, compared to $9 billion in benefits for cash welfare
(TANF) and $50 billion for food stamps1. The income transfers are significant; for example, among
families with two or more children eligibility extends to annual earnings over $40,000 and the average
credit (in 2008) for these recipient families is $2,563. The release of the new “supplemental poverty
measure” reveals that the EITC lifts 6 million persons (including 3 million children) from poverty, more
than any other program (Short 2010). The introduction and expansion of “in-work” assistance, developed
in the U.S., is being adopted across many other countries around the world (Owens 2005).
Following the rapid expansion of the EITC and its now central place in the U.S. safety net, a
substantial literature has examined the impact of the EITC on a wide variety of outcomes such as labor
supply, poverty, consumption, marriage, and fertility (see reviews in Eissa and Hoynes 2006, Hotz and
Scholz 2003). Our paper enters at this point and examines the potential health benefits of this important
income transfer program. In particular, we examine the impact of the EITC on infant health outcomes,
including birth weight and low birth weight. This adds to a small, but growing, literature on the potential

1

The figures for the EITC are for tax year 2008, the most recent program data available (Internal Revenue Service,
2011a). TANF expenditures are for 2009 and consist of total cash expenditures (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2011). Food stamp expenditures are for 2009 (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2011). In the
aftermath of the Great Recession, in 2010 and 2011, Food Stamps costs increased substantially to $72 billion.

1

health benefits of non-health programs in the safety net.2
Using the EITC to examine impacts of income on infant health is attractive for several reasons.
First, the EITC generates sizable increases in household after-tax income. As we discuss below, the EITC
increases income through both the tax credit and incentivized increases in earnings. Further, our research
design identifies increases in income from tax reforms, allowing us to leverage exogenous increases in
income. This is important because there are few quasi-experiments that identify exogenous changes in
income (see discussion in Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2011). This approach allows us not only
to analyze the impact of the EITC on health, but also speak to the more general question of the impacts of
income on health.
We use the U.S. Vital Statistics micro data, covering the full census of births beginning in 1984.
We begin a few years before the 1986 expansion in the EITC, through 1998, a few years after the 1993
expansion in the EITC is fully phased in. Using the national natality data, we examine the impacts of the
EITC on birth weight and low birth weight (weighing less than 2,500 grams). These outcomes are
standard measures of infant health, and are highly predictive of longer term adult health and economic
outcomes (Currie 2011). We also explore other birth outcomes such as pre-term birth, weight-forgestational age and Apgar score. We examine possible mechanisms for the changes in infant health by
examining impacts on maternal health behaviors (smoking and drinking during pregnancy) and maternal
health utilization behaviors (pre-natal care). In addition, using the Current Population Survey, we explore
the possible role played by employment-induced changes in maternal health insurance.
We use three quasi-experimental estimation strategies. First, we begin with a difference-indifference analysis of the most recent and largest EITC reform, OBRA 1993. This commonly used
approach in the EITC and labor supply literature leverages variation over time and across family size.
Second, we use an event study design, along with comparison groups, to analyze the impacts of the 1993
expansion. This approach allows us to explicitly examine the validity of the control group by examining

2

For example, Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2010, 2011) examine the health impacts of the Food Stamp
Program and Bitler, Gelbach and Hoynes (2005) examine the health impacts of welfare reform. Closer to this study
are Evans and Garthwaite (2010) who examine the impact of the EITC on maternal health and Baker (2008) and
Strully et al (2010) who examine the impact of the EITC on birth outcomes. These papers are discussed below.

2

differences in pre-trends across groups. In the third approach, we expand the time frame to encompass the
1984, 1990, and 1993 EITC expansions. To do so, we estimate a panel fixed effects model where we
measure the generosity of the EITC using the maximum EITC credit. This measure of the EITC varies by
year for the three different expansions and increases with family size for the 1993 expansion and later.
In the empirical results, we explore differences in estimates across groups more and less likely to
be impacted by the EITC, using mother’s education, marital status, age, race, and deciles of predicted
EITC treatment. We also present various placebo results. To interpret the magnitude of our findings, we
use the March Current Population Survey combined with the NBER TAXSIM model to compute average
EITC benefits for the subsamples that we analyze in the natality data. We use these calculations to
quantify the “treatments” received by different groups and thereby interpret differences in our estimated
EITC impacts on infant health.
We find that increased EITC income reduces the incidence of low birth weight and increases
mean birth weight. For single low education (<= 12 years) mothers, a policy-induced treatment on the
treated increase of $1000 in EITC income is associated with a 6.7 to 10.8 percent reduction in the low
birth weight rate. Our results suggest that part of the mechanism for this improvement in birth outcomes
is the result of more prenatal care, and less negative health behaviors (smoking). We find little role for
changes in health insurance. Overall, our work provides important findings for evaluating the benefits of
the social safety net as well as the more general question of how income affects health.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the EITC and the
tax reform induced changes in the credit over our sample time frame. In Section 3 we review the
background literature and discuss the possible channels through which the EITC may impact infant
health. In Section 4 we describe the data and in Section 5 we describe our empirical model. In Section 6
we present our results, Section 7 we discuss mechanisms, and Section 8 we present robustness checks. In
Section 9 we provide a discussion and Section 10 we conclude.

3

2. The Earned Income Tax Credit and Tax Reforms
The Earned Income Tax Credit began in 1975 as a modest program aimed at offsetting the social
security payroll tax for low-income families with children and was born out of a desire to reward work.
The EITC is refundable so that a taxpayer with no federal tax liability receives a tax refund from the
government for the full amount of the credit. Taxpayers can elect to receive the credit throughout the
year with their paychecks; but very few (less than 5 percent) avail themselves of this early payment
option (Friedman 2000).
A taxpayer’s eligibility for the EITC depends on their earned income and the number of
qualifying children. First, the taxpayer must have positive earned income, defined as wage and salary
income, business self-employment income, and farm self-employment income. Also, the taxpayer must
have adjusted gross income and earned income below a specified amount. In 2011, the maximum
allowable income for a taxpayer with one child (two or more children) is $36,052 ($40,964) (Tax Policy
Center 2011). Second, a taxpayer must have a qualifying child, who must be under age 19 (or 24 if a fulltime student) or permanently disabled and residing with the taxpayer for more than half the year.
The amount of the credit to which a taxpayer is entitled depends on the taxpayer’s earned income,
adjusted gross income, and, since 1991, the number of EITC-eligible children in the household. There are
three regions in the credit schedule. The initial phase-in region transfers an amount equal to a subsidy
rate times their earnings. Since 1995, the subsidy rate is 34 percent for taxpayers with one child and 40
percent for taxpayers with two or more children. In the flat region, the family receives the maximum
credit (in 2011 $3,094 for one child and $5,112 for two or more children), while in the phase-out region,
the credit is phased out at the phase-out rate (16 and 21 percent). While the generosity of the credit varies
with number of children, it does not vary with marital status; taxpayers pool their earnings and income
and apply their combined resources to determine eligibility and credit amounts.3
The reach and importance of the credit has changed substantially over its history. Figure 1
presents the real maximum EITC credit (in 1999 dollars) by tax year and family size for our analysis

3

Beginning in 2002, the phase-out range was increased for married taxpayers filing jointly. The values for these
taxpayers were $1,000 higher than for singles in 2002, and are $5,080 higher in 2011.

4

period, 1983 to 1999. During this time, the EITC expanded dramatically through three tax acts: the 1986
Tax Reform Act (TRA86) and the Omnibus Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1993 (OBRA90, OBRA93).
Importantly, the tax reforms, as illustrated in Figure 1, generate differential expansions based on family
size (no children, one, two or more) that forms the basis of our quasi-experimental design. Families with
no children are eligible for only a small credit ($347 in 1999 dollars) beginning in 1993. Following
OBRA93, families with two or more children experience increases in the maximum credit of $2,160
(1999 dollars) compared to the much smaller change of $725 for families with one child. The figure also
illustrates that the 1990 and 1993 expansions were phased in over several tax years.
These expansions have led to a dramatic increase in the total cost of the EITC. As discussed in
Eissa and Hoynes (2011), the total cost of the EITC increased steadily from less than $10 billion in 1986
(in 2004 dollars) to more than $40 billion in 2004 (2004 dollars). In fact, between 1990 and 1996 the
program more than doubled in real terms. In 2008, the most recent year for which data is available, the
EITC was received by 25 million families for a total cost of more than $50 billion (Internal Revenue
Service 2011a).

3.

The EITC and Infant Health
The EITC may lead to changes in infant health through several channels including income,

maternal labor supply, and fertility. Here we discuss these channels and in so doing, discuss the
theoretical expectations and related empirical literature.
First, an expansion in the EITC leads to an exogenous and sizable increase in after-tax income for
low to moderate income families with children. Hence spending on all normal goods will increase, and
assuming child health is a normal good, health inputs increase leading to an improvement in infant health
(Currie 2009). It is well established that family socio-economic status is associated with better health (for
example see Case, Lubotsky and Paxson 2002). However, due to many confounding variables (such as
cognitive ability and other psychological and emotional skills, social class, early childhood conditions, as
well as the potential for reverse causality) the literature provides few estimates of the causal impact of
income on birth weight, or health more broadly (Almond and Currie 2011, Currie 2011). As stated in the
5

recent and comprehensive survey by Almond and Currie (2011), “It is however, remarkably difficult to
find examples of policies that increase incomes without potentially having a direct effect on outcomes.”
One approach is to use variation in social assistance policies to leverage exogenous variation in
income. For example, Currie and Cole (1993) use a sibling fixed effect estimator and find that receipt of
AFDC income has no impact on birth weight while Kehrer & Wolin (1979) find evidence that the Gary
Income Maintenance experiment may have improved birth weight for some groups. More recently,
Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2011) use the introduction of the Food Stamp Program and find that
the near-cash transfer leads to an increase in birth weight, a reduction in low birth weight, and no change
in neonatal infant mortality. Similarly, Hoynes, Page and Stevens (2011) find that exposure to WIC, a
food and nutrition program for pregnant women and young children, leads to an improvement in infant
health.
There is also evidence that conditional cash transfers in developing countries can improve birth
outcomes (Barber and Gertler 2008, Amarante et al 2011). While not examining income per se, related
work explores the impact of maternal education (Currie and Moretti 2003, McCrary and Royer 2011),
layoffs (Lindo 2011) and recessions (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004) on infant health. Given limited
evidence on this important issue, our paper provides noteworthy evidence on the potential health benefits
of increases in income.4
The increase in after-tax income could also lead to increased behaviors such as such as smoking
or drinking which lead to well documented decreases in birth weight (Currie, Neidell, and Schmeider
2009). Infant health improvements may work through other channels as well, for instance reducing stress
(e.g., financial stress) experienced by the mother leading to a direct and beneficial impact on birth weight
(Aizer et al 2009, Camacho 2008, Evans and Garthwaite 2010). Patel (2011) also showed that EITC
transfers to single women are, in part, spent on purchasing an automobile, which in of itself could

4

Some studies provide credible evidence on the impact of income on dimensions of health other than infant health.
These studies leverage income variation from a wide range of sources and examine, for example, unanticipated
social security payments and mortality (Snyder and Evans2006 ), the opening of Indian casino and mental health
(Costello et al 2003), declines in agricultural income and mortality (Banerjee et al 2007), and receipt of an
inheritance and self reported health (Meer, Miller and Rosen 2003), lottery winnings and a “health index” (Lindahl
2005).

6

increase access to prenatal care and decrease stress.
A second possible channel operates through employment and earnings. Because the EITC is tied
to work, the credit provides incentives to enter work for single parent (or single earner) families.
However, secondary earners, such as some married women, face incentives to reduce work. The
predictions for hours worked for all family types are more complex, but for most workers theory suggests
an incentive to reduce hours if already in the labor market (Eissa and Hoynes 2006). There is consistent
empirical evidence that the EITC encourages work among single mothers but little evidence that eligibleworking women adjust their hours of work in response to the EITC (Eissa and Liebman 1996, Hotz,
Mullin and Scholz 2002, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). Eissa and Hoynes (2004) find that the EITC leads
to a modest reduction in employment for married women and no change for married men. This discussion
implies that the EITC may lead to an increase in income through an increase in own earnings, at least for
single women (Patel 2011). Less is known about the relationship between maternal employment and own
or child health (Baum 2005, Del Bono et al 2008). However, Gelber and Mitchell (2011) find that the
EITC leads to an increase in market time and a reduction in leisure, but no change in time spent with
children.
In addition, because the EITC is tied to the presence and number of children, an expansion in the
credit could theoretically lead to increases in fertility. On the other hand, the work-inducing aspect of the
EITC suggests that it could lead to reductions in fertility due to an increase in the opportunity cost of the
mother’s time. Therefore, a third possible channel for the effect of the EITC on birth weight is through
changes in the composition of births. Any increase in fertility for this relatively disadvantaged group
would be expected to lead to a negative compositional effect and subsequent downward bias on the
estimates. The available evidence suggests that the EITC does not impact fertility (Baughman and
Dickert-Conlin, 2009) or family formation (Dickert-Conlin 2002; Ellwood, 2000, Herbst 2011).5
Overall, given the balance of evidence and predictions, we expect that the EITC may improve
infant health. The same forces that improve infant health, however, could also lead to a change in the

5

This finding is consistent with the broader literature finding that the elasticity of fertility with respect to transfers
from income support programs is very small (Moffitt 1998).

7

composition of births. In particular, if improvements in fetal health lead to fewer fetal deaths, there could
be a negative compositional effect on birth weight from improved survivability of “marginal” fetuses.
This could bias downward the estimated effects of the EITC on birth weight. In any case, to evaluate such
channels (and the related question of selective fertility), we test for impacts of the EITC on total births
and the composition of births.
Ours is not the first paper to analyze the health impacts of the EITC. Evans and Garthwaite
(2010) use a difference-in-difference analysis of OBRA93, relying on comparisons across women with
one versus two or more children, to examine impacts on maternal health using biomarkers and selfreported health. Quite relevant for our work, they find evidence that the expansion of the EITC lowered
the counts of the risky biomarkers in mothers, suggesting an income pathway for a reduction in stress.
Baker (2008) also examines OBRA93 using a difference-in-difference design, and concludes that the
EITC leads to a 7 to 14 gram increase in average birth weight. Strully et al. (2010) find that the presence
of a state EITCs leads to a 15 gram increase in average birth weight.6 Our paper makes several
contributions to this emerging literature. First, we present results from several identification strategies,
including an OBRA93 difference-in-difference design and a parametric design using the maximum credit
to facilitate analysis of a longer time period with multiple tax reforms. Second, we present event study
analyses as a direct test of the validity of our research design. Third, we richly analyze differences across
subgroups based on mother’s demographic characteristics and the magnitude of the EITC treatment.
Using the CPS combined with TAXSIM, we are able to quantify the predicted EITC benefit for each
group and therefore compare average treatment effects using a reasonable metric. Finally, we examine
impacts on fertility and the composition of births to analyze the potential for endogenous fertility.

4.

Data
Our main data is the U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Data, which consists of micro data on the full

6

Other studies use tax-reform induced changes in after-tax income to examine impacts on other child outcomes.
Dahl and Lochner (forthcoming) find the increase in income through the EITC leads to improvements in child test
scores. Milligan and Stabile (2008) use variation in child benefits across Canadian provinces finding that higher
income leads to increases in child test scores and decreases in aggression.

8

census of births from the National Center for Health Statistics. We use data covering births from 19831999. The data include birth weight, gender, live birth order (parity), and state and month of birth. There
are also (limited) demographic variables including the age, race, ethnicity, education and marital status of
the mother. Education and ethnicity of the mother are missing in some state-years, but by 1992 all states
provide education and by 1993 all states provide ethnicity.7 There are also missing values for birth
weight, parity, race, and marital status, but these are rare and not systematically occurring across states.
We limit the sample to mothers age 18 and older with singleton births who are not missing values for
birth weight or parity.8
We collapse the data to cells defined by state, month-year, parity of birth (1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th or
greater birth to a mother), education of mother (<12, 12, 13-15, 16+, missing), marital status of mother
(single, married, missing), race of the mother (white, black, other, missing), ethnicity of the mother
(Hispanic, non-Hispanic, missing) and age of mother (18-24, 25-35, 35+). For each cell we calculate
average birth weight, average parity (for 4th or greater cell), the fraction of births below 2,500 grams (also
the fraction below 1500, 2000, 3000, 3500, and 4000 grams), as well as other outcomes such as prenatal
care and health behaviors and the number of births.
Once we have the data collapsed to cells, we assign the appropriate tax (EITC) schedule for the
births. As illustrated in Table 1, assigning the appropriate EITC schedule amounts to assigning the
“effective tax year” (what tax year the birth is “treated” by) and number of children to each birth. To do
so, note first that the pregnancy is the “treated” time frame, so the number of children prior to the current
birth will dictate the appropriate EITC schedule. For example, we assign a first-born child the EITC
schedule for “no children,” while a third-born child would be given an EITC schedule for “two children.”9

7

In 1983 California, Texas, and Washington did not report education. In 1988 New York City also stopped
reporting education, causing a sizable portion of births from New York State to be missing mother’s education.
California started reporting education in 1989, and in 1990 Texas. By 1991 New York City reported, and all states
reported education in 1992. For Ethnicity: In 1983, there were 27 states that did not report Hispanic status.
Alabama, Connecticut, Kentucky, North Carolina, and Washington began reporting in 1988, the majority of the
other states followed in 1989 when only Louisiana, New Hampshire, and Oklahoma did not report. Louisiana began
reporting in 1990, Oklahoma in 1991, and New Hampshire in 1993.
8
We limit to singleton births because of systematically lower birth weight for multiple births. Our results are not
sensitive to this sample selection.
9
As with general individual tax exemptions, a new birth is counted as a child for the tax year regardless of when
they are born (Internal Revenue Service 2011b). However, as we describe below, given our “cash on hand”

9

We make two assumptions to assign each birth (or cell) to a given tax year. Our first assumption,
which we refer to as “cash in hand”, assumes that the EITC’s impact on infant health runs through the
cash available to the family which arrives with receipt of the tax refund. Figure 2, which is reprinted from
LaLumia (2011), shows that more than 50 percent of EITC tax refunds are received in February. So, for
example, most tax year 1990 refunds are received in February 1991 (or shortly thereafter). We also
assume that this cash is spent over the subsequent 12 months. Hence, in practice we assume that a birth is
treated based on the tax code for the prior calendar year if their sensitive developmental stage occurs
during February or later, and are treated based on the tax code of two calendar years ago if their sensitive
developmental stage occurs during January. Second, we assume that the sensitive developmental stage is
three months prior to birth.10 This is motivated by evidence that the third trimester of pregnancy is
important for birth weight production.11
Combining these “cash in hand” and sensitive developmental stage assumptions, we assign births
to EITC tax year as follows: For births in the months of May – December (third trimester beginning in
February through September), we assign the EITC parameters from the prior calendar year. For births in
the months of January – April (third trimester beginning in October through January), we assign the EITC
parameters from two calendar years ago. This timing is illustrated in Table 1, where we show our
mapping from birth month into effective tax year for births in 1990 through 1992.
The assumptions behind this mapping are unlikely to be precisely accurate. However, our
identification strategy does not rely on high-frequency time variation. We are comfortable proceeding
with these as a tractable and plausible assignment rule. To the extent that the assignment rule is
inaccurate, this should result in some “treatment” spilling over into the last measured “control” year (or
vice-versa), and this should attenuate our estimated impacts.
assumption, the birth is assigned the tax schedule for the tax year one or two years prior to the calendar year of the
birth. Therefore, the number of children that is relevant for assigning the appropriate tax schedule is the number of
children in the family prior to this birth.
10
By using three months prior to birth, we assume pregnancy is a 9-month event, ignoring preterm births. We make
this choice because gestation is not well measured and is missing for some state-years in our data. Our results are
robust to using observed gestation to assign effective tax year (discussed below).
11
For example, the cohort exposed to the Dutch Famine in the third trimester had lower average birth weight than
cohorts exposed earlier in pregnancy (Painter et al., 2005). In addition, Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2011)
show that the impact of exposure to the food stamp program is greatest in the third trimester. Also see the review in
Rush et al. (1980).

10

A handful of studies examine the impact of the EITC on spending and find that expenditures
increase more in the first quarter (quarter of EITC receipt) than later quarters (Barrow and McGranahan,
2000, Patel 2011, Smeeding et al., 2000, Gao et al 2009). Recognizing this, another approach to assigning
EITC timing is to take advantage of within-year variation in the treatment. We explore this and other
alternative assumptions about the timing of EITC income and fetal sensitivity below in Section 8.1. We
also compare the impact of the EITC through the maternal “labor supply channel” versus “income”
channel. None of the alternatives we consider change the substantive results derived from our baseline
assumptions.
With this timing established, we collapse the data further to cells based on effective tax year (and
state, parity of birth, education, race, ethnicity, marital status and age of mother). To control for potential
confounders, we add data on state by year unemployment rates, Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility
thresholds, and dummies for post welfare reform.12

5.

Empirical Methods
We provide several quasi-experimental research designs beginning with a difference-in-

difference analysis of the OBRA93 expansion. We choose the OBRA93 expansion because it is the
largest expansion of the EITC and it generated differential expansions for different family sizes. We begin
by estimating the following model:
(1)

Ypjst     Aftert * Parity 2 plus p   X st   p   s   t   j   pjst

where Y pjst is a measure of infant health (e.g., fraction low birth weight, average birth weight) for the cell
defined by parity p, demographic group j, in state s for effective tax year t. We include data for effective
tax years 1991–1998 and After equals one for effective tax years 1994 through 1998.13 Xst includes
controls for unemployment rate, welfare reform and Medicaid or SCHIP eligibility and we include fixed

12

The state-year unemployment rates are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011). The welfare reform dummy
variable is equal to one if the state has implemented a waiver or passed TANF by the given year and comes from
Bitler, Gelbach and Hoynes (2006). The Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility threshold comes from Hoynes and
Luttmer (2011).
13
In this design, we do not include data on years prior to 1991 because of the prior expansion in OBRA90.

11

effects for demographic group  j , parity  p , state s and effective tax year t . The estimates for this and
all subsequent models are weighted using the number of births in the state-year-parity-demographic cell
and the standard errors are clustered by state.
In our first specification, we compare 2nd and higher order births (Parity2plus) to first births,
recalling that the EITC treatment corresponds to the number of children prior to the current birth. In this
case first births are the control, because they were exposed to the relatively small childless EITC credit.
To examine predictions concerning the differential expansion in the two-child vs. one-child EITC, in our
second specification we include After * Parity2 and After * Parity3plus (maintaining first births as the
control). Finally, in our third specification, we limit the sample to 2nd and higher order births and include
After * Parity3plus, thus effectively using 2nd births as a control for third and higher order births.
Identification in this model requires that in the absence of the EITC expansion the control group
(e.g. first births) would have similar trends to the treated group (e.g., second or later births). To explore
the validity of the design, we extend the OBRA93 analysis to an “event time” analysis. In practice, this
means estimating (1) with a full set of year effects (which we already have) and year effects interacted
with Parity2plus (with analogous models for the event time versions of second and third specifications).
We then plot the year times Parity2plus interactions. This allows an examination of the pre-trends.
In our second quasi-experimental model we take advantage of the full set of tax reforms which
have resulted in expansions of the EITC. We parameterize the EITC schedule using the maximum credit,
which varies by effective tax year and birth order (1st, 2nd, 3rd or more). We then estimate:
(2)

Ypjst     Maxcredit pt   X st   p   s   t   j   pjst

Maxcredit is equal to the maximum EITC credit that the family can receive, given effective tax year t and
parity p. All other variables are defined the same as in (1) above. To implement our parametric maximum
credit model, we use effective tax years 1983 –1998.

12

6.

Results

6.1

OBRA 93 Treatment - Main Estimates for Low Birth Weight
We begin by presenting results for the OBRA93 difference-in-difference model using effective

tax years 1991 –1998. Our main estimates are for a “high impact sample” consisting of single women
with a high school education or less. This follows much of the EITC and labor supply literature which
also focuses on this high impact group (e.g., Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001).
Using the March Current Population Survey and the NBER TAXSIM model, we find that for the 1998 tax
year about 42 percent of single women 18-45 with a child under age 3 (our proxy for a “new births”
sample) and a high school education or less are eligible for the EITC. This compares to 32 percent for
single women with some college and 27 percent for married women with a high school education or less
(with the same age of woman and age of child restrictions).
Results from estimating equation (1) for our high impact subsample are shown in Table 2. Each
column of the table represents estimates from a separate regression where the dependent variable is the
fraction low birth weight (multiplied by 100). We show only the coefficient on the treatment effect (and
its clustered standard error). The first column indicates that second parity or higher births, relative to first
births, were 0.36 percentage points less likely to be low birth weight in the post-OBRA93 period (relative
to the mean of 10.2 percent). Since the OBRA93 expansion was larger for families that already had two
children the second model (shown in column 3) decomposes the policy impact into second births and
third or higher order births. The results are consistent with expectations: low birth weight status is
reduced by roughly 0.53 percentage points for third or higher births versus 0.16 for second births (each
compared to first births). We can also compare 3rd and higher order births to second births which
eliminates the possibility of 1st births being an inadequate control (perhaps due to less knowledge about
the EITC). These results (in column 5) show that low birth weight status is reduced roughly 0.34
percentage points relative to the mean of 10.7 percent. Table 2 also shows estimates for models where we
add state controls for Medicaid expansions, welfare reform, and state level unemployment rates within the
state by year cell (columns 2, 4 and 6). There is little change to the coefficients from adding these
additional controls (we control for these variables in the remaining analysis).
13

A possible concern is that the regression results from Table 2 could be driven by pre-existing
differential trends in health by parity of birth. For example, if the incidence of low birth weight for higher
birth orders was already declining before the OBRA93 expansion then our estimates could be biased
upward. To address this concern we show results from an event study. In particular, we estimate a model
similar to specification (2) in Table 2 except we replace After*Parity2plus with a full set of year dummies
interacted with Parity2plus. We plot the year by parity interactions in Figure 3a, where we normalize the
coefficients to 0 in 1993, the year prior to the OBRA93 expansion. The figure suggests there was little to
no pre-trend before the expansion, validating the research design. In addition, the treatment effect grows
with years since 1993 which is consistent with the phased-in expansion (see Figure 1). Figure 3b shows
the event study coefficients for the second model, where we plot the interactions of the year dummies
with Parity2 and Parity3plus. Here, as in Figure 3a, the pre-trend is quite flat. We include on Figure 3b
the maximum EITC credit (in 1999 dollars) by year for second births and third or higher births (relative to
first births). By including this measure of the relative expansions in the credit, we can see that the
magnitudes of the event study coefficients across group (2nd versus 3rd or higher births) and across years
are quite consistent with the law changes. In particular, the treatment effects are larger for the third and
later births than for second births and the treatment effects increase with time since 1993. One limitation
of these results is due to the earlier OBRA90 expansion in the EITC; this limits our sample to three years
of pre-trends.14
The third model, which uses second births as the control group rather than first births, offers an
additional examination of the effects of increased income through the EITC. Recall in this model we
compare third and higher order births to second births, taking advantage of the differential expansions for
two or more children (Figure 1). In addition, because this differential expansion between third and higher
births relative to second births was not part of the earlier 1990 EITC expansion, we can utilize data for
more pre-years in the event study. Figure 3c shows the event study for this model, where we estimate it
using data for effective tax years 1987-1998. The results are very encouraging: The relatively long pre
period shows no confounding pre-trend accompanied by a sharp decline in the incidence of low birth
14

In our panel fixed effects model below we take advantage of the full set of credit expansions.

14

weight births corresponding to the increase in eligibility for maximum EITC benefits. As with Figure 3b,
we include the maximum EITC credit (in 1999 dollars) by year for third and higher births (relative to
second births) and see that the magnitude and timing of the birth weight changes line up well with the
timing of the EITC expansion.15
Table 3 shows heterogeneity in effects by race and Hispanic origin within the high impact
sample. The EITC reduced the likelihood of having a low birth weight birth for black mothers of 0.73
percentage points (relative to a mean of 14.4 percent), more than four times higher than the effect on
white mothers (0.13 percentage point decile relative to a mean of 8.1 percent). This reflects the fact that
black mothers in comparison to white mothers (in the high impact sample) have on average lower income
and therefore are more likely to receive larger EITC benefits. We return to this below when we discuss
the magnitudes of these findings. Interestingly, smaller treatment effects are experienced by Hispanic
mothers than non-Hispanic mothers (-0.13 versus -0.41 in the 2nd+/1st parity model). Perhaps this is
because Hispanic children tend have better baseline birth outcomes (7 percent of Hispanic births in the
high impact are low birth weight compared to 11.2 percent of non-Hispanic births), so there could be less
room for improvement. In addition, a larger fraction of Hispanics are undocumented immigrants who do
not qualify for the EITC which could also attenuate the estimates (Internal Revenue Service 2011b).16
To interpret these results it is helpful to know the average increase in dollars of income accruing
to EITC eligible mothers (due to OBRA93). Because neither income nor EITC benefits is reported in the
vital statistics it is impossible to use our estimation sample to directly quantify changes in EITC benefits
received. The CPS has earnings and income but not EITC benefits; however, using the CPS combined
with the NBER TAXSIM model it is possible to impute the average change in dollars of EITC

15

The event study shows that the improvement in low birth weight continues after OBRA93 is fully phased in. This
may be explained by the EITC-generated improvement in maternal health that is brought into the pregnancy after the
expansion is fully phased in (Evans and Garthwaite 2010).
16
We also explored differences by gender of birth, finding no significant differences in birth outcomes. Dahl and
Lochner (forthcoming) and Milligan and Stabile (2008) use tax reforms to identify changes in income on child
outcomes and find larger effects for boys. However, they examine the impacts of income on outcomes of existing
children and thus may capture gender biases in allocation of the additional income. In our case, many/most mothers
may not know the sex during pregnancy so the differences in outcomes would come from biology rather than
behavioral differences.

15

eligibility.17 These results, along with the effects on infant health, are shown in Table 4. Panel A presents
results corresponding to our model comparing 2nd and higher order births to first births. The first row
transcribes from Tables 2 and 3 the estimated impacts of the EITC expansion on low birth weight for all
mothers, and for Black and White mothers. The second row shows estimates of the impact of the
expansion on EITC dollars received by each of these groups (relative to first births). These are calculated
by a simple pre-post treated/untreated difference in difference estimate with the outcome variable being
the TAXSIM calculation for simulated EITC benefits.18 This row shows that among our high impact
sample of single mothers with 12 or fewer years of schooling, Black mothers received the largest increase
in average predicted EITC income from OBRA93 ($624 in 2009 dollars compared to $471 for white
mothers).
The third row of Table 4 presents the “impact of $1000 treatment on the treated” (TOT) estimate
obtained by dividing the first row by the second row and then multiplying by 1000. This IV-type
interpretation suggests what the impact of EITC income would be, under the assumptions that (1) take-up
of EITC was 100 percent19, and (2) EITC income was the only mechanism through which the policy
impacted birth outcomes. We view this as an overly restrictive assumption, but still think that the
numbers offer a useful scaling of the coefficients. The fourth row presents the percent impact of the
$1000 treatment on the treated by dividing the third row by the group mean. Finally, Panel B of Table 4
presents similar results for our separate comparisons of 2nd and 3rd and higher order births against 1st
children and Panel C presents estimates for the comparisons of 3rd and higher order births compared to 2nd
births.

17

In particular, we use the March CPS for 1992-1999 (corresponding the tax years 1991-1998). To construct a
sample resembling the “new births” natality sample, we limit the sample to women 18-45 with a child age less than
three. We use the woman’s marital status and household income and earnings to calculate taxes. We assign
dependents to be the number of children in the household minus one (e.g. the child<3 is the “new birth” and hence
not counted in our tax calculation to mimic the treatment assignment in the natality data). Providing this
information, TAXSIM returns the federal EITC that the observation is eligible for.
18
We take our CPS sample which proxies a “new births” sample (describe above) and regress the real EITC
simulated benefit on dummies for Parity2plus (for our 2+/1 model) or Parity2 and Parity3plus (for 3+/2/1 model),
After, and interactions of parity and after. Exactly replicating equation (1) (adding state and year fixed effects,
demographic dummies and state-year controls) has little impact on the estimates.
19
Scholz (1994) analyzes tax year 1990 and estimates take-up rates between 80-86%. Internal Revenue Service
(2002) analyzes 1996 tax year and estimates range from 82 to 87 percent. The IRS study finds lower take-up rates
for childless filers and Hispanics.

16

The results in Table 4 show that for our high impact sample a $1000 EITC TOT (2009 $) leads to
a 0.68 percentage point reduction in percent low birth weight, a 6.7 percent effect. The corresponding
$1000 TOT effect for whites is -0.28 percentage points or a 3.4 percent decline and for blacks a TOT
effect of -1.17 percentage points or an 8.1 percent decline.
Panel B in Table 4 shows the EITC treatment for 2nd births is smaller than 3rd or later births ($373
versus $667). Interestingly, the scaled estimates (TOT) are also smaller for the 2nd births than they are for
the 3rd births. Table 4 thus helps us to understand why the coefficients in Tables 2 and 3 are smaller for
2nd than for 3rd births: it is both because the 2nd births received a smaller treatment and also because their
outcomes appear to be less sensitive to the treatment. Table 4 further shows that this effect is most
pronounced for Black mothers. For White mothers, it appears that the differences are solely due to the
size of the differences in the EITC treatment.
6.2

Impacts of OBRA93 across subgroups
To obtain more insight into these effects, we have estimated the results on subgroups of the data.

For this analysis we use the full sample (that is, we no longer condition on being in the high impact
sample). Within the full sample we estimate models on the following subgroups: education categories
(<12, =12, 12+); race (White, Black); ethnicity (Hispanic, Non-Hispanic); marital status (Single,
Married); age group (18-24, 25-34, 35+); and (for continuity) the high impact sample. For each of these
subgroups we estimate the impacts of the EITC expansion on probability of low birth weight using the
specification in columns (2) and (6) of Table 2, and we also estimate the difference-in-difference impact
on EITC income (as in row 2 of Table 4) using the CPS sample.
Figure 4 presents results from this exercise. The x-axis shows the impact on EITC income and
the y-axis shows the estimated impact on low birth weight. For example, the key result from Table 4 (“all
high impact mothers”) is presented as a dot at (x = $521, y = -0.354). The size of the dots represents the
number of births for this subgroup. These scatterplots show a strong relationship between the magnitude
of EITC treatment and impacts on low birth weight for the Parity 2+ vs. 1 model (Figure 4a) and the
parity 3+ vs. 2 model (Figure 4b). Subgroups with large estimated impacts on low birth weight are also
those with large impacts on the EITC income while subgroups with smaller increases in EITC income
17

also have smaller impacts on low birth weight. You can also see “placebo” estimates, for example the
estimate for highly educated women (labeled “ed16+”) which has a very small EITC treatment and a
wrong signed (insignificant) and small coefficient on low birth weight.
One drawback of the analysis in Figure 4 is that the subgroups are overlapping. As an alternative,
we take the full sample and divide it into 10 “deciles of predicted EITC treatment.” To do this we take the
CPS 1997-2001 (tax year 1996-2000) and select women ages 18-45 with two or more children (at least
one less than 6).20 We use the woman’s characteristics to impute the EITC amount using TAXSIM (as
above). We regress the predicted EITC on state fixed effects and full set of interactions of the
demographic predictors.21 We apply these parameter estimates to the natality sample to obtain predicted
EITC income. Using the predicted EITC we assign each demographic group-state cell to an “EITC
decile” (1 being least impacted and 10 being most impacted).22 We then estimate the difference-indifference models for low birth weight and the EITC treatment for each decile (as we did for each
demographic subgroup). We present the results for this analysis in Figure 5. The parameter estimates (and
their 95 percent confidence intervals) are shown in blue circles (left y-axis scale) and the EITC treatment
for each decile is shown in red diamonds (right y-axis scale). (Note we have plotted the percentage point
reduction in low birth weight so that the EITC income treatment and the estimated treatment effects both
increase with decile.) The results for the 2+/1 model (Figure 5a) shows the treatment effect growing with
the EITC treatment, with significant impacts for the top 3 deciles. For the 3+/2 model (Figure 5b) the
effects are significant for the 7th and highest decile.
6.3

Panel FE estimates using multiple EITC expansions
We can extend our analysis of the EITC by looking at a larger number of years and the three

different expansions. In particular, we use natality data spanning effective tax years 1984-1998
encompassing the expansions in 1986, 1990 and 1993. To parameterize the generosity of the EITC we use
20

This CPS sample is slightly different from the one described above. To assign predicted EITC we want a stable
EITC schedule (not varying in real terms across years or with number of children) thus years 1996-2000 (after
OBRA93 is fully phased in) and women with two or more children.
21
Demographic predictors include education group (<12, 12, 12+), race (white, black, other), marital status
(married, single) and age (18-24, 25-34, 35+). We do not use Hispanic status because it is missing for some states in
the Natality sample.
22
The deciles are assigned taking account of the number of births in each cell. By construction the decile assignment
does not vary by year (and only by state-demographic cell).

18

the maximum credit (in 1000s of 1995$), which varies by tax year and parity. We estimate equation (2)
which is weighted using the number of births in a cell and standard errors are clustered on state.
Table 5 shows results from estimating the model on our high impact sample, single women with a
high school education or less and for white and black subsets of the high impact sample. The results for
the full high impact sample show that a $1000 dollar (1995$) increase in the maximum credit leads to a
0.3 percentage point decline in the percent low birth weight (column 1). As above, the results show larger
effects for blacks (-0.52) than for whites (-0.12).
Due to the longer time span, with multiple EITC expansions, we can explore the sensitivity of the
results to the inclusion of parity times year linear trends. The results (in columns 2, 4, and 6) show
substantially larger estimated treatment effects for models with parity linear trends. While we may be
“overfitting” the parity-time relationship, we view the robustness to including the parity trends as an
important result.
The results in Table 5 are not directly comparable to the magnitudes for difference-in-difference
results (provided above in Table 4) because here we are using the maximum benefit program parameter.
To facilitate comparison to the difference-in-difference results we return to the CPS data linked with
TAXSIM and estimate a “first stage” model where we regress predicted EITC income on the maximum
credit (along with controls for year, parity, demographics). For the full high impact sample, the point
estimate suggests that a $1000 increase in the maximum credit leads to a $330 increase in EITC income
(the tables shows the estimate of 0.330), reflecting the fact that a fraction of the sample is not eligible, or
are eligible for an amount smaller than the maximum benefit. We use this to construct an IV-type estimate
of the impact of $1000 of EITC income (not max credit) on the percent low birth weight, as well as the
percent impact. This is comparable to our difference-in-difference estimates above.
The estimates (without parity linear trends) are very similar to, but slightly lower than, the
difference-in-difference estimates: a $1000 of EITC expansion reduces the incidence of low birth weight
by 5.6% for the full high impact sample (compared to 6.7% for the DD), 3.4% for whites (3.4% in the
DD), and 7.2% for blacks (8.1% for the DD). We also estimated models by decile of predicted EITC
treatment, showing larger estimated effects in the higher deciles (available on request).
19

Given the similarity of the panel fixed effects results to the OBRA93 results, we return to the
OBRA93 design for the remainder of the paper.
6.4

Other outcome variables
Low birth weight (less than 2,500 grams) is a standard outcome for infant health. However, for

our purposes it is rather arbitrary. To explore more fully the impact of the EITC expansion on the
distribution of birth weight, following Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2011we estimated a series of
difference-in-difference models for the probability that birth weight is below a given gram threshold:
1,500; 2,000; 2,500; 3,000; 3,500; and 4,000. We plot the estimates and their 95% confidence intervals
for the 2nd+/1st parity model (Figure 6a) and the 3rd+/2nd parity model (Figure 6b). For each gram
threshold, we divide the estimate by the mean for that outcome (generating the percent effects in the
graphs). The results generally show larger effects at the lower end of the birth weight distribution and
very small effects at the top. For the 2nd+/1st parity model, the effects on very low birth weight (<1,500
grams) are not statistically significant.
Many studies also examine mean birth weight and we do so here for our high impact sample in
Table 6. We estimate that for all high impact mothers the EITC expansion, comparing second and higher
order births to first births, leads to an increase in mean birth weight of 10 grams (or 6.9 grams for the 3+/2
model). As shown in Appendix Table 1, these impacts are larger for Black mothers (18 grams), and for
Non-Hispanic mothers (11 grams). Appendix Table 2 presents our birth weight results along with the
EITC income results, so as to be able to gauge the magnitudes of our estimated impacts. For our basic
2+/1 model, we find that an increase of $1000 of EITC income (2009$ TOT) is associated with an
increase in mean birth weight of 19 grams for a 0.6 percent effect. This TOT percent effect is significantly
smaller than the 7 percent impact for low birth weight. This is consistent with other studies finding larger
impacts in the lower tail of the birth weight distribution (e.g. Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2011).
Again, this impact is larger for Black mothers ($1000 TOT effect is 28.7 grams or a .9 percentage point
increase) than for White mothers ($1000 TOT effect is 9.25 grams or a 0.28 percentage point increase),

20

and larger for 3rd births (23.3 grams or 0.73 percent) relative to 2nd births.23
In addition to birth weight, we can examine other birth outcomes such as pre-term birth (born
before the 37th week of pregnancy), small for gestational age (below the 10th percentile of birth weight for
gestational age), and Apgar score (score below 8 [of 10]). 24 These results are presented in the remaining
columns of Table 6 and show that the EITC expansions improved infant health along each of these
dimensions: a reduction in prematurity, an improvement in weight-for-gestational age, and an
improvement in 5 minute APGAR scores. All of these effects are found for the 2+/1 model and the 3+/2
model, are statistically significantly distinguishable from zero, and are fairly modest in magnitude. On
the whole, these outcomes tell the same story as the analysis of low birth weight. Further, as shown in
Appendix Table 1, the estimates are consistently larger for Blacks and Non-Hispanics compared to
whites.

7.

Mechanisms of impact
What are the mechanisms by which an expanded EITC leads to improved infant health? Some of

the possible mechanisms can be examined directly. For instance, Patel (2011) documents the relationship
between the EITC and family expenditures. It is plausible that this increased consumption may lend itself
to a healthier fetal environment through improved nutrition or reductions in stress and other
environmental threats. Alternatively, it is possible that the EITC could lend itself to improvements in

23

We also estimated event study models for mean birth weight and we present those in Appendix Figure 1. The
event study for parity 2+ vs. 1 (Appendix Figure 1a) suggests a possible pre-existing trend. Appendix Figure 1b
splits this out by parity. Here we see (solid lines) that there is a modest (but similar) pre-trend in mean birth weight
for both parity groups. As such, for mean birth weight, we feel more confident in our model using parity 2 births as a
control group for parity 3+ births. Appendix Figure 1c presents the event study graph from our 3+/2 model. The pretrends appear to be flat, and there is a jump in both EITC income (the treatment) and in mean birth weight (the
outcome) following the expansion.
24
Unfortunately, due to data limitations we were unable to estimate the impact on infant mortality, an important
outcome measure that would be complementary to the outcomes we present here. The national linked birth-death
vital statistics records are unavailable for the years 1992, 1993, and 1994; and they lie in the middle of the OBRA93
expansions. When we re-estimate our birth weight models excluding these years, the main results become too noisy
to provide much insight. We are unable to use the unlinked death and birth records to compute cohort-based
measures of mortality, because the death records do not record the child’s parity. Without this information we
cannot assign a treatment status to deaths. We have explored the possibility of pursuing California vital statistics
records (which have linked births and infant deaths over the full period). When we re-estimate our birth weight
models on California data only, the results do not hold up within this state (point estimates are small, and confidence
intervals are large).

21

health care utilization during pregnancy, leading to improved health outcomes.
To explore the impact of the EITC on health care, we examine prenatal care as an intermediate
outcome. We consider several measures of prenatal care, and results are presented in Table 7 for our high
impact sample. The results are for the most part consistent in magnitude and significance across both of
our difference-in-difference research designs, and so we discuss only the 3+/2 results here.
The EITC expansion led to an increase in prenatal care across all measures. There is an increase
in 0.62 percentage points of receiving any prenatal care, and a similar magnitude in receiving care before
the third trimester. This increase is large compared the “no care” average outcomes (11.5% do not
receive prenatal care before their 3rd trimester, and 4% do not receive any care). The impact on the
number of visits, 0.09, is precisely estimated and fairly modest compared to the mean (9.8 visits).
Finally, we see an improvement in the Kessner Index for adequate care.
In addition to examining prenatal care, we use information on self-reported smoking and drinking
in the birth certificate data as additional intermediate outcomes of interest. We find reductions in “any
smoking” of 1.2 percentage points, which is reasonably large compared to baseline smoking rates of
about 30%. We find reductions in “any drinking” of about 1.1 percentage points (compared to mean
drinking rates of about 3.3%).
Given that the EITC leads to increases in employment, one possible pathway for affecting infant
health is through changes in maternal health insurance. The national birth records that are our primary
data set do not have this information, so we use the March Current Population Survey for this purpose.
We use information on whether a woman has any insurance, public insurance or private insurance as
outcome variables, and analyze these with our 2+/1 and 3+/2 models. For this analysis we treat the
number of children in the household as the key variable determining the EITC schedule.25 Demand for
insurance may be directly influenced by the presence of children in the household, and if this influence is
changing over time this threatens the 2+/1 model, which compares families with children against those
without. As such we place greater trust in the 3+/2 model which compares families with two or more
25

In the CPS, we do not observe a new births sample. Instead here we adopt the usual EITC research design and use
the observed number of children to assign treatment. Thus our 2+/1 sample compares women with children to
women without children. Our 3+/2 design compares women with two or more children to women with one child.

22

children against those with one child. Finally, we also examine the subset of women who have children
younger than age 6, since we expect their economic and demographic circumstances to be closer to the
birth population of our main results.
Our results on health insurance for the high impact sample are in Table 8. In the first column we
show employment as the outcome variable, confirming the typical result that EITC causes large and
statistically significant increases in (annual) employment. The remaining columns of the table show that
the EITC expansion led to a decrease in the woman’s Medicaid coverage and an increase in her private
insurance coverage. Examining the 3+/2 model for all mothers, we estimate a 3.7 percentage point
reduction in Medicaid coverage and a 3.2 percentage point increase in private insurance. These numbers
can be compared with a 6 percentage point increase in employment. The offsetting impacts lead, overall,
to an estimate of no change in the probability of any insurance (and a decline in coverage in the 2+/1
model). 26 When we examine the sample of women with young children, we see the same qualitative
impacts. The point estimates are smaller (2.1 percentage point reduction in Medicaid coverage and 2.8
percentage point increase in private coverage), and the standard errors are a bit larger.
How should we interpret the reductions in low birth weight in light of these estimates? First, we
see the reduction in smoking rates as being a plausible channel for the birth weight improvements27 and
we also find the increase in the chance of having a prenatal visit to be consistent with this pattern. One
possibility is that the EITC-generated increases in income lead to more access to prenatal care (and thus
less smoking) and better birth outcomes. Another possibility is that the EITC-generated increase in
employment leads to dropping Medicaid insurance for private insurance. The insurance specifications
suggest that overall insurance coverage is not changed by the EITC expansion (and if anything declines in
the 2+/1 model) but if the private insurance is higher “quality,” lowering barriers for mothers to schedule
doctor’s appointments, this may result in earlier prenatal care (for some mothers), which leads to
reductions in smoking and improved birth outcomes.
26

Meyer and Rosenbaum (2008) find a similar result.
Almond, et. al. (2005, Table VI) estimate that smokers have 3.5%pts higher incidence of low birth weight. We
estimate in Table 7 a reduction in smoking of 1.2–1.9 %pts, which suggests a reduction in low birth weight
incidence due to the smoking channel of 4 to 7 per 10,000 births. This is a modest but meaningful portion of our
main estimates in Table 2 of an overall reduction in low birth weight incidence of 34 per 10,000 births.
27

23

This discussion of channels of impact is speculative on our part, and our research design does not
let us distinguish it from alternative plausible channels. For example, it may be the case that employment
itself leads to reductions in smoking, or instead that early prenatal care leads to reductions in low birth
weight. Further, it may be that the increases in income lead to reductions in birth weight through other
channels, perhaps including better nutrition.28

8.

Extensions and robustness checks

8.1

Sensitivity to model of timing of impact
Recall that in our main results we assign the “EITC treatment” assuming that the income arrives

in February (our “cash-in-hand” assumption), is available throughout the next 12 months, and the tax
treatment as of the beginning of the third trimester is what matters for birth outcomes. Here we examine
the sensitivity of our results to alternative models of the timing of the impact. We explore three
alternatives: (1) when the “sensitive” period is for fetal development during gestation; (2) when the EITC
income is received/spent and is likely to impact fetal health; and (3) impacts arising from the timing of the
arrival of additional income through “labor supply” (versus time timing of arrival of the additional
income through the EITC refund).
To examine alternative assumptions about the sensitive period for fetal development, we return to
our data at the month-year (by state by parity by demographic group) level. We assume that the EITC
income is received beginning in a February and spent evenly throughout the subsequent year. For a given
birth, we can construct the EITC exposure during the infant’s first trimester, second trimester, and third
trimester as the average credit across the given months of pregnancy. For example, a March 1995 birth
will have for its third trimester exposure one month of tax year 1993 policy (reflecting fetal exposure
during January 1995, hence EITC received during February 1994, which comes from tax policy set in
1993), and two months of tax year 1994 policy (reflecting fetal exposure during February and March
1995, reflecting cash received in February 1995, which comes from tax policy in 1994). We also examine
28

We would like to be able to measure insurance status linked with birth outcomes, and some state-level data (CA,
MI) have this linkage in their records. However, when we limited our basic models to estimate on just CA or just
MI, the main results do not hold up (with overly large and uninformative confidence intervals).

24

similar exposure in the first and second trimesters (as well as a model allowing for sensitivities in all three
trimesters).
Results of these models are in Table 9. In this table we present results from our maximum EITC
credit panel fixed effects specification, with low birth weight as the outcome variable.29 Results for our
3+/2 difference-in-difference model (reported in Appendix Table 3) are qualitatively similar. Each row
presents results from a separate model. The first row copies the results from Column 1 of Table 5. The
next three rows assume that a child’s “sensitive trimester” is the averaged over the 3rd, 2nd, and 1st,
respectively. They all have similar point estimates and standard errors. The next row includes a variable
for each trimester’s exposure. The point estimates in this model are noisy and we cannot reject equality
of coefficients; . the evidence is suggestive that the impact may be strongest in the first trimester.
To examine alternative assumptions about the timing of EITC income’s impact on infant health,
we next assume that all EITC income is spent in the February of receipt. We then assign this income to
an infant based on whether and when February falls within their gestation. Results of these models are
presented in rows 6 and 7 of Table 9. Again, the point estimates here are similar to that from our base
model. Also, we cannot distinguish among the three trimesters to determine if one is especially
important. (For this timing model, a birth will experience exposure at most during one of its trimesters –
whichever one contains February. As such, we do not need to sum up the coefficients in row 7.)
Finally, we examine potential impacts through the labor supply and earned income channels of
the EITC. To do this, we assign to each month the EITC treatment status of the current (JanuaryDecember) tax year, to reflect the labor supply incentives and corresponding impact on earned income.30
We then assign this treatment to each birth based on which months fall into which trimester. Results of
this model are presented in rows 8 and 9 of Table 9. In row 8, we see results similar to the baseline model.
In row 9, we “horse race” the labor supply channel against the core cash-in-hand channel. In this model
the cash-in-hand coefficient retains its significance (and increases somewhat in magnitude), while the
29

Since this examination of timing requires averaging across months of exposure, it seemed more natural to use the
maximum credit model.
30
For example, a March 1995 birth will have for its third trimester exposure three months tax year 1995 policy
(reflecting fetal exposure during January-March 1995) and six months of tax 1994 policy (reflecting fetal exposure
during June – December 1994).

25

labor supply coefficient becomes positive. Our reading of this evidence is that it is difficult to separately
identify these two channels with the low-frequency tax changes that identify our model.
8.2

Potential threats to identification: Endogenous Births
As discussed above, expansions in the EITC may lead to changes in the composition of births due

to labor supply incentives and fertility. If, for example, expansions lead to an increase in the births to
more disadvantaged women, then our estimates will be biased downward. To explore this we apply the
same identification strategy that we applied above to infant health and examine the impacts on the number
and composition of births. Table 10 presents the results of the difference-in-difference analysis for the
high impact sample where the dependent variable is the log of the number of births in the (state-parityyear-demographic) cell. We provide estimates of comparing 2nd and higher order births to 1st births, and
comparing 3rd and higher order births to 2nd births. Consistent with the existing literature, the results
show small and statistically insignificant impacts on overall fertility. In the remaining columns of Table
10, we examine the impact of the EITC expansion on the composition of births by estimating models with
the dependent variable equal to the share of births in the cell that are born to women in a given
demographic group. We examine impacts on the race, education, and age of the mother. Note that these
are all characteristics that we control for in our main regressions above. So changes in these variables are
not a threat to our design. But if treatment is related to changes in these observables we might be
concerned about changes in unobservables. The table shows evidence of some small, but statistically
significant effects of the treatment on the demographic characteristics. Interestingly, there is an
inconsistent pattern across the models, with some models showing the treatment correlated with more
births to disadvantaged mothers and others showing treatment correlated with fewer disadvantaged births.
We are encouraged by the fact that, as shown in event study version of these results in Figure 7 (for the
3+/2 model), the changes in the demographics are changing smoothly through the 1993 expansion while
our main results (Figure 3) change sharply with the expansion in 1993. Given this, we do not see
endogenous fertility to be a concern for the interpretation of our results.31

31

Nonetheless, we show in Appendix Figure 2 that our main event study results for low birth weight are robust to
adding controls for demographic-group times linear year.

26

8.3

Robustness and Sensitivity
Our results are robust to changes in the specific sample selection that we use for the analysis. In

Appendix Table 4, we present estimates of the 2+/1 and 3+/2 difference-in-difference models for low
birth weight. In column 1, we drop Mexican born women, who are at higher risk of being undocumented
and ineligible for the EITC. In column 2, we use reported gestation to assign treatment (rather than
assuming a 9-month gestation) and in column 4 drop observations with weight inconsistent with
gestation. In column 3 we drop fourth and higher parities and in the last two columns we balance the
panel to include states reporting education in all years (column 5) and states that did not impute marital
status in all years (column 6). The qualitative results are unchanged across these different samples.
Our core research design is based on a “parity times tax year” identification strategy.
Consequently, our strategy could be susceptible to bias arising from parity-specific spurious trends in
birth weight that are coincident with the policy change. We have already tested this in two ways: First the
event study models provide a direct test of the validity of the design by examination of pre-trends.
Second, we showed that the maximum credit panel fixed effects model are robust to adding parity linear
trends (the results with trends are, if anything, larger than our base case results). To examine this further,
we examine a series of “pair-wise” comparisons of different parity births. Some of these comparisons
(e.g. 2 vs. 1, 3 vs. 2) embed a treatment and some (e.g. 4 vs. 3) form a “placebo test” for our estimation
method.
We present results in Appendix Table 5 for the high impact sample. In the first row we compare
second births (treated under the “one child” EITC schedule) to first births (untreated), and so on. The first
two rows reinforce our main findings – there was a relative improvement in low birth weight for 2nd births
compared to 1st births, and also for 3rd births compared to 2nd births. The remaining rows of the table
compare pairs of birth parities which are both “treated” and we expect to find no estimated effect for these
comparisons. This appears to be true for 5th vs. 4th and 6th and higher vs. 5th. However, we do find that
low birth weight improved more for fourth births than for third births, which is not consistent with our
expectation. To investigate this finding further, we estimated an event study model for this comparison.
This analysis indicates that the 4 vs. 3 difference begins in 1995 and grows after that. Additionally we
27

predict EITC income “treatment” for 4 vs. 3 in the CPS (as we did above in Table 4). We found that the
OBRA93 expansion was associated with an increase in predicted EITC income for fourth births compared
to third, even though the policy change was the same for these two groups. This suggests that women
with 4th births were becoming more disadvantaged (e.g. lower earnings) relative to women with 3rd births.
The gap between 4th and 3rd births does raise a cautionary note about potential parity-specific
trends in birth weight, and our analysis should be interpreted in light of this caution. We believe that
despite this, the preponderance of evidence indicates that the EITC does improve child health. First, the
timing of these spurious trends does not correspond cleanly with the policy change. Second, in our
“maxcredit” models, results are robust to inclusion of parity-specific trends. Third, the fact that predicted
EITC income increases for 4th vs. 3rd births is consistent with the EITC being part of the channel for the
improved birth weight of 4th born children.

9.

Discussion
In this paper we find that the OBRA93 expansions are associated with decreases in low birth

weight and increases in average birth weight. This is true for two different identification strategies
(comparing 2nd and higher parities to 1st born children; and comparing 3rd and higher parities to 2nd born
children). When we examine impacts by subgroup, we find that the groups who have largest
improvements in child health have greater increases in EITC income (3rd and higher births), greater
socioeconomic risk, or both (Black mothers). In addition, when we examine groups (e.g., high education
mothers) for whom we expect (and find) little EITC income impact, we see insignificant and small
negative effects (for some college) or insignificant and small positive effects (for college graduates) on
the low birth weight outcomes. This provides a “falsification test,” which is satisfied in our data.
One key limitation from this analysis is the maintained assumption that counterfactual differences
in birth outcomes across parity groups would be constant over time. However, our event study analysis
shows that for low birth weight the preexisting trends are flat, for both the 2+/1 and the 3+/2 comparisons.
This coupled with the falsification tests for “untreated” demographic groups, provides reassurance that we
are estimating the causal impact of the expansions.
28

We find that for single low education (<= 12 years) mothers, a policy-induced treatment on the
treated increase of $1000 in EITC income is associated with a 6.7 to 10.8 percent reduction in the low
birth weight rate. Is this a meaningfully large impact? We address this question in two ways.
First, these estimates fit in well with the (small) literature on the impacts of income on low birth
weight. Almond et al (2011) find that a $1000 (2009$) TOT impact of food stamps leads to an 4 percent
reduction in low birth weight for whites and a 2 percent reduction for blacks, somewhat smaller than our
8 (3) percent reduction for blacks (whites). Hoynes et al (2011) find that WIC leads to a 10-20%
reduction in low birth weight.
As a second way to assess the magnitude of the impacts, we aim to measure the dollar benefit of
reductions in low birth weight. We take estimates from Almond et. al. (2005) who estimate cross-section
and twin fixed effects models to measure the association between newborn hospital charges and birth
weight. Using the results from their Table 5, we assign to each birth in our sample “excess hospital costs”
(beyond those of regular birth weight births), and then estimate our difference-in-difference models with
the excess costs as the outcome variable. We examine two measures of excess costs: one coming from
Almond et. al.’s “pooled” model (analogous to a cross section association), and one coming from their
“fixed effects” model.32 We then take the resulting estimates and scale up using the “first stage” from
Table 4 ($1000/$521 = 1.92 for our 2+/1 models, $1000/$294 = 3.40 for our 3+/2 models) to get a “$
benefits of reduced hospital charges per $1000 EITC received”.
We find in our 2+/1 models that the TOT per $1000 EITC impact is a reduction of $80 using the
“pooled” cost estimates, and $20 using the “fixed effects” estimates. In our 3+/2 models the TOT per
$1000 EITC impact is a reduction of $245 in charges using the “pooled” estimates, and $95 using the
“fixed effects estimates. These models are estimated with imprecision, with only the $245 estimate
statistically significant at conventional levels. Taken as a whole, this suggests that the benefits from
reducing hospital costs may be on the order of 2%-25% of the direct EITC outlays for these women. This
does not count fully the health benefits from the improvements in birth weight. Hospital charges are just

32

The pooled model is more representative of estimates from the epidemiological and public health literature, but
Almond et. al. indicate that the twin fixed-effects model will have less omitted variable bias.

29

one of potentially many measurable benefits of reductions in low birth weight, and so these estimates are
lower bounds. We note that this component of the EITC benefits accrue only to those mothers/infants
born, which are a small fraction of women receiving EITC benefits. So the aggregate impact of this
channel is small compared to overall expenditures.

10.

Conclusion
This paper evaluates the health impact of a central piece in the U.S. safety net for families with

children: the Earned Income Tax Credit. Using tax-reform induced variation in the federal EITC we
examine the impact of the credit on infant health outcomes. We find that increased EITC income reduces
the incidence of low birth weight and increases mean birth weight. For single low education (<= 12
years) mothers, a policy-induced treatment on the treated increase of $1000 in EITC income is associated
with a 6.7 to 10.8% reduction in the low birth weight. These impacts are evident with difference-indifference models and event study analyses. We conclude that the sizeable increase in income for eligible
families significantly improved birth outcomes for both whites and African Americans, with larger
impacts for births to African American mothers. Our results suggest that there are non-trivial health
impacts of the EITC. Notably, while some of these benefits are internal (to the family), given the
substantial life time costs of low birth weight, nontrivial external benefits are captured. Importantly, these
impacts are typically not taken into account given the non-health nature of the program and should be
considered in discussions of the value of the safety net. The results also speak to the debate as to whether
income affects health, by providing an estimate of a relatively large and exogenous increase in income on
infant health.

30

8.

References

Aizer A., L. Stroud and S. Buka, (2009), Maternal Stress and Child Well-Being: Evidence from Siblings,
mimeo, Brown University.
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee, (2005), “The Costs of Low Birth Weight” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, No. 3 (Aug., 2005), pp. 1031-1083.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011). “Human Capital Development before Age Five.” In Handbook
of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1315–1486. New York:Elsevier.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes and Diane Schanzenbach (2011). “Inside the War on Poverty: The
Impact of the Food Stamp Program on Birth Outcomes.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes and Diane Schanzenbach (2010). “Long Run Economic and Health
Impacts of Participation in the Food Stamp Program” Mimeo.
Amarante, Manacorda, Miguel and Vigorito (2011) “Do Cash Transfers Improve Birth Outcomes:
Evidence from Matched Vital Statistics, Social Security and Program Data,” mimeo.
Baker, Kevin (2008). “Do Cash Transfer Programs Improve Infant Health: Evidence from the 1993
Expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit,” mimeo, University of Notre Dame.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy Watts. 2007. “Long-Run Health
Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France.” NBER Working Paper No.
12895.
Barber, Sarah. and Paul Gertler (2008). Empowering women: how Mexico's conditional cash transfer
program raised prenatal care quality and birthweight, mimeo, UC Berkeley.
Barrow, Lisa and Leslie. McGranahan. 2000. “The Effects of the Earned Income Credit on the
Seasonality of Household Expenditures.” National Tax Journal 53(4): 1211-1243.
Baum, Charles (2005). “The Effects of Employment While Pregnant on Health at Birth”. Economic
Inquiry, 43, 2, 283-302.
Baughman, Reagan and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2009. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility.”
Population Economics 22(3): 537-563.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach and Hilary Hoynes (2005). “Welfare Reform and Health,” Journal of
Human Resources Volume 40, Number 2, pp. 306-334.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach and Hilary Hoynes (2006). “Welfare Reform and Children’s Living
Arrangements,” Journal of Human Resources Volume 41, Number 1, pp. 1-27, Winter 2006.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes (2010). “The State of the Safety Net in the Post-Welfare Reform Era”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2010, pp. 71-127.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011). Unemployment rate for U.S. and states, http://www.bls.gov/lau/.
Camacho Adriana. (2008), Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks’, American
Economic Review: P&P, 98:2, 511–515.
Case, Anne, Lubotsky, Darren, Paxson, Christina, 2002. “Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The
Origins of the Gradient. American Economic Review 92(5), 1308–1334.
Costello, Jane, Scott Compton, Gordon Keeler, and Adrian Angold. 2003. “Relationships between
Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
290(15): 2023–28.

31

Currie, Janet (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and
Human Capital Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 47:1, 87–122.
Currie, Janet (2011). “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 101:3, 1–2.
Currie, Janet and Nancy Cole (1993). ‘‘Welfare and Child Health: The Link between AFDC Participation
and Birth Weight,’’ American Economic Review 83 (1993), 971–985.
Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1495–1532.
Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes F. Schmieder. (2009). “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
Lessons from New Jersey.” Journal of Health Economics, 28(3): 688–703.
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner (forthcoming). “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2004). “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119(3):1091-1130.
Del Bono Emilia., John Ermisch J. and M. Francesconi (2008). ‘Intrafamily resource allocations: a
dynamic model of birthweight’. IZA Discussion Papers, 3704.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy. 2002. “EITC and Marriage.” National Tax Journal 55(1): 25-40.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples:
The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 88, Issues 9-10, Pages 19311958, August 2004.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2006). “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC and
Labor Supply,” Tax Policy and the Economy Volume 20, pp. 74-110. MIT Press, 2006.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2011).“Redistribution and Tax Expenditures: The Earned Income Tax
Credit.” National Tax Journal, June 2011, 64 (2, Part 2), 689–730.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey Liebman (1996). "Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 605-637.
Ellwood, David (2000). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on
Work, Marriage and Living Arrangements,” National Tax Journal 53(4) Part 2 (December).
Evans, William and Craig Garthwaite (2010). “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC
Payments on Maternal Health,” NBER working paper 16296.
Friedman, Pamela (2000) “The Earned Income Tax Credit” Welfare Information Network, Issue Notes.
Gao, Qin, Neeraj Kaushal, and Jane Waldfogel (2009). “How Have Expansions in the EITC Affected
Family Expenditures?” In James P. Ziliak (ed) Welfare Reform and Its Long-Term Consequences for
America’s Poor. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gelber, Alexander and Joshua Mitchell (2011), “Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from Single
Women and Men,” Review of Economic Studies.
Herbst, Chris (2011). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Marriage and Divorce: Evidence
from Flow Data,” Population Research and Policy Review 30:101–128.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz (2003). “The Earned Income Tax Credit” in Robert Moffitt, ed.,
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

32

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles Mullin and John Karl Scholz (2002). “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the
Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare,” Mimeo, UCLA.
Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page and Ann Stevens (2011). “Can Targeted Transfers Improve Birth
Outcomes? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program,” Journal of Public Economics, 95: 813–
827, 2011.
Hoynes, Hilary and Erzo Luttmer (2011). “Insurance Benefits from Progressive Taxes and Transfers,”
Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.
Internal Revenue Service (2002). “Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit Program for Tax Year
1996,” Fiscal Year 2001 Research Project #12.26 (conducted by SB SE Research, Greensboro NC).
Internal Revenue Service (2011a). Statistics of Income Branch, “SOI Tax Stats - Individual Statistical
Tables by Size of Adjusted Gross Income, Individual Income Tax Returns with Earned Income Credit.”
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/08in25ic.xls, accessed July 2011.
Internal Revenue Service (2011b). “Earned Income Credit (EIC),” Publication 596.
Kehrer, Barbara H., and Charles M. Wolin, ‘‘Impact of Income Maintenance on Low Birth Weight:
Evidence from the Gary Experiment,’’ Journal of Human Resources 14 (1979), 434–462.
LaLumia, Sara (2011). “The EITC, Tax Refunds, and Unemployment Spells,” Mimeo, Williams College.
Lindahl (2005). “Estimating the effect of income on health...” Journal of Human Resources.
Lindo, Jason (2011). “Parental Job Loss and Infant Health,” Journal of Health Economics, 30(5).
McCrary, Justin, and Heather Royer (2011). “The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant
Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth.” American Economic Review,
101(1): 158–95.
Meer, Jonathan, Douglas L. Miller, and Harvey S. Rosen. 2003. “Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus.”
Journal of Health Economics 22(5): 713-730.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-1114.
Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan 2008, “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single
Mother Headed Families,” American Economic Review, 98:5, 2221–2241.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2008). “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Wellbeing of Children?
Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions,” NBER working paper 14624.
Moffitt, Robert (1998). ‘‘The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility,’’ in Robert Moffitt (Ed.),
Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, (Washington, DC: National Research Council, 1998).
Owens, Jeffrey (2005). “Fundamental Tax Reform: The Experience of OECD Countries.” Background
Paper, February 2005, Number 47, Tax Foundation.
Painter, Rebecca C., Tessa J. Rosebooma, and Otto P. Bleker (2005), ‘‘Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch
Famine and Disease in Later Life: An Overview,’’Reproductive Toxicology 20, 345–352.
Patel, Ankur (2011). “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Expenditures”, mimeo University of California
Davis.
Rush, David, Stein, Zena, Susser, Mervyn, 1980. Diet in Pregnancy: A Randomized Controlled Trial of
Nutritional Supplements. Alan R. Liss, Inc, New York.

33

Scholz, John Karl (1994). “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, and Antipoverty
Effectiveness,” National Tax Journal, Volume 47, Number 1, 1994.
Short, Kathleen (2010). “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010,” Current Population Report
P60-241, U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin Ross Phillips, and Michael O’Connor. 2000. “The EITC: Expectation,
Knowledge, use and Economic and Social Mobility.” National Tax Journal 53(4, Part 2), 1187-1210.
Snyder, Stephen E. and William N. Evans. 2006. “The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the
Social Security Notch.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 482-495.
Strully, Kate, David H. Rehkopf and Ziming Xuan (2010). “Effects of Prenatal Poverty on Infant Health :
State Earned Income Tax Credits and Birth Weight,” American Sociological Review 2010 75: 534.
Tax Policy Center (2011). “Tax Facts, Historical EITC Parameters,”
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=36, accessed July 2011.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (2011). SNAP Program data found at:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/SNAPsummary.htm, accessed July 2011.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2011). TANF Program data found at:
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/index.html, accessed December 2010.

34

Figure 1: Maximum Credit for Federal EITC, by Tax Year and Number of Children
EITC Maximum Benefits by Number of Children (1999$)
$4,500
$4,000

No Children
1 Child

$3,500

2 or more children

$3,000
$2,500

OBRA
1993

OBRA
1990

TRA 1986

$2,000
$1,500
$1,000
$500
$0
1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Tax Year

Source: Tax Policy Center (2011).

Figure 2: Distribution of Tax Refunds, by Calendar Month

Note: Reprinted from Lalumia (2011). Figure shows 10 years averages using Monthly Treasury Statements 19982007.

35

Figure 3: Event Time Estimates of OBRA93 on Low Birth Weight and EITC Income, Single Women
with a High School Education or Less
(a) Estimates for Parity 2+ versus Parity 1
0.4
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96

Fraction LBW (*100)

0.2

Parity 2+ (relative to 1)

0.0

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.6
1991

1992

1993

1994
1995
Effective Tax Year

1996

1997

1998

(b) Estimates for Parity 2 and Parity 3+ versus Parity 1
0.4

$5,000
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96

$4,000

0.0
$3,000

‐0.2

‐0.4

$2,000

‐0.6

1999 Dollars

Fraction Low Birth Weight (*100)

0.2

Parity 2 (relative to 1)
$1,000

Parity 3+ (relative to 1)
‐0.8

EITC 1 child (relative to 0)
EITC 2+ (relative to 0)

‐1.0
1991

$0
1992

1993

1994
1995
1996
Effective Tax Year

1997

1998

(c) Estimates for Parity 3+ versus Parity 2
0.4

Fraction Low Birth Weight (*100)

0.2

$2,000
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96
$1,500

0.0

‐0.2
$1,000
‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.8

$500
Parity 3+ (relative to 2)
EITC 2+ (relative to 1)

‐1.0
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Effective Tax Year

$0

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from an event-study analysis where the coefficients are year dummies interacted with the
treatment indicator (e.g. higher order parity relative to lower order parity). The specification includes fixed effects for year, state,
parity, demographic group and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates. In panels (b)
and (c) the figure provides DD estimates for low birth weight and predicted EITC income. Estimates for EITC income and based
on the March CPS and the EITC is calculated using TAXSIM. See text for details.

36

Figure 4: Demographic Subgroup Estimates of OBRA93 and Magnitude of EITC Treatment
(a) Estimates for Parity 2+ vs. Parity 1
.2

OUTCOME = Low birthweight, MODEL=parity 2+ vs. 1

0

ED16+

Percentage Points
-.4
-.2

AGE35WH
ED13
MARR
NHISP ALL ED=12
AGE25

AGE18
HISP
ED<12

-.6

HIGHIMP
SING

-.8

BL

0

100

200
300
400
500
600
OBRA93 Increase in EITC, T relative to C group

700

(b) Estimates for Parity 3+ vs. Parity 2
.2

OUTCOME = Low birthweight, MODEL=parity 3+ vs. 2
ED16+

ED13
HISP

0

WH
MARR AGE18
AGE35

Percentage Points
-.4
-.2

ED=12
NHISP ALL

ED<12
AGE25

SING
HIGHIMP

-.8

-.6

BL

0

100

200
300
400
500
600
OBRA93 Increase in EITC, T relative to C group

700

Notes: Each point on the graph represents DD regression estimates for a specified demographic subgroup. The xaxis provides the DD estimate of EITC income (using the CPS/TAXSIM sample) and the y-axis provides the DD
estimate on LBW. The size of the points reflects group’s cell size.

37

Figure 5: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93, by Decile of Predicted EITC Treatment
(a) Estimates for Parity 2+ vs. Parity 1

-.4

0
200
$ of EITC

400

%pt reduction in Low Birth Weight
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6

600

EITC impacts on low birthweight, parity 2+ vs 1

1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Decile of EITC use

change in Low BW

8

9

10

Change in EITC amt

(b) Estimates for Parity 3+ vs. Parity 2

-.4

%pt reduction in Low Birth Weight
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6

100200300400500600
$ of EITC

EITC impacts on low birthweight, parity 3+ vs 2

1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Decile of EITC use

change in Low BW

8

9

10

DD3_eitc

Notes: Each point on the graph represents DD regression estimates for 10 deciles of predicted EITC use. EITC
deciles are assigned based on demographics and state using a prediction model estimated using the March CPS
combined with TAXSIM. By construction the deciles do not vary by year or parity. The blue circles provide the DD
estimate of LBW (and the 95% confidence interval) and the red diamonds provide the DD estimate on EITC income
using the CPS/TAXSIM sample.

38

Figure 6: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on the Distribution of Birth Weight, Single
Women with a High School Education or Less
(a) Estimates for Parity 2+ vs. Parity 1
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
‐1.0%
‐2.0%
‐3.0%

Parity 2+ (relative to 1)

‐4.0%

Upper 95% CI

‐5.0%

Lower 95% CI
‐6.0%
1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

4000

Birthweight less than (in grams)

(b) Estimates for Parity 3+ vs. Parity 2
2.0%

0.0%

‐2.0%

‐4.0%

Parity 3+ (relative to 2)

‐6.0%

Upper 95% CI
Lower 95% CI
‐8.0%
1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

4000

Birthweight less than (in grams)

Notes: The graph shows estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals for the difference-in-difference estimate of
the impact of EITC on the fraction of births that is below each specified number of grams. The specification is given
by column (2) in Table 2.

39

Figure 7: Event Time Estimates of OBRA93 on Composition of Births, Single Women with a High
School Education or Less (parity 3+ versus parity 2 model)
(a) Non-Hispanic
MODEL= Parity 3+ vs. 2, OUTCOME=% Non‐Hispanic
0.010
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96

0.005

0.000

‐0.005

‐0.010

‐0.015

‐0.020
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992 1993 1994
Effective Tax Year

1995

1996

1997

1998

1997

1998

(b) Age 35+
MODEL= Parity 3+ vs. 2, OUTCOME=% Age 35+
0.016
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96

0.012

0.008

0.004

0.000

‐0.004

‐0.008
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992 1993 1994
Effective Tax Year

1995

1996

(c) Education <= 12 years
MODEL= Parity 3+ vs. 2, OUTCOME=% Ed<12
0.010
OBRA93
phased in
1994‐96

0.005

0.000

‐0.005

‐0.010

‐0.015
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992 1993 1994
Effective Tax Year

1995

1996

1997

1998

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from an event-study analysis where the coefficients are year dummies interacted with the
treatment indicator (e.g. 3+ parity relative to parity 2). The specification includes fixed effects for year, state, parity, and stateyear controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates.

40

Table 1: Illustration of Cash-in-Hand Assignment of Effective Tax Year

Birth month and year
Beginning of 3rd trimester
Month
Year
Month
Year
January
1990
10
1989
Feburary
1990
11
1989
March
1990
12
1989
April
1990
1
1990
May
1990
2
1990
June
1990
3
1990
July
1990
4
1990
August
1990
5
1990
Sept
1990
6
1990
October
1990
7
1990
November
1990
8
1990
December
1990
9
1990
January
1991
10
1990
Feburary
1991
11
1990
March
1991
12
1990
April
1991
1
1991
May
1991
2
1991
June
1991
3
1991
July
1991
4
1991
August
1991
5
1991
Sept
1991
6
1991
October
1991
7
1991
November
1991
8
1991
December
1991
9
1991
January
1992
10
1991
Feburary
1992
11
1991
March
1992
12
1991
April
1992
1
1992
May
1992
2
1992
June
1992
3
1992
July
1992
4
1992
August
1992
5
1992
Sept
1992
6
1992
October
1992
7
1992
November
1992
8
1992
December
1992
9
1992

41

Effective tax
year
1988
1988
1988
1988
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991

Table 2: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Low Birth weight, Single Women with a
High School Education or Less
Model:
Parity2+ * After

Parity 2+ vs. 1
-0.355***
(0.075)

-0.354***
(0.074)

Parity=2 * After

-0.164**
(0.072)
-0.529***
(0.091)

Parity3+ * After
State x year control variables
Mean of the dep. variable
N

Parity 3+ vs. 2

Parity 2, 3+ vs. 1

10.2
47,687

X
10.2
47,687

10.2
47,687

-0.164**
(0.072)
-0.528***
(0.090)
X
10.2
47,687

-0.342*** -0.340***
(0.069)
(0.068)
X
X
10.7
10.7
35,467
35,467

Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression of the percent low birth applied to Natality data for effective
tax years 1991-1998. Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All models include fixed
effects for effective tax year, parity, state, demographic group. Columns (2) and (4) add state-year controls for
Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the
cell and are clustered on state. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 3: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Low Birth Weight, Single Women with a
High School Education or Less by Race and Ethnicity

Model: Parity 2+ vs. 1
Parity2+ * After
Mean of the dep. variable
N
Model: Parity 2, 3+ vs. 1
Parity=2 * After
Parity3+ * After
Mean of the dep. variable
N
Model: Parity 3+ vs. 2
Parity3+ * After
Mean of the dep. variable
N

White

Black

NonHispanic

Hispanic

-0.132*
(0.072)
8.14
21,775

-0.728***
(0.143)
14.43
13,780

-0.413***
(0.099)
11.24
26,066

-0.130*
(0.070)
7.04
14,823

-0.114*
(0.065)
-0.151
(0.093)
8.14
21,775

-0.310**
(0.144)
-1.040***
(0.160)
14.43
13,780

-0.187**
(0.090)
-0.625***
(0.123)
11.24
26,066

-0.0600
(0.078)
-0.191**
(0.087)
7.04
14,823

-0.0231
(0.071)
8.23
16,247

-0.715***
(0.121)
14.92
10,273

-0.407***
(0.094)
12.12
19,611

-0.121
(0.092)
6.78
10,951

Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression of the percent low birth applied to Natality data for effective
tax years 1991-1998. Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All models include fixed
effects for effective tax year, parity, state, demographic group and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare
reform and unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the cell and are clustered on
state. Standard errors are in parentheses.

42

Table 4: Magnitudes in OBRA93 Models, Low Birth Weight
All

White

Black

A. PARITY 2+ vs. PARITY 1
Treatment Effect
EITC increase (2009$)

-0.354

-0.132

-0.728

$521

$471

$624

Treatment on Treated per $1000 (2009$)

-0.68

-0.28

-1.17

-6.69%

-3.44%

-8.09%

ToTper $1000 (2009$), % impact

B. PARITY=2, PARITY 3+ vs PARITY 1
Treatment Effect (2 vs. 1)
EITC Increase (2009$) (2 vs 1)

-0.164

-0.111

-0.31

$373

$335

$445

Treatment on Treated per $1000 (2009$)

-0.44

-0.33

-0.70

ToTper $1000 (2009$), % impact

-4.33%

-4.07%

-4.83%

Treatment Effect (3+ vs. 1)
EITC Increase (2009$) (3+ vs 1)

-0.528

-0.151

-1.04

$667

$615

$749

Treatment on Treated per $1000 (2009$)

-0.79

-0.25

-1.39

-7.79%
10.2

-3.02%
8.1

-9.62%
14.4

ToTper $1000 (2009$), % impact
Mean of the dependent variable

C. PARITY 3+ vs. PARITY 2
Treatment Effect (3+ vs. 2)
EITC Increase (2009$) (3+ vs 2)

-0.340

-0.023

-0.715

$294

$281

$304

Treatment on Treated per $1000 (2009$)

-1.16

-0.08

-2.35

-10.81%
10.7

-0.99%
8.2

-15.76%
14.9

ToTper $1000 (2009$), % impact
Mean of the dependent variable

Notes: Each column in each panel provides estimates for a separate DD regression. In each panel, the first row
repeats LBW parameter estimates from Tables 2 and 3. The second row provides the DD estimate on EITC income
from the CPS/TAXSIM data. Row 3 is the treatment on the treated estimate of a $1000 increase in EITC income
(row 1 / row 2 * 1000). Row 4 provides the percent TOT impact (row 3 / mean).

43

Table5: Maximum Credit Estimates of EITC on Low Birth weight, Single Women with a High School
Education or Less by Race
All
Maximum Credit ($1000 of 95$)

White

-0.307*** -0.774***
(0.0659)

Parity * linear time

(0.127)

Black

-0.119**

-0.0842

(0.0528)

(0.107)

X

State x year controls

-0.518*** -1.359***
(0.115)

X

(0.179)
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Mean of dependent variable

11.21

11.21

8.810

8.810

14.76

14.76

N

81782

81782

37335

37335

23746

23746

1st stage impact of maxcredit on ave EITC

0.330

0.330

0.330

0.330

0.330

0.330

Treatment on Treated per $1000 (2009$)

-0.66
-5.9%

-1.67
-14.9%

-0.26
-2.9%

-0.18
-2.1%

-1.12
-7.6%

-2.93
-19.8%

ToT per $1000 (2009$), % impact

Notes: Each column is from a separate regression of the percent low birth on the EITC maximum credit applied to
Natality data for effective tax years 1984-1998. Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All
models include fixed effects for effective tax year, parity, state, demographic group and state-year controls for
Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the
cell and are clustered on state. Standard errors are in parentheses. The “1st stage impact of maxcredit on EITC” is the
coefficient of a regression of the predicted EITC income on the maximum credit, estimated on the CPS/TAXSIM
sample. The following two rows calculate the treatment on the treated impact per $1000 (estimate / 1st stage * 1000)
and the last row provides the percent TOT impact.

Table 6: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Other Birth Outcomes, Single Women with a
High School Education or Less

Model: Parity 2+ vs. 1
Parity2+ * After
Mean of the dep. variable
N
Model: Parity 3+ vs. 2
Parity3+ * After
Mean of the dep. variable
N

Mean
Birthweight

Preterm birth
<37 wks

Weight for age
below 10th p.

5-minute
Apgar <8

5-minute
Apgar, average

9.95***
(2.05)
3206
47,687

-0.191**
(0.0798)
14.32
47,613

-0.362***
(0.0759)
14.66
47,593

-0.185***
(0.048)
3.61
45,820

0.011***
(0.003)
8.89
45,820

6.81***
(1.741)
3206
47,687

-0.194**
(0.0866)
15.76
35,417

-0.154**
(0.0648)
13.98
35,404

-0.103**
(0.051)
3.38
34,076

0.007**
(0.002)
8.91
34,076

Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression applied to Natality data for effective tax years 1991-1998.
Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All models include fixed effects for effective tax
year, parity, state, demographic group, and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and
unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the cell and are clustered on state.
Standard errors are in parentheses. Observations differ across the outcomes due to incomplete data on these
outcomes for all state-years (and some missing data on gestation).

44

Table 7: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Pregnancy Behaviors, Single Women with a
High School Education or Less
Prenatal care
began before
3rd tri

Prenatal
care,
number
visits

Any
prenatal
care

Kessner
Index,
Inadequate
care

Kessner
Index,
Good or
better

0.123***
(0.0226)
47,110
10.27

0.570***
(0.105)
47,110
96.92

-1.105***
(0.198)
46,957
12.06

0.135
(0.205)
46,957
58.21

-1.930*** -1.060***
(0.152)
(0.128)
45,554
46,128
25.74
2.603

0.0984***
(0.0160)
35,040
9.797

0.616***
(0.119)
35,040
95.92

-0.880***
(0.168)
34,922
15.13

0.347**
(0.119)
34,922
53.40

-1.163*** -1.086***
(0.205)
(0.161)
33,885
34,312
28.69
3.320

Any
Smoking

Any
Drinking

Model: Parity 2+ vs. 1
Parity2+ * After

0.634***
(0.175)
N
47,246
Mean, dep. Var
91.45
Model: Parity 3+ vs. 2
Parity3+ * After
0.652***
(0.175)
N
35,141
Mean dep var.
89.42

Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression applied to Natality data for effective tax years 1991-1998.
Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All models include fixed effects for effective tax
year, parity, state, demographic group and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and
unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the cell and are clustered on state.
Standard errors are in parentheses. Observations differ across the outcomes due to incomplete data on these
outcomes for all state-years.

Table 8: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Health Insurance and Employment, Single
Women with a High School Education or Less (Current Population Survey)
HI
Employed HI Coverage: HI Coverage:
Coverage:
Last Year
Mediaid
Any Private
Any

Model: any children vs. none
anykids * after
0.077***
(0.008)
Mean Dep Var
0.70
N
51,317
Model: 2+ children vs. 1
2+kids * after
0.060***
(0.011)
Mean Dep Var
0.65
N
30,313

-0.068***
(0.008)
0.29
51,317

0.023***
(0.009)
0.38
51,317

-0.035***
(0.008)
0.71
51,317

-0.037***
(0.110)
0.40
30,313

0.032***
(0.011)
0.32
30,313

-0.001
(0.010)
0.74
30,313

Model: 2+ Children vs. 1 (and presence of young child)
2+kids * after
0.048***
-0.021
0.028**
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.014)
Mean Dep Var
0.59
0.49
0.23
N
16,744
16,744
16,744

0.009
(0.014)
0.73
16,744

Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression applied to 1992-1998 CPS (covering income years 19911998). Observations are at the individual level and the models include fixed effects for effective tax year, parity,
state, demographics, and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates.
Estimates are weighted using the CPS weights and are clustered on state. Standard errors are in parentheses.

45

Table9: Maximum Credit Estimates of EITC on Low Birth Weight using Alternative Assumptions about
Timing, Single Women with a High School Education or Less
Assign treatment based on exposure in:
Model

When do I get the money?

Assign EITC in 7th month (base case)

Refund-cash, all year

Assign EITC based on 3rd trimester

Refund-cash, all year

Assign EITC based on 2nd trimester

Refund-cash, all year

Assign EITC based on 1st trimester

Refund-cash, all year

Horse race all trimesters

Refund-cash, all year

All cash in Feb, based on 3rd trimester

Refund-cash, Feb only

1st
trimester

2nd
trimester

3rd
trimester

3rd tri,
labor supply

-0.307***
(0.0659)
-0.304***
(0.0671)
-0.314***
(0.0667)
-0.332***
(0.0688)
-0.419*
(0.237)

All cash in Feb, horse race all trimesters Refund-cash, Feb only

-0.191
(0.129)

Labor supply model, 3rd trimester

Labor supply/earnings

Horse race rebate credit & labor supply

Refund-cash & labor supply

-0.145
(0.351)

0.231
(0.246)
-0.458***
(0.095)
-0.318*** -0.581***
(0.134)
(0.136)

-0.605**
(0.126)

-0.263***
(0.066)
0.306**
(0.132)

Notes: Each row is from a separate regression of the percent low birth on the EITC maximum credit applied to
Natality data for effective tax years 1984-1998. Observations are at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level. All
models include fixed effects for effective tax year, parity, state, demographic group and state-year controls for
Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform and unemployment rates. Estimates are weighted using the number of births in the
cell and are clustered on state. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 10: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of OBRA93 on Number and Composition of Births,
Single Women with 12 years of education or less

Log(Births)
Model: Parity 2+ vs. 1
Parity2+ * After
-0.020
(0.014)
Mean of Dep Var
N
37639

black

white

-0.010
(0.009)
0.323
1632

0.009
(0.010)
0.641
1632

Fraction in state-year cell:
Non18-24
24-34
Hispanic
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.738
1632

-0.005**
(0.002)
0.648
1632

-0.001
(0.002)
0.300
1632

35+

Ed<12

0.006***
(0.001)
0.0520
1632

-0.004
(0.010)
0.432
1632

Model: Parity 3+ vs. 2
Parity3+ * After
-0.017
-0.003
0.004
0.006*** -0.025*** 0.016*** 0.009*** -0.011**
(0.016)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.004)
Mean of Dep Var
0.370
0.593
0.726
0.523
0.402
0.075
0.484
25419
N
1224
1224
1224
1224
1224
1224
1224
Notes: Each column is from a separate DD regression using the Natality data for effective tax years 1991-1998.
Column 1 use data at the year-state-parity-demographic cell level and the specification includes fixed effects for
effective tax year, parity, state, and demographic group and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare reform
and unemployment rates. The remaining columns use data at the year-state-parity level and the specification
includes fixed effects for effective tax year, parity, state, and state-year controls for Medicaid/SCHIP, welfare
reform and unemployment. Estimates are clustered on state. Standard errors are in parentheses.

46

