                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EVALUATING STUDENT OUTCOMES AT FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES

                                               Kevin Lang
                                             Russell Weinstein

                                          Working Paper 18201
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18201


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2012




This topic was brought to our attention by Jesse Felix whose excellent undergraduate research opportunities
project was the earliest use, of which we are aware, of the Beginning Post-Secondary Students survey
to examine differences in financial and labor market outcomes of students at for-profit and other institutions.
We regret that data access restrictions prevented him from working with us on this new project. We
are grateful to participants in the Boston University empirical microeconomics workshop for helpful
comments and suggestions. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Evaluating Student Outcomes at For-Profit Colleges
Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18201
June 2012
JEL No. I23,J3

                                                 ABSTRACT

Using the Beginning Postsecondary Student Survey, we examine the effect on earnings of obtaining
certificates/degrees from for-profit, not-for-profit, and public institutions. Students who enter certificate
programs at any type of institution do not gain from earning a certificate. However, among those entering
associates degree programs, there are large, statistically significant benefits from obtaining certificates/degrees
from public and not-for-profit but not from for-profit institutions. These results are robust to addressing
selection into the labor market from college, and into positive earnings from unemployment, using
imputation methods and quantile regression along with a maximum likelihood sample selection model.


Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu

Russell Weinstein
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
weinst@bu.edu
1     Introduction

The dramatic recent growth of the for-pro…t post-secondary education sector has generated

considerable controversy. Critics charge that these institutions recruit unquali…ed students

in order to obtain their federal student aid. Indeed, students at for-pro…ts account for

nearly half of all student loan defaults (Zagier, 2011) but only about 12 percent of post-

secondary students (Wolfson and Staiti, 2011). Between 2000 and 2010, the private sector

share of federal student aid money grew from $4.6 billion to more than $26 billion (Zagier,

2011), about one quarter of all federal student grants and loans (Wolfson and Staiti, 2011).

Proponents argue that for-pro…t institutions educate non-traditional students who would not

otherwise attend college and who therefore bene…t from their existence. They maintain that

the large quantity of loans and defaults re‡ects the e¤orts of for-pro…t institutions to serve

this under-served group.1

    Recent research by Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) …nds that comparable students at

for-pro…ts are more indebted, but they are also more likely to obtain some quali…cations, most

notably certi…cates and, more modestly, associates degrees, although less likely to obtain a

bachelors degree. They also have lower average earnings although to some extent this is

    1
      The principal di¤erence between for-pro…t and not-for-pro…t organizations is that not-for-pro…t …rms
cannot distribute pro…ts to those who exercise control over the …rm (Hansmann 1996) but must distribute
them in other ways, such as improving buildings and classrooms or by avoiding pro…ts through lower prices.
In the United States, not-for-pro…t educational institutions are generally exempt from corporate and property
taxation, donations are tax deductible for the donor, and they have access to tax-exempt bond …nancing.
However, for-pro…t institutions can use equity …nancing. Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) develop a model of
why …rms choose non-pro…t status that does not focus on the tax bene…ts, but rather on the …rm’s desire
to constrain their ability to maximize pro…ts. This improves their competitive standing in markets where
…rms are able to take advantage of their customers. A related literature on for-pro…t and not-for-pro…t
hospitals …nds no clear di¤erence in quality (McClellan and Staiger 2000). In theory, for-pro…t institutions
have greater incentives to provide lower quality care in the absence of perfect information which could lead
consumers to pay a premium to stay in a not-for-pro…t hospital, but this prediction is not con…rmed in the
data (Philipson 2000).



                                                     1
explained by lower employment rates. Their paper is deliberately exploratory and does not

attempt to address in-depth how di¤erences in unemployment and school enrollment rates

in‡uence the estimated earnings di¤erentials.2

       In this paper, we focus on earnings outcomes. Our main contribution is investigating

the labor market return to certi…cates or degrees from for-pro…t, and not-for-pro…t/public

institutions. Since students who enter for-pro…t institutions tend to be disadvantaged, their

poorer labor market performance after completing their education may re‡ect our inability

to control adequately for pre-entry di¤erences. If, for example, among those entering certi-

…cate programs, the di¤erence in earnings between those who do and do not complete their

certi…cate is similar regardless of institution type, we would be more inclined to believe that

the lower wages of for-pro…t graduates re‡ects unmeasured di¤erences. On the other hand,

if the wage gain among for-pro…t graduates is lower, then the hypothesis that the for-pro…t

education is less valuable becomes more plausible. To draw this conclusion, we require that

any ability (or other) bias a¤ecting the measured return to certi…cation be similar across

institution type.

       There are large, statistically signi…cant, positive e¤ects of obtaining certi…cates/degrees

from a public or not-for-pro…t institution among those starting in associates degree pro-

grams. We …nd no evidence that students gain from obtaining any certi…cate or degree from

   2
    Using the NLSY97, Cellini and Chaudhary (2011) …nd no signi…cant di¤erences in income or other
outcomes between those attending private and public institutions. However, the NLSY97 does not distinguish
between for-pro…t and not-for-pro…t private institutions for those enrolled in associates degree programs. In
our sample, approximately half of students starting associates degrees in private institutions are enrolled at
a not-for-pro…t institution. Moreover, the NLSY97 cannot be used to study certi…cate programs. In our
sample, about half of students enrolled at for-pro…t institutions are in certi…cate programs. Chung (2008)
uses NELS88 which has a sample of only 157 respondents enrolled in either certi…cate or associates degree
programs at for-pro…t colleges. She …nds that, after controlling for selection, obtaining a for-pro…t certi…cate
results in 141 to 158% higher earnings compared to those who have selected into the for-pro…t sector but do
not complete any degree.


                                                       2
a for-pro…t institution. However, among those both starting and …nishing associates degree

programs, the bene…t of the degree is also not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent across in-

stitution types. Among those entering certi…cate programs, we …nd no bene…t of receiving

a certi…cate from any type of institution. These results are robust to addressing selection

into the labor market from college and into positive earnings from unemployment, using im-

putation methods and quantile regression along with a maximum likelihood sample selection

model.

    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the methods. Section 3 describes the

data. Section 4 contains the results. Section 5 presents robustness checks, and Section 6

concludes.




2     Methods

Our data, discussed in detail below, consist of students entering post-secondary education in

2003-04. In everything that follows, we conduct our analysis separately for those entering cer-

ti…cate and associates degree programs. We do not examine students starting in non-degree

or BA programs. For ease of presentation, in this section we drop notation distinguishing

whether the sample is those entering certi…cate or associates degree programs. We use the

term certi…cation to refer to certi…cates, associates degrees, or bachelor degrees.



2.1      Basic Regression Analysis

Our starting point is a fairly standard log-earnings equation:




                                              3
                       y=          +   1F P   +   2C     +   3A   +   4 BA   +   5 CF P   +   6 AF P +   (1)

                               +   7 BAF P    + X1   8   +



where y denotes log annual income in 2009. We have dropped the i subscript for simplicity.

The variables C are indicators for whether the highest degree obtained was a certi…cate, and

similarly for A(ssociates) and BA(chelors). The variable F P is an indicator for whether the

student started at a for-pro…t, and the subscript FP denotes that the certi…cate or degree

was obtained from a for-pro…t. Note that an individual who enters, for example, a certi…cate

program in fall 2003, may have no certi…cation, a certi…cate (but no higher certi…cation), an

associates degree or a bachelors degree in 2009.

      2   through      4   capture the “return” to earning certi…cation at a not-for-pro…t or public

while     5   through      7   capture the di¤erence between this return and the return at a for-pro…t

institution. There is a long history in labor economics of papers addressing ability (and other

forms of) bias in estimates of the return to education. We will not revisit this literature.

However, ability bias should be smaller in our setting than in the standard case. In our

case, ability bias re‡ects the di¤erence in ability between those …nishing and those starting

but not …nishing at a particular type of institution. This should be smaller than the ability

di¤erence between those …nishing at all institution types and those either starting but not

…nishing or never even attempting programs at the same level.

     Moreover, the existence of ability bias is relatively unimportant for our analysis because

 5   through     7   can be interpreted as di¤erences-in-di¤erences estimates. Therefore, we require


                                                                  4
only that any ability bias is similar across institutions. We discuss the plausibility of this

assumption when we describe the data.

     1   represents the return to starting a certi…cate or degree at a for-pro…t relative to a

not-for-pro…t or public, for those who do not receive any certi…cation. This coe¢ cient can

di¤er from 0 either because human capital acquisition di¤ers even among those who do not

complete a certi…cation or because the types of students who do not complete any certi…cation

di¤er among institution types. To address the former explanation, in some speci…cations we

control for time spent on post-secondary education and its interaction with F P .

   X1 denotes the explanatory variables that are determined before or just after enrollment

and therefore unlikely to be caused by starting-institution type. These include age, Black,

Hispanic, male, whether English is the primary language, marital status in 2003, whether

born in the United States, household size (this variable is equal to parents’household size

for dependent students, and respondent’s household size for independent students), income

in 2002 (this variable is equal to parental income for dependent students and respondent

income for independent students) and number of dependent children in 2003. It includes

family background characteristics: expected family contribution to college …nances in 2003,

parents’highest level of education is a high school diploma or less, whether the individual was

claimed by another as a dependent in 2003, whether both parents were born in the United

States, dummy variables for four initial majors (business; liberal arts and sciences; health,

human services, and education; manual and technological vocational training; undeclared is

the excluded category), whether attained a high school diploma, whether obtained a GED,

and the number of years the individual delayed enrollment in college after high school. For

those who began their post-secondary schooling before age 24, we also have indicators for

                                               5
parents’ income is less than 30,000 dollars per year, high school GPA above 3.0, took the

SAT or ACT, and SAT/ACT score.

   There are a number of potentially endogenous variables in the data. These include the

total amount of grants and veterans bene…ts for college the individual received in 2003,

whether the individual was always a full-time student during his/her postsecondary school-

ing, GPA in 2003/2004, number of dependent children in 2006, and 2009, married in 2009, the

number of times the student transferred, the number of months since the individual was last

enrolled in college, and the total months enrolled. The last two variables are, for example,

measures of education quantity and post-education experience but may also be in‡uenced

by institution choice. Our preliminary investigations showed only minor di¤erences from our

main results when we included the post-2003 characteristics. We therefore present results

only with the clearly exogenous explanatory variables except for some robustness checks.

   As noted above, there is a potentially important subset of variables available only for

those starting post-secondary education before age 24. We therefore chose to obtain four

sets of estimates: a “young” sample with all variables, a young sample with only variables

available for the entire sample, an “old”sample, and the full sample. For the young sample,

a speci…cation test never rejects that our baseline estimates of the e¤ects of credentials are

una¤ected by including the under-24 variables. Moreover, we cannot reject the hypothesis

that the coe¢ cients are the same for the young and old samples. Therefore, we present the

main speci…cation estimates for the young sample with all variables and for the full sample.

In all remaining speci…cations, we present only the results for the full sample, which are also

generally the most precise. However, in the text we point out any notable di¤erences among

samples and speci…cations.

                                              6
2.2    Propensity Score Weighting

Since we will see that students beginning at di¤erent institution-types have quite di¤erent

background characteristics, and since the linearity assumptions underlying the regression

model may be problematic, as a robustness check we also present propensity-score-weighted

regressions. We use the standard logit model to calculate the propensity scores. We include

all variables in X1 a priori, including the under-24-only variables in the speci…cations for

which they are included in the wage equation. We calculate propensity scores separately for

the four samples/speci…cations described in the previous sub-section.

   To determine which interactions between variables to include, we make use of an al-

gorithm proposed by Imbens (2010). When we use the full sample, the algorithm …nds that

50 interaction terms should be included in the propensity score speci…cation. When added

to the 21 linear terms, this results in a total of 71 variables in the propensity score speci…c-

ation. Applying the same procedures as above to the associates degree sample, we include

47 interaction terms and the 21 linear terms that we included a priori.

   Kernel density estimates show that there is a lack of overlap between those starting at

for-pro…t, not-for-pro…t, and public certi…cate programs at the bottom of the propensity

score distribution. Following the advice and analysis of Imbens (2010) and Crump, Hotz,

Imbens, and Mitnik (2006), we discard observations with propensity scores below .1 or

above .9. The lack of overlap is much less dramatic for those starting in associates degree

programs. We thus do not need to discard all observations with propensity scores below .1

or above .9. Instead, we trim the sample so there is common overlap; thus we discard all

observations starting in not-for-pro…t or public programs with propensity scores below the



                                               7
lowest propensity score or above the highest propensity score of an individual starting in a

for-pro…t program.

   Once we have calculated the probability that an individual started in a certi…cate (asso-

ciates degree) program at a for-pro…t college, those probabilities are used to generate weights

in the usual way.

   We also check that the balancing property is satis…ed for the propensity score (using

the trimmed sample). To do this, we use an algorithm similar to that developed by Becker

and Ichino (2002). However, we use the standard Bonferroni correction for determining the

threshold p-value for signi…cance of each test since we have multiple tests of whether the

average propensity score for each group di¤ers within blocks. When we test whether the

average of each variable di¤ers within blocks, we use the Bonferroni correction adjusted for

correlation across explanatory variables. Since we have many variables, and some of those

variables are presumably correlated, a balancing test for one variable could provide inform-

ation on the balancing test for another variable. The information from these correlations

should be accounted for in the Bonferroni correction, raising the threshold p-value (lowering

the critical t) used to determine signi…cance for each test, relative to the traditional Bon-

ferroni p-value which assumes no correlation between variables. In order to implement this

strategy, we …nd the correlation between each of the variables used in the propensity score

speci…cation, and then take the mean of those correlations. The mean correlation is then

used to adjust the standard Bonferroni correction. In the full sample of those starting in

certi…cate programs, this algorithm results in 6 blocks and no variables that are unbalanced.

In the full sample of those starting in associates degree programs, we obtain 8 blocks and

one variable that is unbalanced out of the 544 total variables.

                                              8
3         Data

We use the Beginning Post-Secondary Student Survey, 2004 (hereafter BPS). The BPS

sampled approximately 16,6803 students who began post-secondary education for the …rst

time in the 2003-2004 academic year. Students were surveyed in their 1st, 3rd, and 6th

year after entering college. Because a substantial proportion of students who enter four-year

programs do not complete within six years, we focus on a sample of close to 2,050 students

who entered certi…cate programs and 5,740 who entered associates degree programs. All of

the institutions we observe in the data have signed Title IV agreements with the Department

of Education, meaning they are eligible for Title IV aid, and so they are accredited by at

least one of the Department of Education’s approved accrediting agencies.

        We examine outcomes separately for those initially enrolled in certi…cate and associates

degree programs. We do not distinguish among individuals on the basis of the types of

programs the institution o¤ers. Thus we pool individuals enrolled in, for example, certi-

…cate programs at two-year and four-year institutions. We note that a nontrivial number

of respondents report themselves as being enrolled in a bachelors program at a two-year

institution or in an associates degree program at a non-degree granting institution. These

have been recoded in the released data. However, this cleaning process would not catch

respondents who under-reported their certi…cation or the nature of their program. There

is thus some risk that some respondents may have reported being in a certi…cate program

and/or having earned a certi…cate when, in fact, they were in an associates degree program.

        Unfortunately, 2009 labor market data were collected only for those whose last date of

    3
     For con…dentiality reasons, the Department of Education requires that any time a number of observations
is provided, it is rounded to the nearest ten.


                                                     9
enrollment was before February 2009. While our baseline results drop students who were

still enrolled …ve and a half years after entering a certi…cate or associates degree program,

we perform a number of robustness checks to address these missing data.

   Table 1 summarizes the data. The …rst two columns are the certi…cate program sample,

separated by those starting at a for-pro…t (1190 observations) and not-for-pro…t/public (860

observations). The last two columns describe the associates degree sample which is dom-

inated by those starting at not-for-pro…t/public programs (5210 observations) relative to

those starting at for-pro…t programs (530 observations). The means are calculated using the

sampling weights. Despite some coding di¤erences, the results are broadly similar to those

in Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012).



3.1     Certi…cate programs

It is evident from Table 1 that students starting certi…cate programs at for-pro…t institutions

have signi…cantly worse outcomes than students starting in not-for-pro…t/public institutions.

Income in 2009 is approximately $5500 lower for students starting at for-pro…t institutions

than for students starting at not-for-pro…t/public institutions, statistically signi…cant at the

.01 level.

   It is by no means evident, however, that this di¤erence is causal. Compared to those who

start at not-for-pro…t/public institutions, students starting in certi…cate programs at for-

pro…t institutions are much more likely to be Black, Hispanic, female, younger, and single at

the time they enter college. They are less likely to speak English as their primary language,

and their parents are less likely to have been born in the United States. Furthermore,



                                              10
income in 2002 (parental for dependent students and respondent for independent students)

and expected family contribution to college are much lower. They are also less likely to have

taken the SAT, less likely to have received their high school diploma, and less likely to have

had a high school GPA above a 3.0.

   An important issue is whether ability bias is likely to di¤er across institution type. We can

cast some light on this by examining the distribution of certi…cations. Slightly more of those

entering for-pro…ts (46%) than of those entering other institutions (42%) have not gained

any certi…cation. This di¤erence falls short of statistical signi…cance at any conventional

level. Similarly the former are slightly and insigni…cantly more likely (53% v 52%) to have

attained a certi…cate but nothing higher. This suggests that any ability bias a¤ecting the

estimated return to obtaining a certi…cate should be similar for students at the two types of

institutions.



3.2    Associates Degree programs

Table 1 also shows that students starting associates degree programs at for-pro…t institutions

have signi…cantly worse outcomes than those starting in not-for-pro…t/public institutions.

Their income in 2009 is approximately $3000 less than the income of students starting at

not-for-pro…t/public programs, statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.

   Again, it is not clear that this di¤erence is causal. Compared to those who start at not-

for-pro…t/public institutions, students starting in associates degree programs at for-pro…t

institutions are much more likely to be Black and Hispanic; however, they are also more

likely to speak English as their primary language. Furthermore, income in 2002 (parental for



                                              11
dependent students and respondent for independent students) is much lower among for-pro…t

students, their parents’highest level of education is more likely to be a High School diploma

or less, and their expected family contribution to college is much lower. They are also less

likely to have taken the SAT, and those who do have lower scores. Students starting at

for-pro…ts are less likely to have obtained their High School diploma, and more likely to have

obtained their GED. Interestingly, those starting at for-pro…t institutions are more likely to

have a High School GPA above a 3.0.

    Unfortunately, the pattern of certi…cation di¤ers between those entering associates degree

programs in for-pro…ts and not-for-pro…ts/publics. In both cases there are small, not sig-

ni…cantly di¤erent, numbers of students reporting leaving with a certi…cate as their highest

degree (4% at for-pro…ts and 6% at not-for-pro…t/publics) and roughly similar numbers who

have acquired no certi…cation (65% at both institution-types), but those starting in associ-

ates degree programs at public and not-for-pro…t institutions are much more likely to have

gone on to a bachelors degree than are those who started at a for-pro…t institution. As a

consequence, those having only an associates degree are likely to be more favorably selected

if they began at a for-pro…t.




4     Results

As in most of the literature studying labor market returns to education, we use the term “re-

turn”somewhat loosely to refer to the percentage di¤erence in income between an individual

who obtains a degree and one who started a degree, but did not obtain a degree. Thus, this

use of return does not account for costs. As discussed above, there is an extensive literature


                                              12
on ability bias in OLS estimates of the return to schooling. To the extent that those who

attempt post-secondary education but do not complete it are more favorably selected than

those who never attempt it, such ability bias should be less of a problem in our sample.

We initially estimated our models using four combinations of speci…cations and samples.

However, we could not reject the hypothesis that the key coe¢ cients were una¤ected by the

presence or absence of variables available only for those entering post-secondary schooling

before they turned 24 years old. We also could not reject the hypothesis that the results

were the same for the older and younger samples. Therefore we present only the results for

the younger sample with the added variables and for the whole sample.



4.1    Return to Certi…cates/Degrees: Started Certi…cate Program

Table 2 shows the e¤ect of obtaining certi…cates/degrees on students who begin in a certi…cate

program. Using the basic speci…cation, the point estimates show no bene…t from obtaining a

certi…cate from a public or not-for-pro…t institution although the standard errors are large.

The point estimates for the young, but not the full, sample suggest a small return to a

certi…cate from a for-pro…t institution, but given the large standard errors, even the positive

coe¢ cient is indistinguishable from zero. When we use propensity score weighting the point

estimates suggest a positive return to certi…cates in both for-pro…ts and other institutions

for the younger sample, but the coe¢ cients are dwarfed by their standard errors. For the

whole sample, we again …nd no evidence of a bene…t from earning a certi…cate from a for-

pro…t. Taken together, the results strongly suggest that, at least for those completing their

education within …ve and a half years of starting, there is no market bene…t from a certi…cate



                                              13
among those who begin in such programs.

   Although it is not the focus of our paper, we note also that the coe¢ cient on the for-pro…t

dummy is insigni…cant and, at least in the full sample, small. Thus, those leaving certi…cate

programs without certi…cation have similar incomes regardless of where they enrolled. Unless

dropouts di¤er either in the time spent enrolled or post-enrollment experience (both explored

brie‡y below), we would expect dropouts from di¤erent institution types to have similar

earnings if we control adequately for other di¤erences. The absence of a signi…cant coe¢ cient

on the dummy variable is therefore reassuring.



4.2    Return to Certi…cates/Degrees: Started Associates Program

Table 3 is similar to Table 2 except that it shows the results for those entering associates

degree programs. The results are striking. Students who obtain certi…cates/degrees from a

public or not-for-pro…t institution receive a large wage premium. The value of an associates

degree is large and statistically signi…cant at the .05-level or better in all four speci…cations,

with magnitude as large as 14 log points. Depending on the sample and estimation technique,

the value of a certi…cate ranges from 21 to 35 log points and is statistically signi…cant at the

.05-level or better in all four speci…cations. However, the number of students whose highest

degree is a certi…cate, but started in an associates degree program, is small and probably

includes some associates degrees misreported as certi…cates. For the group obtaining a BA,

there is also a large and statistically signi…cant premium in all four sets of estimates. We

note, however, that this group is highly selected since it consists of students who entered

an associates program and received a BA within …ve years. Further, the number of these



                                               14
students is also small.

   In contrast, there is little evidence of a return to any certi…cate or degree from a for-pro…t

institution. The estimated return to an associates degree is negative for one speci…cation

and small in the rest of the speci…cations. Even the largest coe¢ cient (OLS on the full

sample) only suggests a modest 9.2 percent return to associates degrees. However, we also

note that the di¤erence between the returns from a for-pro…t associates degree and a not

for pro…t/public associates degree is also not statistically signi…cant and is small in some

speci…cations. Still, since a much higher proportion of students go on to bachelors degrees at

not-for-pro…ts and publics, we expected that, if anything, our estimates of the return to an

associates degree at a for-pro…t would be biased upwards relative to other institution types.

   The estimated premium from earning a for-pro…t certi…cate is negative in three of four

estimates and is only 4 percent in the fourth. Similarly, for the young sample, the point

estimates of the premium from earning a for-pro…t BA are negative or very small. For the

full sample, they are positive, 6.7 percent using OLS and 8.8 percent using propensity-score

weighting. Again, we note that those with a BA are a highly selected sample and the sample

sizes of those starting in associates degree programs and obtaining certi…cates or bachelors

degrees is small.

   Taken together, these results con…rm that students who begin associates degrees at tra-

ditional (not-for-pro…t and public) institutions and obtain a degree earn higher wages than

apparently comparable individuals who do not. However, we …nd no evidence that students

bene…t from certi…cations received at for-pro…t institutions.

   We note that, in contrast with the case of students entering certi…cate programs, the

coe¢ cient on the for-pro…t dummy is negative, large and statistically signi…cant in one

                                              15
speci…cation. The …nding that dropouts from associates degree programs do worse if they

started at a for-pro…t is disturbing and suggests that we have not fully accounted for dif-

ferences between students at for-pro…t and other institutions. The robustness checks in the

next section are intended, in part, to address this concern.




5         Robustness Checks

In this section, we report the results of a series of robustness checks using only the full sample

and only OLS except for a few cases when the results using other samples or propensity-score

weighting di¤er.



5.1        Selection

A major empirical challenge in assessing the e¤ect of for-pro…t colleges on student outcomes

is that there are two groups of people who are missing wages in our sample: those who

are unemployed and those who are still enrolled in school as of February 1, 2009.4 Overall,

among the 1870 students starting in certi…cate programs, 300 were enrolled as of February

2009 and 430 were unemployed. Similarly, among the 5580 who started associates programs,

1650 were still enrolled and 860 were unemployed.

        Two types of selection concerned us. The …rst is selection in levels, for example if the

best students leave most quickly. This would lead us to estimate an e¤ect among only a

very particular subset of the relevant population. The second is di¤erential selection across

    4
    Income is not missing if the student is currently enrolled in an undergraduate college, but not in a degree
program, and is employed.




                                                      16
institution types, for example if the sorts of students who are no longer enrolled or who …nd

jobs di¤er across starting-institution type.5

       To address these questions, we begin by asking whether there are di¤erences in the

proportion of students who were enrolled on February 1, 2009 or later. About one-sixth (16%)

of students entering certi…cate programs report their last date of enrollment as February,

2009 or later. This …gure is nearly identical for those starting at a for-pro…t (16%) and those

starting at a not-for-pro…t or public (17%). The p-value for this test of equality is .51. Thus,

at least in terms of proportions still enrolled, the two types of institutions do not di¤er for

those entering certi…cate programs.

       The proportion of those who started in an associates program and were still enrolled on

February 1, 2009 or later is much lower for those who start in a for-pro…t associates program

(19%) than for those who start in a not-for-pro…t or public associates program (31%). We

can reject equality of these percentages at conventional levels of signi…cance.

       Addressing di¤erences in selection is facilitated if the pattern of selection is similar for

all groups. We therefore estimated, separately for those starting in for-pro…t programs and

those starting in not-for-pro…t/public programs, a linear probability model for whether the

individual was still enrolled on our standard set of pre-enrollment variables. For those start-

ing in certi…cate programs, we cannot reject that the determinants of schooling completion

are identical. For those starting in associate degree programs, we cannot reject that the

selection equations di¤er only by an intercept.

       We take the results of the selection analysis as support for the view that our results

   5
    Selection could also exacerbate ability bias if, for example, the weakest students drop out and the best
students …nish fastest.



                                                    17
for those entering certi…cate program are valid albeit with the caveat that they need not

apply to the roughly one-sixth of the sample still enrolled. However, for those who initially

enrolled in an associates degree program, we are concerned that our results could be a¤ected

by selection bias. We note that among those starting in associates degree programs, those

still enrolled in school are more likely to be Black, female, younger, have parents not born

in the US, smaller household size, lower expected family contribution to college in 2003, but

higher income (parental for dependent students and respondent for independent students)

in 2002, and less likely to be Hispanic.


5.1.1   Imputations


In this section, we address possible sample selection bias through imputation and quantile

regression. Since we do not know the …nal “highest degree”of those still enrolled, we impute

wages only for individuals who are no longer enrolled but are unemployed.

   First, among those who are not enrolled in 2009 and are missing wages because they

are unemployed, some were not enrolled in 2005, and were employed in that year. For the

students in that sample who did not obtain any further degrees from 2005 to 2009, wage

in 2005 is used to predict wage in 2009. In order to account for wage growth over that

period, we calculate the wage growth for everyone starting in associates degree (certi…cate)

programs who was employed in 2005 and 2009, and did not obtain any degrees between

2005 and 2009. We then calculate the weighted average wage growth separately for those

starting in for-pro…t, and not-for-pro…t/public institutions and use this average wage growth

to predict 2009 wages for those who were employed in 2005, unemployed in 2009, and did

not obtain any additional degrees between 2005 and 2009. We obtain the weighted averages

                                             18
and medians using the sampling weights.6

       We then follow Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) and estimate the probability that each

individual remaining without a wage, would have had a wage above the median. We have

two observations for those who are missing wages: one is assigned a wage above the median,

weighted by the probability that the wage is above the median, and the other is assigned

a wage below the median, weighted by the probability that the wage is below the median.

Since the observations already have sampling weights, we multiply the sampling weight by

the probability that the wage is above (or below) the median. The sampling weight of the

employed individuals remains unchanged.

       Table 4 can be read as follows. The …rst column repeats coe¢ cients from tables 2 and 3.

The top panel gives the coe¢ cients for those entering certi…cate programs and the bottom

one for those entering associates degree programs. The second column shows the estimates

when we conduct the imputation exercise described in this sub-section and estimate the

income equations by quantile (median) regression.

       We continue to …nd no evidence of a bene…t from completing a certi…cate at either

a for-pro…t or not-for-pro…t/public. The estimated return to an associates degree among

those entering such programs is now slightly lower but remains statistically signi…cant at

the .05 level. The di¤erential e¤ect of obtaining the degree from a for-pro…t is small and

insigni…cant but also su¢ ciently imprecise that we cannot reject that there is no return to

an associates degree from such institutions. We remind the reader that in column 1, we

are presenting results for OLS on the full sample, the technique/sample combination in the

   6
    Throughout this section, we follow a parallel procedure for the estimates (not shown) using propensity-
score weighting.



                                                    19
baseline estimates that showed the largest bene…t to for-pro…t associates degrees. We also

continue to …nd strong evidence of a bene…t from earning a certi…cate or BA among those

starting an associates degree at a not-for-pro…t or public but not at a for-pro…t institution.


5.1.2   Maximum Likelihood Sample Selection Correction


In this section, we correct for sample selection under the assumption that the error in the

income and selection equations are joint normals (Gronau 1974, Heckman 1976, Heckman

1979). We present results using two di¤erent exclusion restrictions.

   The …rst exclusion restriction makes use of discontinuities in GPA a¤ecting academic

standing and thus enrollment. We assume that GPA is a continuous predictor of ability

and that ability a¤ects wages in a continuous manner. Thus once we control for GPA,

being in academic di¢ culty should not a¤ect future income except through its e¤ect on

future enrollment. The power of this variable is limited. Leaving school in 2004 because

of academic problems has a large positive e¤ect on the probability of having a non-missing

wage for the full sample starting in associates degree programs, but it is signi…cant at only

the .068 level. It has no predictive power for those entering a certi…cate program.

   Our other exclusion restriction is whether the individual received aid from an employer

in his or her …rst year of post-secondary education. Recall that we control for prior year

income and therefore for job quality. This variable is a weak predictor of non-missing wages

for the full sample of those starting in both certi…cate and associates degree programs. The

coe¢ cients suggest that those who received aid from their employer in 2003 are much more

likely to have a non-missing wage in 2009 than those who do not. However, the coe¢ cient

for the associates sample has a p-value of only .078, and falls just short of signi…cance at the

                                              20
.1 level in the certi…cate sample.

   With the strong caveat that the degree to which we are relying on parametric identi…c-

ation is unclear, the third and fourth (associates programs only) columns of table 4 present

the result of the maximum likelihood sample selection. Both sets of results are largely

unchanged except that when we use the second exclusion restriction, the results not only

indicate a negative return to a BA from a for-pro…t but the di¤erence in the return between

institution-type is now statistically signi…cant.


5.1.3   Health Majors


It is possible that di¤erences in major across institution-types are driving the di¤erences

in return to degrees. Students starting in associates degree programs at public/not-for-

pro…ts enroll in a very diverse set of majors, including many liberal arts and sciences and

general studies majors. However, students starting in associates degree programs at for-

pro…ts mainly enroll in vocational majors such as business, computer science, and health.

The majors of those starting in certi…cate programs are generally similar across institution-

types, except for a large number of students pursuing personal/culinary studies at for-pro…t

institutions.

   The largest major for those starting in certi…cate and associates degree programs, at

both institution-types, is health. Thus, to cast light on whether our results might re‡ect

di¤erences in area of study across institution-type, in the …fth column of table 4, we restrict

the sample to students majoring in health. Despite the smaller sample size (330 in certi…cate

programs and 310 in associates programs), there are some striking results.

   Among those starting in certi…cate programs, we observe a large and statistically sig-

                                               21
ni…cant return to earning a certi…cate in health from a public or not-for-pro…t institution.

In contrast, the point estimate for earning such a certi…cate from a for-pro…t is close to

zero. Although the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant for the sample and estimation

technique shown here, it is signi…cant at the .05 level when we restrict the sample to those

at least age 24 (not shown) when they entered post-secondary education.

   We also observe a noticeably (albeit not statistically signi…cantly) larger return to an

associates degree in health from a not-for-pro…t/public than we found for the whole sample

both for those beginning in certi…cate (not shown) and associates degree programs. The

results shown in the table are too imprecise to allow us either to reject that the return to

an associates degree is similarly large for both types of institutions or to reject that it is

nonexistent at for-pro…ts. However, for some choices of estimation technique and sample,

the estimated return is signi…cantly (in both senses) lower at for-pro…ts.


5.1.4   Time in Program and Time in Labor Market


Certi…cate programs, especially, may di¤er in length, and students might persevere longer

in one type of institution than another. Therefore in the sixth column of table 4, we control

for months enrolled. For both types of program, the coe¢ cients on months enrolled (not

shown) are small and insigni…cant, and the remaining coe¢ cients are una¤ected.

   In order to determine whether the large, negative, statistically signi…cant, coe¢ cient on

starting an associates degree at a for-pro…t is due to di¤erences in human capital acquisition

for drop-outs or di¤erences in drop-outs across institution-types, we include total months

enrolled, and total months enrolled interacted with starting at a for-pro…t. In this speci…ca-

tion, the coe¢ cient on starting at a for-pro…t is the e¤ect of starting at a for-pro…t and not

                                              22
spending any time enrolled. However, we continue to …nd the same coe¢ cient on starting at

a for-pro…t (not shown). To relax the linearity assumption of this test, we restrict the sample

to those who have been enrolled for at most 6 months and estimate the main speci…cation

(without controlling for months enrolled). Again, we would expect not to …nd any human

capital e¤ects in this speci…cation, and so …nding a signi…cant coe¢ cient on starting at a

for-pro…t would be indicative of di¤erences in ability bias across institution-types. Here we

…nd that the coe¢ cient on starting at a for-pro…t is .014 and is not statistically signi…cant

(not shown; sample size here is 200), reassuring evidence that the di¤erences-in-di¤erences

estimates are unbiased.

   In the last column of the table we control for potential experience since leaving the

program. To allow for the possibility that wage growth after leaving school is stronger for

those starting at for-pro…ts, we include both a linear term for months since last enrolled and

its interaction with starting at a for-pro…t. The results for our key coe¢ cients are again very

similar to those in the original speci…cation. However, we note the coe¢ cient on the for-pro…t

dummy falls to zero among those in associates degree programs. This is somewhat reassuring

in that it supports the view that dropouts from for-pro…ts and other institutions are similar

once we control for observables. Although the di¤erence is statistically insigni…cant, our point

estimates suggest slower post-labor market entry wage growth for those entering associates

degree programs at for-pro…ts (not shown).


5.1.5   Labor Market Conditions


The di¤erential returns might re‡ect di¤erences in labor market strength in areas where

for-pro…t and not-for-pro…t/public institutions are located. The distance between the re-

                                              23
spondent’s home and school is somewhat greater among those attending for-pro…ts. The

median distance between the respondent’s permanent home and starting-institution is 18

miles for individuals starting in for-pro…t associates degree programs, and 10 miles for indi-

viduals starting in not-for-pro…t or public associates degree programs. The median distance

between the respondent’s permanent home and starting-institution is 15 miles for individuals

starting in for-pro…t certi…cate programs, and 12 miles for those starting in not-for-pro…t or

public certi…cate programs. While these di¤erences are statistically signi…cant, they suggest

that for most students, the labor market where the post-secondary institution is located is

a good proxy for the student’s local labor market.

   To investigate the possibility that for-pro…ts are located in worse labor markets, we use

the IPEDS public-use data to identify all institutions that primarily grant certi…cates and

associates degrees. We are able to obtain the county name and state for each of these institu-

tions. We then match these data with the average county-level unemployment rate in 2009,

published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We …nd that the di¤erence in the unemploy-

ment rate of counties where the for-pro…t institutions are located relative to counties where

the not-for-pro…t or public institutions are located is just signi…cant at the .1 level (p=.1).

However, the unemployment rate in counties where for-pro…ts are located is slightly lower

than that in counties where not-for-pro…t/public institutions are located (9.1% v 9.3%).

Thus, our results are not driven by for-pro…t institutions being located in particularly weak

labor markets.




                                              24
6     Conclusion

Much of the policy debate surrounding for-pro…t colleges has involved claims that for-pro…t

colleges leave students with very high debt levels and poor employment outcomes. Basic

summary statistics presented in this paper indeed show that post-college income is signi-

…cantly lower for students starting at for-pro…t institutions. However, it is also very clear

that those who start at for-pro…t institutions are less well prepared for college, had lower

levels of pre-college academic performance, and face other signi…cant obstacles to college

and post-college success. This paper controls for these characteristics using both traditional

OLS and propensity score methods. In addition, we use imputation methods and a sample

selection model to address the various selection issues that are present in the data.

    While high standard errors force us to be cautious, our results strongly suggest that, even

after controlling for an extensive set of background variables, students at for-pro…t institu-

tions do not bene…t more and often bene…t less from their education than apparently similar

students at not-for-pro…t and public institutions. Certi…cates received by those starting in

certi…cate programs provide little labor market bene…t at either type of institution except

that certi…cates in health …elds appear to be valuable only if they are from not-for-pro…ts

and publics. Among those starting in associates degree programs, the return to a certi…cate

or a BA is lower at for-pro…ts. The return to an associates degree among this group is never

statistically signi…cant and is statistically signi…cantly lower than the return to an associates

degree from other institutions in health in some speci…cations.

    The mechanism underlying these di¤erential returns is unclear. One possibility is that

students at not-for-pro…t and public institutions have access to better career o¢ ces at their


                                               25
institution. However, the opposite appears to be true. Among people employed in 2009

and not employed in the same or similar job as when they were enrolled, 14% of those

who started in for-pro…t associates degree programs compared with 8% of those starting in

other institutions say the school helped them …nd their job. For those starting in certi…cate

programs, the corresponding …gures are 9% and 7%.

   There are additional reasons for being cautious about our results. Our income data are

from 2009, during an economic recession. If students starting at for-pro…t universities are

more adversely a¤ected in the labor market by the recession than those at not-for-pro…t or

public institutions, we would expect to see lower returns to for-pro…t certi…cates and degrees.

The lower returns to for-pro…t degrees could re‡ect that employers know graduates of for-

pro…t institutions are of lower quality. Alternatively, lower for-pro…t returns could re‡ect

that employers perceive graduates of for-pro…t universities to be lower quality when they

are in fact equal in competence to those from not-for-pro…t or public universities. Since our

data only allow us to observe wages at most a few years after completing a degree, we can

only estimate short-run labor market e¤ects.




References
 [1] Becker, Sascha O. and A. Ichino. “Estimation of Average Treatment E¤ects Based on
     Propensity Scores.”Stata Journal. Vol. 2, Number 4. 2002.

 [2] Cellini, S. and L. Chaudhary. “The Labor Market Returns to a Private Two-Year College
     Education.”Working Paper. April, 2011.

 [3] Chung, A. “E¤ects of For-Pro…t College Training on Earnings.”Working Paper. Octo-
     ber, 2008.




                                              26
 [4] Crump, R., V.J. Hotz, G. Imbens, and O. Mitnik. “Moving the Goalposts: Addressing
     Limited Overlap in Estimation of Average Treatment E¤ects by Changing the Estim-
     and.”Unpublished Manuscript. Department of Economics. UC Berkeley. 2006.

 [5] Deming, D., C. Goldin, and L. Katz. “The For-Pro…t Postsecondary school sector:
     Nimble critters or Agile Predators?”NBER Working Paper 17710. 2011.

 [6] Glaeser, E., A. Shleifer. “Not-for-Pro…t Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Public Economics.
     Vol. 81. 2001.

 [7] Gronau, R. “Wage Comparison-A Selectivity Bias.”Journal of Political Economy. Vol.
     82. 1974.

 [8] Heckman, J. J. “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
     Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models.”
     Annals of Economics and Social Measurement. Vol. 5. 1976.

 [9] Heckman, J. J. “Sample Selection Bias as a Speci…cation Error.”Econometrica. Vol. 47.
     1979.

[10] Imbens, G. “Methods for Estimating Treatment E¤ects I: Unconfounded Treatment
     Assignment.”Lecture at Impact Evaluation Network. 2010.

[11] Imbens, G. and J. Wooldridge. “What’s New in Econometrics: Estimation of Average
     Treatment E¤ects Under Unconfoundedness.” Lecture Notes 1. NBER Summer Insti-
     tute. 2007.

[12] Korn, Melissa. “Party Ends at For-Pro…t Schools.” Wall Street Journal. August 23,
     2011.

[13] McClellan, M., and D. Staiger. “Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Pro…t and Not-for-
     Pro…t Hospitals.” In The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing For-Pro…t and Not-
     for-Pro…t Institutions. Ed. D. Cutler. University of Chicago Press. p. 93-112. January,
     2000.

[14] Olivetti, C. and B. Petrongolo. “Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A Cross-
     Country Analysis of Gender Gaps.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 26, Number 4.
     2008.

[15] Philipson, T. “Asymmetric Information in the Not-for-Pro…t Sector: Does its Output
     Sell at a Premium?” In The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing For-Pro…t and
     Not-for-Pro…t Institutions. Ed. D. Cutler. University of Chicago Press. January, 2000.

[16] “For-Pro…t Colleges Surge as U.S. Student Aid Rules Eased.” Ed. Lisa Wolfson and
     Chris Staiti. Bloomberg. August 12, 2011.

[17] Zagier, Alan Scher. “For-pro…t Colleges respond to Increased Scrutiny.” Associated
     Press. August 7, 2011.


                                            27
                                  Table 1: Outcomes (2009) by Initial Institution Type
                                           (1)                     (2)              (3)                 (4)
                                             Start Certificate Program              Start Associates Program
                                        For-Profit      Not-For-Profit/Public    For-Profit    Not-For-Profit/Public
Highest Degree
                         Bachelors        0.001                0.017***            0.033             0.121***
                                         (0.001)               (0.006)            (0.018)            (0.006)

                        Associates        0.011                0.045***            0.278             0.166***
                                         (0.004)               (0.011)            (0.028)            (0.007)

                         Certificate      0.527                 0.515              0.042              0.059
                                         (0.023)               (0.027)            (0.013)            (0.006)

Majored in
                          Business        0.061                  0.09              0.124              0.142
                                         (0.011)               (0.015)            (0.022)            (0.007)

             Liberal Arts/Sciences        0.043                 0.055              0.069             0.151***
                                         (0.009)               (0.012)            (0.018)            (0.008)

        Health, Human Services,           0.519                0.399***            0.355              0.351
                         Education       (0.023)               (0.026)            (0.030)            (0.010)

             Manual/Technological         0.113                0.226***            0.244             0.088***
                Vocational Training      (0.017)               (0.025)            (0.026)            (0.005)

                        Undeclared        0.265                 0.231              0.208             0.267**
                                         (0.020)               (0.022)            (0.023)            (0.009)

Months Since Last Enrolled,              39.089                36.119*            33.534            23.343***
2009                                     (1.013)               (1.195)            (1.269)            (0.464)

Total Months Enrolled                    19.236               21.138**            25.508            31.664***
                                         (0.460)               (0.669)            (1.101)            (0.363)

GPA 2003-2004                           316.023                308.551            309.627           284.357***
                                         (3.674)               (5.100)            (5.634)            (1.822)

Parents' Ed < 12                          0.652                 0.615              0.525             0.405***
                                         (0.022)               (0.027)            (0.031)            (0.010)

Expected Family Contribution,             1.594                5.935***            3.264             8.074***
2003 ($,000)                             (0.180)               (0.757)            (0.301)            (0.318)

Years Delayed Starting Post-              5.299                8.55***             4.776              4.334
Secondary Education                      (0.365)               (0.459)            (0.387)            (0.188)

High School Diploma                       0.699                 0.76**              0.81              0.87**
                                         (0.021)               (0.023)            (0.026)            (0.007)

GED                                       0.195                 0.175              0.162             0.084***
                                         (0.018)               (0.019)            (0.021)            (0.005)

English is Primary Language               0.826                0.882**             0.913             0.879**
                                         (0.016)               (0.017)            (0.016)            (0.007)


Number of Dependent Children,             0.836                 0.883              0.611             0.414***
2003                                     (0.052)               (0.081)            (0.059)            (0.021)

Dependent, 2003                           0.395                 0.353              0.451             0.654***
                                         (0.022)               (0.026)            (0.030)            (0.010)

Married, 2003                             0.15                 0.313***            0.144              0.146
                                         (0.016)               (0.026)            (0.019)            (0.008)
                                            (1)                     (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                              Start Certificate Program                   Start Associates Program
                                        For-Profit        Not-For-Profit/Public       For-Profit      Not-For-Profit/Public
Age, 2009                                 29.762                33.15***                28.555               27.919
                                         (0.369)                 (0.483)               (0.395)               (0.192)

Male                                      0.248                 0.427***                0.466                 0.428
                                         (0.021)                 (0.027)               (0.031)               (0.010)

Hispanic                                  0.317                 0.166***                0.191                 0.15*
                                         (0.021)                 (0.022)               (0.024)               (0.008)

Black                                     0.316                 0.192***                 0.25                0.17***
                                         (0.021)                 (0.022)               (0.029)               (0.007)

Income in 2002 ($,000)                    21.303                37.24***                28.347              49.356***
                                         (0.958)                 (2.983)               (1.317)               (1.124)

Born in the US                            0.859                  0.884                  0.888                 0.877
                                         (0.014)                 (0.017)               (0.028)               (0.007)


Parents Born in the US                     0.72                 0.787**                 0.776                 0.764
                                         (0.019)                 (0.024)               (0.030)               (0.009)


Household Size                            3.258                   3.39                  3.114                3.627***
                                         (0.068)                 (0.094)               (0.094)               (0.033)
Under-24-Only Regressors (all
Exogenous)
HS GPA > 3.0                              0.732                 0.847***                0.748                0.693**
                                         (0.020)                 (0.018)               (0.025)               (0.009)

Took the SAT                              0.361                  0.55***                0.577                0.709***
                                         (0.027)                 (0.039)               (0.037)               (0.010)

SAT/ACT score/100                         8.164                 8.738**                 8.425                8.931**
                                         (0.161)                 (0.189)               (0.208)               (0.046)

Parents' Income < 30,000                  0.446                 0.307***                0.365                0.254***
                                         (0.028)                 (0.034)               (0.038)               (0.010)

Outcome Variable
Income in 2009 ($,000)                    26.356               31.889***                28.578               31.788**
                                         (0.854)                 (1.521)               (1.256)               (0.589)


Standard deviations in parentheses under the means.
Stars next to values in Column 2 denote significant differences between Columns 1 and 2. Stars next to values in
Column 4 denote significant differences between Columns 3 and 4.


Except for 2009 income, years delayed post-secondary education, parental education, and all of the under-24-only
variables, there are 1190 observations that start a certificate program at a for-profit, and 860 observations that start a
certificate program at a not for profit/public institution. There are 530 observations that start an Associates program at a
for-profit, and 5210 observations that start an Associates program at a not-for-profit/public institution. Unweighted
sample sizes do not fall below 10 in any of the cells. Observations are weighted by the sample weights from the survey.
We have income data for 680 individuals starting a certificate at a for-profit, 550 at a not-for-profit/public. We have
income data for 330 individuals starting an associates at a for-profit, 2830 at a not-for-profit/public.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table 2: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009: Start in
                             Certificate Program
                         (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                     Under 24      All Ages           Under 24      All Ages
                                                          Propensity Score
                        Basic Specification                 Specification



     Start
     Program at:
 (1) For-Profit         -0.082         -0.037             0.102         -0.028
                        [0.108]        [0.080]           [0.113]        [0.082]
     Highest
     Degree:
 (2) Certificate         0.009         0.014              0.129         0.036
                        [0.135]        [0.085]           [0.136]        [0.082]
 (3) Associates         -0.263         -0.120             0.054         0.072
                        [0.291]        [0.232]           [0.181]        [0.166]
 (4) Bachelors          0.365*        0.450**            0.492**       0.624***
                        [0.186]        [0.188]           [0.219]        [0.127]
     Certificate
     from:
 (5) For-Profit          0.052         -0.007            -0.086         -0.030
                        [0.162]        [0.106]           [0.167]        [0.110]
     Associates
     from:
 (6) For-Profit            a           -0.292               a          -0.528**
                                       [0.271]                          [0.211]
     Combination
 (7) (2) + (5)           0.062         0.008              0.043         0.006
                         [.082]        [.064]             [.093]        [.073]
     Under-24-
     Only
     Variables             Y             N                  Y             N
      N                   560          1,040             430               990
a
  denotes the coefficient was omitted to preserve the confidentiality of the few
individuals obtaining those degrees.

The basic specification weights the observations by the sampling weights of the
survey, while the Propensity Score specification weights the observations by
propensity scores and sampling weights. Under-24 only variables are taking
the SAT/ACT, SAT/ACT score, HS GPA above 3.0, and parental income less
than $30,000. Explanatory variables are Expected Family Contribution to
college (2003), Number of Dependent Children in 2003, years delayed
enrollment into college, age, household size in 2003, income in 2002 (parental
income for dependent students and respondent income for independent
students) indicators for Black, Male, married, Hispanic, HS diploma, GED,
dependent in 2003, highest level of parental education HS or less, English
being the primary language, born in the US, major in 2003/2004 (undeclared
[omitted category]; business; liberal arts and sciences; health, human services,
and education; manual and technological vocational training) and parents born
in the US. Degree institution types pertain to the highest degree obtained.
          Table 3: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009: Start in
                              Associates Degree Program
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
                              Under 24 All Ages       Under 24     All Ages
                                                              Propensity Score
                                Basic Specification             Specification
        Start Program at:
    (1) For-Profit               -0.021     -0.152**          0.027         -0.088
                                 [0.052]     [0.074]         [0.062]        [0.068]
        Highest Degree:
    (2) Certificate             0.316***    0.208**         0.351***       0.215**
                                 [0.113]     [0.092]         [0.113]        [0.092]
    (3) Associates              0.128**     0.115***        0.142***       0.114**
                                 [0.051]     [0.043]         [0.051]        [0.046]
    (4) Bachelors               0.223***    0.210***        0.234***       0.209***
                                 [0.050]     [0.048]         [0.053]        [0.051]
        Certificate from:
    (5) For-Profit              -0.432***    -0.257*        -0.360**        -0.178
                                 [0.155]     [0.136]         [0.170]        [0.152]
        Associates from:
    (6) For-Profit               -0.131      -0.024          -0.089         -0.051
                                 [0.092]     [0.097]         [0.098]        [0.102]
        Bachelors from:
    (7) For-Profit              -0.318***    -0.143          -0.206         -0.121
                                 [0.118]     [0.125]         [0.127]        [0.117]
    (8) Combination (3) + (6)    -0.003       0.092           0.053          0.063
                                  [.079]      [.086]          [.087]         [.092]
       Under-24-Only
       Variables                   Y           N               Y              N
       N                          2020        2640            1900           2520


a
  denotes the coefficient was omitted to preserve the confidentiality of the few
individuals obtaining those degrees.

The basic specification weights the observations by the sampling weights of the
survey, while the Propensity Score specification weights the observations by
propensity scores and sampling weights. Explanatory variables are the same as
those listed in Table 2. Under-24-Only variables are the same as those listed in
Table 2. Degree institution types pertain to the highest degree obtained.
                                       Table 4: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009: Robustness Checks
                                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)        (6)             (7)
                                                                                MLE Sample
                                                                                  Selection  MLE Sample
                                                                                 Correction:   Selection
                                                    Principal                    Academic     Correction:               Health     Months     Months Since
                                                   Specification     Imputation   Standing   Employer Aid               Majors     Enrolled   Last Enrolled
                 Panel A: Start in Certificate Program
                 Start Program at:
            (1) For-Profit                            -0.037           -0.083                                            0.055     -0.043          -0.100
                                                      [0.080]          [0.092]                                          [0.116]    [0.079]        [0.175]
                 Highest Degree:
            (2) Certificate                            0.014           -0.019                                           0.220**     0.008          0.023
                Certificate from:                     [0.085]          [0.088]                                          [0.103]    [0.084]        [0.086]
            (3) For-Profit                            -0.007            0.033                                           -0.198      0.004          -0.011
                                                      [0.106]          [0.116]                                          [0.144]    [0.105]        [0.108]
            (4) Combination (2) + (3)                  0.008            0.014                                            0.022      0.011          0.012
                                                       [.064]           [.076]                                           [.097]     [.064]         [.065]
                 N                                     1,040            1640                                              330       1,040          1,040

                 Panel B: Start in Associates Degree Program
                 Start Program at:
            (5) For-Profit                           -0.152**         -0.120**         -0.162**        -0.221***        -0.522*    -0.153**        0.004
                                                      [0.074]          [0.060]         [0.078]           [0.077]        [0.298]    [0.074]        [0.126]
                 Highest Degree:
            (6) Certificate                           0.208**          0.214*          0.193**          0.222**         -0.057     0.210**        0.218**
                                                      [0.092]          [0.122]         [0.089]           [0.090]        [0.110]    [0.092]        [0.093]
            (7) Associates                           0.115***          0.090**         0.100**          0.131***        0.268***   0.125***      0.129***
                                                      [0.043]          [0.044]         [0.044]           [0.042]        [0.092]    [0.045]        [0.043]
            (8) Bachelors                            0.210***         0.304***         0.187***         0.215***         0.098     0.228***      0.235***
                                                      [0.048]          [0.060]         [0.050]           [0.044]        [0.140]    [0.054]        [0.050]
                 Certificate from:
            (9) For-Profit                            -0.257*          -0.323          -0.230*          -0.329**         0.195     -0.257*        -0.284**
                                                      [0.136]          [0.205]         [0.135]           [0.131]        [0.234]    [0.135]        [0.131]
                 Associates from:
           (10) For-Profit                            -0.024           -0.004           -0.023           -0.074          0.015     -0.027          -0.041
                                                      [0.097]          [0.111]         [0.097]           [0.085]        [0.405]    [0.097]        [0.098]
                 Bachelors from:
           (11) For-Profit                            -0.143           -0.386           -0.153         -0.292***           a       -0.138         -0.219*
                                                      [0.125]          [1.148]         [0.123]           [0.113]                   [0.125]        [0.133]
           (12) Combination (7) + (10)                 0.092            0.085           0.077            0.057           0.283      0.098          0.088
                                                       [.086]           [.102]          [.084]           [.075]          [.362]     [.087]         [.087]
                 N                                     2640             3910             5160             5160            440       2640           2640
a   denotes the coefficient was omitted to preserve the confidentiality of the few individuals obtaining that degree.

Results are from the full sample; observations weighted by the sampling weights. Explanatory variables are listed in Table 2. Degree institution types pertain
to the highest degree obtained. Column 1 presents the results from Tables 2 and 3. Column 2 contains results from median regressions, imputing for the
unemployed. Observations in Column 2 also weighted by imputation weights as described in the paper with standard errors obtained by bootstrap. Columns
3 and 4 contain Maximum Likelihood Sample Selection results, in which non-missing wages are a function of the explanatory variables in Table 2, and whether
the respondent received employer aid for college in 2003/2004 (Column 3) or 2003/2004 GPA and leaving school because of academic problems in 2004
(Column 4). GPA in 2003/2004 is included as an explanatory variable in Column 4. The first-stage coefficient on receiving employer aid is .213 (.121), and on
leaving school because of academic problems it is .366 (.201). Column 5 restricts the sample to Health majors. Column 6 includes as an explanatory
variable total months enrolled, while Column 7 includes months since last enrolled and this variable interacted with starting at a for-profit.
