NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FACING THE CLIMATE CHANGE CHALLENGE IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY
Lee G. Branstetter
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 18214
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18214

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

The authors thank Peter Adams, Joseph Aldy, Scott Barrett, Alex Bowen, Sean McCoy, Allen Robinson,
and participants in two NBER workshops on "Globalization in an Age of Crisis" for helpful comments
and suggestions. Lee Branstetter recently served as a senior economist at the Council of Economic
Advisers. However, the views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Council of Economic Advisers, or any
other branch or agency of the U.S. government.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lee G. Branstetter and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Facing the Climate Change Challenge in a Global Economy
Lee G. Branstetter and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 18214
July 2012
JEL No. F18,F55,Q54
ABSTRACT
Over the past two decades, the international community has struggled to deal constructively with the
problem of mitigating climate change. This is considered by many to be the preeminent public policy
challenge of our time, but actual policy responses have been relatively modest. This essay provides
an abbreviated narrative history of international policy in this domain, with a special emphasis on
aspects of the problem, proposed solutions, and unresolved issues that are of interest to international
economists and informed observers of the global economic system. We also discuss the potential
conflict that could emerge between free trade principles on the one hand and environmental policy
objectives on the other.

Lee G. Branstetter
Heinz College
School of Public Policy and Management
Department of Social and Decision Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu
William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu

1. Introduction
As concern about greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and possible human-induced climate change
has intensified, the volume of economic research on prospective climate change, its negative economic
impacts, and cost-effective methods of limiting those impacts has grown substantially. We will make no
effort in this paper to offer a comprehensive review of the recent literature on the economics of climate
change. 1 Instead, we focus in this paper on the particular challenge of international policy coordination
to reduce emissions, the processes through which this coordination is or is not emerging, and the
implications for international trade. Even in this narrower domain, there is a substantial and growing
literature comprising important contributions from scholars working in multiple disciplines. Our aim is
to summarize and place in context some of the lessons of this literature for economists interested in the
general question of multilateral policy coordination in the 21st century. Because our intended audience
is the general community of international economists and policymakers interested in international
economic policy issues, rather than the community of climate specialists, our exposition will necessarily
cover a broad range of topics, sometimes with limited depth.
In the view of the authors, the impressive collection of evidence documented by the successive
reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) leaves little doubt that anthropogenic
GHG emissions are already changing the earth's climate system. 2 Unconstrained growth in GHG

1

Readers interested in a recent, comprehensive survey of key issues and controversies are directed to Aldy et al
(2010). The Stern Review (N. H. Stern & Great Britain, 2007), one of the more recent and most thorough efforts to
quantify the economic case for strong action, staked out positions on many of these difficult questions and stirred
up considerable debate in the process (see, for example, Mendelsohn, 2006; W. D. Nordhaus, 2007; Martin L.
Weitzman, 2007).
2
The IPCC is an international panel of scientific experts charged under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCC) to produce periodic reports on the scientific evidence for the existence and extent of
anthropogenic global warming. The most recent IPCC assessment report (Pachauri & Reisinger, 2007) was
published in 2007 and can be accessed on-line at
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/contents.html. The drafting of the fifth assessment report

2

emissions is likely to intensify these changes in coming decades, raising the prospect of serious damage
to ecological and economic systems worldwide. 3 Many scholars and political leaders view an effort to
limit climate change as the preeminent policy challenge of our time.
But this effort carries with it special challenges that stem from the intrinsic characteristics of the
climate change problem. The majority of GHGs, including carbon dioxide (CO2), persist for a very long
time in the atmosphere -- time spans measured in centuries -- which implies that the consequences of
our action (or inaction) today, while potentially significant, will only fully emerge over an
intergenerational time span. This makes it difficult for democratic political systems with relatively short
decision making time horizons to come to terms with the problem. And, despite the remarkably strong
consensus among physical scientists regarding the reality of anthropogenic climate change, significant
uncertainties still exist around exactly how and when the earth's climate system might respond to
increases in GHG concentrations. This uncertainty about the earth's future physical circumstances is
only compounded by our general uncertainty about the impact of climate change on human systems,
driven by the uncertain evolution of future economic growth, population expansion, and technological
change. If our political systems find it difficult enough to reckon with long-run problems when the
consequences are well known, it is even more difficult when they are highly uncertain. Meanwhile, the
almost direct relationship between carbon dioxide emissions and energy use, and, ultimately, economic
activity, often makes the cost of taking action all too palpable.
Domestic political difficulties have arisen in many countries seeking to enact policies to mitigate
climate change, but most notably – and importantly – in the United States. While no longer the largest
emitter in the world (Buckley, 2010), policy decisions in the United States are immensely important.
is currently underway. In 2007, the IPCC shared the Nobel Peace Prize with former U.S. Vice President Albert Gore
for its efforts to promote public understanding of climate change.
3
A useful nontechnical summary of the basic physical science of climate change can be found in Collins et al
(2007). Concerns over the possibility of small probability, high consequence has also spurred a line of work
questioning the basic notion of (presented discounted) expected utility analysis (M. L. Weitzman, 2009)

3

U.S. emissions are still the highest among developed countries, and others look to the United States for
leadership. Yet, following promising developments towards a legislated emissions trading program in
2009, the political shift up to and including the November 2010 elections led even the President to
declare that he was “going to be looking for other ways to solve that problem” (Soraghan, 2010).
While the political stars may not be aligned for a comprehensive legislative solution in the
United States now, we can expect attention to refocus on the issue once current economic doldrums
pass and partisan bickering calms down. More importantly, the developments in 2009 offer important
insights into what will ultimately matter in a U.S. policy – particularly the competitiveness concerns we
discuss later. Indeed, it is our view that the United States will eventually enact comprehensive climate
legislation that motivates interest in how U.S. policy along with other national, regional, and global
initiatives can be best made operational in a global economy, and how all these policies might or might
not coalesce into a global system.
This possibility of a jumble of various national, regional, and global policies reflects the final,
perhaps most vexing aspect of the climate change problem: its global nature. Most pollutants are
essentially local problems. Emissions inflict damage, but the intensity of that damage diminishes sharply
with increasing geographic distance from the point of emissions. GHG emissions, by contrast, are a
textbook case of a transnational environmental externality. GHG emissions have the same impact on
the global climate system, regardless of where they are emitted. A molecule of CO2 emerging from a
cooking fire in rural India has the same impact as a molecule of CO2 emerging from the tailpipe of an
SUV in the Houston suburbs.

4

Coupled with the high correlation among emissions, energy use, and economic development,
this global nature has created an unusually polarizing international dilemma. 4 The preponderance of
projected growth in GHG emissions over the next several decades will come in developing countries
whose ongoing industrialization will bring in its train a rapid increase in per capita energy use and GHG
emissions. 5 These countries have made it clear in international negotiations that they view the
continuation of rapid economic growth as a greater priority than the curbing of emissions, and they
expect significant support from developed countries to finance emission mitigation. Meanwhile, many
developed countries face severe fiscal constraints that constrain their ability to use public funds to
subsidize mitigation in their own, let alone developing, countries (though regulatory tools, like emissions
trading, remain a hopeful option). The international system has thus struggled to deal with the reality,
on the one hand, that the greatest source of current and especially future emissions sees itself as having
relatively little to gain from a strong, self-financed commitment to climate change mitigation and, on the
other hand, that other countries will have a hard time paying them to do so.
In this essay, we start by laying out some basic facts about the current and prospective future
distribution of emissions across countries. We will also summarize what that the basic economic theory
of environmental regulation would prescribe as the first-best solution to the problem of emissions
reductions. Unfortunately, we shall see that the ability of current global institutions to practically
implement anything like this first-best solution in the near term is practically zero. We will then
summarize the recent, major shift in the direction of global negotiation away from the top down, legally

4

Schmalensee, Stoker, & Judson (1998) provide an early and comprehensive look at the historic pattern of
emissions per capita as countries have grown over time. He consistently finds increasing emissions up to a
threshold income level, at which point emissions per capita flatten or peak. Of course, one of the dominant
themes in the climate change debate is that currently developing countries must pursue low carbon development
strategies (e.g., see material at from a 2011 workshop hosted by the EU and US governments (Open Energy Info,
2011)) However, even low carbon development strategies require some increase in carbon emissions, which raises
the same issues.
5
Weber, Peters, Guan, & Hubacek (2008) suggest that much of the growth in industrial carbon dioxide emissions in
emerging economies is related to energy-intensive exports to developed countries.

5

binding developed-country-only targets and timetables of the Kyoto Protocol, and towards a bottom up
set of mitigation commitments by all major economies, provisions for transparent review, and financial
support – both public and private – for poorer countries. How and when this might coalesce into a more
coherent global system remains an important question.
Toward the end of the paper we address an idea that many international economists may find
controversial and unwelcome. As policies to mitigate emissions are strengthened in some countries –
particularly through mechanisms that price emissions and effectively raise energy costs – pressure will
build to shield domestic energy-intensive, trade-exposed manufacturing industries from competition
with producers based in other countries with weak or nonexistent carbon control policies. This has lead
many countries to consider "carbon tariffs" or other border measures, both to allow progress in those
countries seeking to strengthen their carbon control regimes and to convince other, laggard countries
that some degree of global cooperation on carbon control is warranted. These ideas raise important
legal and economic questions, which we will review.
2. The Global Distribution of GHG Emissions: Past, Present, and Future
Today, global negotiations on climate change policy are conducted primarily under the aegis of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This is the legal framework
under which the Kyoto Protocol was created. The recent Copenhagen and Cancun meetings, which we
will discuss below, were international negotiating conferences among the parties to this convention
focused on further elaborations and extensions. The UNFCCC itself is a treaty that came into force in
1994 after first being presented for signing at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 1992. With 195
parties, the treaty enjoys near universal participation among UN member states. Among the provisions
of the UNFCCC, the participating developed-country nations – enumerated in “Annex I” to the UNFCCC –
made (nonbinding) pledges to reduce GHG emissions below 1990 levels by 2000 while no such
6

quantified target was established for developing countries (see Article 4, specifically 4.1(a) and 4.2(b),
United Nations, 1994).
Given the persistence of this differentiation among countries, particularly the anchoring to
developmental status in the early 1990s through inclusion or exclusion to Annex I, it is worth reflecting
on the context in which this arrangement took shape. In the early 1990s, the developing world as a
whole was slowly and fitfully emerging from the multiple recessions and financial collapses initially
triggered by a severe recession in the developed world and sustained by the Third World debt crisis of
the 1980s. Throughout that decade, progress in terms of sustained growth in per capita income had
been minimal, and many regions had witnessed substantial declines in the real purchasing power of the
median worker. Developing nations in East and Southeast Asia were doing much better, but the growth
miracles of China and, especially, India were still at an early stage, and were not yet recognized as such
by the global community. The developed world had fared much better in the 1980s, with reasonably
robust GDP expansion in Japan, Western Europe, and the U.S., and most forecasters looked forward to a
short- and medium-term future that would resemble the recent past. This would be a world where
wealth, prosperity, and energy consumption were disproportionately concentrated in the advanced
industrial countries. Despite their relatively small collective share of the world's population, these
countries accounted for the overwhelming majority of greenhouse gas emissions. As UNFCCC emerged
in 1992, it made sense to concentrate on the advanced industrial countries as a first step, since they
were both the primary source of the problem and the set of nations best suited to shoulder the
economic costs of reducing emissions.
Legal scholars tell us that founding documents have enduring consequences. By the time
serious negotiations surrounding the Kyoto Protocol were taking shape in the mid-to-late 1990s,
observers of the world economy had begun to take industrial Asia much more seriously. But

7

negotiations remained focused on legally binding targets for Annex I countries and no others. The
diplomatic die had already been cast, and newly emerging economies were able to evade the efforts
made to create legally binding emissions reduction targets that applied to them. 6
As the rest of our essay will attest, this has been a significant omission. Even in the mid 1990s,
observers understood that manufacturers in energy-intensive industries could face a strong incentive to
relocate production from countries that imposed a cost of emissions to countries with weak or
nonexistent carbon regulation regimes. The development of a high level of manufacturing capacity in
East and Southeast Asian nations with no obligations to curb emissions raised the specter of "leakage"
of carbon intensive industrial activity from the Western countries to this region. This leakage has an
environmental angle – that emission reductions efforts in developed countries could be partially, wholly,
or even more than wholly offset by increases in unregulated emerging economies. But equally
important, it has an economic angle as jobs are pushed overseas, a concern faced with regard to
environmental regulations more generally (Jaffe, Peterson, Portney, & Stavins, 1995).
As early as 1997, there were responses to this concern. Prior to the Kyoto meetings (where the
final negotiation and signing of the Kyoto Protocol occurred), the United States Senate passed the ByrdHagel Resolution (by a vote of 95 to 0) expressing the “sense of the Senate” to oppose any climate
change treaty that failed to impose meaningful constraints on developing countries. This meant, of
course, that the Kyoto Protocol was effectively dead in the United States even before a final version had
been agreed upon by international negotiators. The Clinton administration signed the agreement, but
never submitted it to the Senate for ratification, and it therefore never became binding as U.S. law.

6

Interestingly, the goal of reducing emissions below 1990 levels, also originally embodied in the UNFCCC's
founding documents, remained the salient benchmark for the Kyoto Protocol negotiations.

8

After the election of President George W. Bush, the United States formally withdrew from the Kyoto
Protocol altogether.
As resistance to a focus on “Annex I only” obligations was building in the U.S. and elsewhere,
economic developments worldwide were also rendering the Annex I designations increasingly obsolete.
The 1990s were a time of dramatically slower economic growth in Japan and in much of Western
Europe, lowering the rate of growth of Annex I country emissions. 7 At the same time, the growth boom
that had begun in China in the 1980s significantly accelerated in the 1990s and India's economy
responded to the liberalization program of the 1990s with a significant growth acceleration of its own.
Industrial Asia expanded throughout much of the decade. The global pattern of emissions was shifting
away from Annex I countries and toward the set of countries for which no binding emissions limitations
existed.
These trends accelerated in the 2000s. China's rapid and sustained growth during this decade
led the Asian giant to displace the United States as the world's single largest emitter around 2006, and
the gap between the two widened sharply in the wake of the global financial crisis (World Climate
Report, 2011). Figure 1 illustrates this dramatic shift over the past 30 years, whereby developed
countries emissions (“Annex I” in the figure) went from being nearly double those in developing
countries (“non Annex I”) to being barely two-thirds.
Looking ahead, at the time of this writing the near universal expectation among market
forecasters is that growth in the developed world will continue to proceed at a relatively slow pace -much slower than in the developing world. According to growth projections widely touted by Citigroup,
7

At the same time, economic sclerosis in Western Europe and Japan limited the growth in emissions in that
decade, and made a reduction of emissions below 1990 levels, as eventually called for in the Kyoto Protocol, more
feasible for these countries. Relatively robust economic growth in the U.S. in the 1990s pushed emissions well
above 1990 levels by the end of the decade, which meant that the "Kyoto pledge" would be many times more
economically costly for the U.S. to implement than for its European or Japanese trading partners. See Victor
(2004), who lays out this contrast.

9

China will exceed the United States in terms of total economic size by 2020, developing Asia will account
for 44% of world GDP by 2030, and today's developing regions will collectively account for nearly 75% of
world GDP by 2050. 8 The future consequence for emissions is profound.
Figure 2 presents one "baseline" estimate of carbon emissions generated by the Figure 1
groupings of developed and developing countries from the year 2000 through 2100. These estimates
arise out of a study undertaken through the Energy Modeling Forum (the study is referred to as EMF-22)
(Leon Clarke et al., 2009). This initiative utilized ten of the world's leading integrated assessment
models to forecast future levels of GHG emissions and atmospheric concentrations over time in the
absence of serious efforts to mitigate global warming as well as the climatic and economic implications
of various policy efforts to slow down or even reverse this trend. 9

Obviously, any exercise of this kind

is speculative -- the models must incorporate assumptions about population growth, economic growth,
technological progress, public policy, and other variables that are hard to predict with any degree of
accuracy. However, the general picture that emerges has broad agreement among most experts: While
per capita income will continue to rise in the rich countries, slow population growth and a general
transition to a post-industrial economy will limit emissions growth. In striking contrast, developing
countries and especially the so-called BRICs will see rapid and substantial growth in emissions. This
particular forecast suggests developing country emissions will be nearly three times those of the current
developed countries by the middle of the century, and four times by the end.

8

See the forecasts contained in Global Economics View: Global Growth Generators, Moving beyond 'Emerging
Markets' and 'BRICs', by Willem Buiter, available at http://www.nber.org/~wbuiter/3G.pdf. The forecasts of
economic size are measured using (prospective) PPP exchange rates.
9
Integrated assessment models are computer simulation tools which integrate models of the earth's physical
environment with models of economic growth. Perhaps the best known model of this family for economists is
William Nordhaus's DICE (Dynamic Integrated Model of Climate and the Economy) model, which he has used in
numerous papers and in his recent book, Nordhaus (2008). They have become a central analytic tool within the
climate change community.

10

Against this backdrop, it is clear that even large emissions reductions by the Annex I countries
will be insufficient to offset increases in expected emissions by the developing countries over coming
decades, let alone be the basis for global reductions. Real reductions, at a global level, in emissions will
require that developing countries deviate from their baseline. Depending on how aggressive we want to
be, those deviations may need to occur within years rather than decades. This was the central theme of
EMF-22: What does developing country participation imply about the feasibility (as well as costs) of
various targets?
Figure 3 summarizes the EMF-22 results. 10 This figure shows the global emission reductions
required in 2050 (y-axis) to achieve increasingly ambitious long-run concentration targets (x-axis),
keeping in mind the cumulative nature of emission in the atmosphere. 11 The unsurprising pattern is
that lower concentration targets require lower emissions by 2050. More specifically, a concentration
target of 450 ppm CO2e requires a 50% or more reduction in global emissions by 2050, a 550 ppm target
could be achieved with roughly level emissions between now and 2050, and a 650 ppm target would
allow a roughly 50% increase in emissions. 12 Within this range, 450 ppm is the target required for an
expected average global warming of 2 degrees C, the identified goal in the L’Aquila Declaration of

10

The EMF results (in terms of emission reductions and price per ton of CO2) with full participation and flexibility
are not notably different from another recent study (Edenhofer et al., 2010). However, that study did not consider
the possible delay of participation or constraints on overshooting.
11
The figure shows a range of results that differ by model – each of the ten participating models and four variants
are indicated by different colored dots in the figure – as well as two key scenario definitions. First, scenarios
consider separately whether concentrations can overshoot (“O.S.”) the target or are not-to-exceed the target
(“N.T.E.”). Second, they consider separately whether all countries fully participate from the beginning (“Full”) or
developing countries delay participation. This “Delay” scenario specifies the BRICs starting in 2030 and other
developing countries starting in 2050. For a number of scenarios, the figure indicates outcomes where a particular
scenario-model combination “could not be modeled under criteria of study,” meaning the model literally would
not solve or the initial solution price was more than $1000 per ton of CO2e.
12
Concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere are measured in terms of “parts per million” (ppm) –
that is, among a million molecules of gas in the atmosphere, how many are carbon dioxide. CO2e or “carbon
dioxide equivalent” converts concentrations of all greenhouse gases into the amount of carbon dioxide that causes
the equivalent amount of warming.

11

Leaders (2009) and both the Copenhagen Accord and Cancun Agreements. 13 However, the implied 50%
reductions by 2050 are virtually impossible without immediate full participation by all countries. 14 And,
while the 2008 G-8 declaration in Hokkaido articulated precisely that kind of 50% reduction by 2050,
such a global emission target has yet to be endorsed by any emerging economy (perhaps related to the
implied need for developing country action).
While the EMF-22 study suggested that many targets are simply infeasible without the
participation of major emerging economies, an obvious corollary is that all targets are more expensive
without their participation. Common sense suggests that if emerging economies generate a large share
of global emissions, they will also contain a large share of cost-effective mitigation opportunities. On
top of this first-pass reasoning, compared to developed countries, developing countries also tend to be
less energy efficient and face many more first-time (versus retrofit) energy investments, two features
that make low-carbon alternatives even cheaper. It should therefore not come as a surprise that the
EMF-22 study found the delayed participation of emerging economies raised the global cost of the
(achievable) 550 ppm target by 50 to 100 percent (Leon Clarke et al., 2009). The common sense
conclusion that economic efficiency requires global participation enjoys universal support from the
climate change modeling community (e.g., W. Nordhaus, 2007).
3. Economic Logic Versus Political Reality: The Conception and Failure of Kyoto
This economic logic of reducing costs was, in fact, an important backdrop for the design and
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol before it began to fall victim to very deep political rifts. By the
mid 1990s, it was clear that the UNFCCC’s aforementioned goal of returning developed country
emissions to their 1990 levels was not being met and even moderate concentration targets required yet

13

A 550 ppm target would imply 3 degrees C of expected warming, and 650 nearly 4.
A 450 ppm target also requires us overshooting 450 before falling back to it – an unsurprising result given
atmospheric GHG concentrations are roughly 450ppm already.

14

12

larger reductions. Our noted economic logic demanded that any global effort address emission
reductions in developing countries, but the world continued to be (legally) anchored in a model with
obligations focused entirely on developed countries. The solution envisioned in Kyoto was a system of
legally binding reduction targets for developed countries, coupled with the flexibility both (1) to buy and
sell emission commitments among those developed countries and (2) to generate offsets in developing
countries. While these flexibility measures represented a hard fought victory for economists, the
dichotomous developed / developing country architecture ultimately has proven unable to adapt to the
dramatic shift in emissions growth to emerging economies.
The U.S. delegation in Kyoto led the fight for economic flexibility within the Kyoto framework.
The Kyoto targets involved multiple greenhouse gases and emissions from land-use changes, and
allowed for trade-offs within this basket of targets. International emissions trading was made a central
feature of the protocol, over the initial reservations of the Europeans. 15 While only Annex 1 countries
were required to reduce emissions, they were allowed to obtain credit against their targets through the
funding of emissions reductions in developing countries (as well as through trading with each other).
This allowed a separation between the discussion of who would pay for emission reductions and where
the reductions would occur – which, from a cost-effectiveness point of view, should be where they are
cheapest. Given the importance of U.S. participation (as the world's then largest emitter), the other
delegations eventually endorsed these flexibility mechanisms.
The United States (under both the Clinton and Bush administrations) never sought to ratify the
Kyoto Protocol. The sharp distinction between the United States’ “legally binding emission limit” and

15

The U.S. team was a strong advocate of a global cap-and-trade style approach to regulating GHG emissions for
another reason. The federal government has employed this tool with great success to combat acid rain in the
Northeastern U.S. Sulfur dioxide emissions had declined more rapidly and at lower economic cost than either
industry or environmentalists had anticipated. Interestingly, cap-and-trade was viewed in environmental circles at
the time as a "conservative" idea, implemented under George H. W. Bush's Administration and championed by
Pennsylvania's Republican Senator, Jack Heinz.

13

none for China failed to meet the Byrd-Hagel resolution standard for meaningful participation by all
countries. Equally important, the targets themselves were viewed by many as too costly for the United
States. Prominent climate change economists, including Nordhaus, publicly criticized the Kyoto Protocol
on the grounds that it imposed unreasonably (and therefore politically unacceptable) costs of
compliance on the United States (Nordhaus & Boyer, 1998). The focus on fixed historic emission levels
as the benchmark for progress was also a relative disadvantage for the United States (as well as Canada
and Australia) who faced, and continue to face, population growth of around 1 percent, versus the
European Union and Japan who do not. Population growth generally involves a proportional increase in
emissions, other things equal. 17 In addition, 1990 was a particularly advantageous year for Europe
because of the subsequent shift from coal to natural gas use in the United Kingdom and, following the
reunification of East and West Germany, the collapse and more efficient reconstruction of a highly
inefficient East German economy. 18
Underlying this issue of the U.S. target is a much deeper schism over the appropriate basis for
dividing up any global emission limit. 19 As noted, historic baselines favor already-developed countries
with low (or negative) population growth. Developing countries often put forward models instead
based on per capita emissions or historic cumulative emissions, which are even more difficult for

17

This notion that national emissions are the product of population, income per capita, and emissions per unit of
GDP, was developed early in the analysis of climate change economics and is referred to as the “Kaya” or “IPAT”
identity (Kaya & Yokobori, 1997; Waggoner & Ausubel, 2002).
18
The UK's 1990s emissions levels reflected heavy use of coal that was phased out during the 1990s as the UK
took increasing advantage of North Sea natural gas to replace coal. This transition largely accounts for the UK's
success in meeting its target. Likewise, Germany benefitted from the fact that its 1990 emissions level includes the
emissions of the Eastern Lander. Reunification coincided with a deep and persistent industrial collapse that left
emissions in the states of the former East Germany well below 1990 levels even in the late 2000s. This largely
accounts for German success at meeting its Kyoto targets.
19
A number of authors and stakeholders have also raised the more fundamental issue of whether we should be
counting emissions based on where goods are produced or where they are consumed (e.g., Peters & Hertwich,
2008). A consumption approach has some theoretical appeal, but is much more complex and has achieved little
traction.

14

countries like the United States. 20 Meanwhile, the U.S. has emphasized comparability based on cost or
effort (T. Stern, 2009b). These conceptual differences give an analytical rationale for the basic point that
key countries have wildly different views about what they should be doing relative to other countries.
This makes mutual agreement on targets virtually impossible (in fact, one might instead ask, what
unusual alignment of the stars led to the Kyoto agreement on targets in the first place?). 21 Finally, the
notion of “countries having views” is itself an extremely tricky issue for a country like the United States,
with polarized national politics and fickle popular views. 22
Even if the particulars of the U.S.’ Kyoto target could have been fixed – and there was a window
of opportunity for the Bush administration to do so ("EU ready to renegotiate Kyoto," 2001) – the sharp
distinction between developed and developing country commitments could not be. At first, this was not
as problematic for other, non-U.S. members of Annex I. President George W. Bush formally withdrew
the United States from the protocol in 2001 and ceased participating in relevant meetings, but all other
Kyoto member states remained in and ratified the protocol. Outside of the European Union, those
countries did little to enact national policies that would effectively ensure compliance (New Zealand
adopted a cap-and-trade program in 2010; Australia passed an emission pricing program in late 2011 –
by just two votes in its lower house and four in the upper house). Nonetheless, thanks largely to the
U.S. withdrawal, the Annex I countries are as a group likely to meet their Kyoto targets. Without the
U.S., the generous targets afforded the formerly socialist "economies-in-transition" (EITs) offset the
roughly 10 percent shortfall among non-EIT members of Annex I.

20

See, for example, den Elzen et al (2009), Houser (2010), and Dellink and Corfee-Morlot (2010) who compare the
Copenhagen commitments across various metrics.
21
Internal documents show that U.S. administration views concerning the Kyoto Protocol varied significantly in the
months leading up to Kyoto, with economic interests arguing for a much looser target (Sperling, McGinty, &
Tarullo, 1997). Interestingly, the U.S. delegation ultimately agreed to a target more stringent than anything in the
internal documents.
22
Often issues in the United States and abroad can be traced to regional as much as partisan differences, with
fossil-rich regions opposing mitigation action and renewable-rich regions supporting such action.

15

As negotiations on a second commitment period for Kyoto have intensified, however, other
Annex I countries have called it quits. Japan and Russia announced in December 2010 that they would
not participate in a second commitment period, while Canada made the same statement in June. All
cite the need for a new agreement to include the world’s largest emitters – China and the United States.
Meanwhile, the Kyoto model will not change: China and other major developing countries refuse to
step up to the kinds of legally-binding commitments contained in Kyoto.
Why won’t emerging economies agree to Kyoto-style commitments? The developing countries
-- especially the big ones that really matter, including China and India -- harbor grave reservations about
signing up for significant limits on absolute emissions. 23 These countries understand that
industrialization and economic growth will raise their emissions per capita. In fact, they see the current
gap between their own emissions per capita and those of the industrialized West as a strong reason for
them to refuse to make any concessions whatsoever.
These developing country reservations crop up both quantitatively and qualitatively in the
written mitigation pledges submitted by all major economies in January 2010 following the Copenhagen
meetings. Numerical analyses of these pledges suggest that the emission pledges by China and India are
relatively modest when viewed against a U.S. metric of cost or effort (Dellink & Corfee-Morlot, 2010;
Houser, 2010). 24 Modeling suggests they could meet their target for less than $1 per ton compared to
costs closer to $10-30 per ton for developed country targets in the EU and US. Under their submissions,
Chinese and Indian emissions are also increasing around 70 percent over 2005 levels. Unlike China and
India, who expressed their emissions target in relation to GDP (so emissions would be higher with higher
GDP), all other developing countries made reductions pledges – some quite large – but against an
unspecified baseline (an interesting exception is Brazil, who codified its baseline and reduction
23

A recent article noted recent statements about regional emissions trading in China, but also voiced skepticism
(Reklev & Garside, 2011).
24
For actual submissions, see http://unfccc.int/meetings/cop_15/copenhagen_accord/items/5265.php.

16

commitment into a domestic law; Hochstetler & Viola, 2010). Adding up all of the pledges, the analyses
suggest a path towards at least 3 degrees of warming (Pew, 2010). 25
While the quantitative issues are important, equally if not more important are the qualitative
differences reflecting the persistent view among developing countries that developed countries should
agree to an internationally binding, economywide emission limits on total emissions, while developing
countries should make non-binding pledges. 26 Regardless of what developing countries may pledge to
do, it is hard to sell the idea that binding commitments are somehow valuable in developed countries
when the largest and fast growing emitter is not part of the system. While this political reality started in
the United States, it has clearly spread.
It is possible to look at this political reality as the consequence of a greater economic reality.
There is no shortage of economic models to drive home the difficulty of negotiating a mutually
agreeable means of moving forward when large emitters have a limited interest in mitigation and the
global system lacks legal mechanisms to compel participation in emissions reductions by reluctant
nations. An extensive game theoretic literature illustrates these problems. Carraro and Siniscalco
(1993) and Barrett (1993) show that the presence of asymmetries across countries and the incentive to
free ride make the existence of global self-enforcing agreements quite unlikely. When self-enforcing
international agreements exist, they are signed by a limited number of countries (Barrett, 1994; Hoel,
1992, 1994). A grand coalition, in which all countries sign the same agreement, is unlikely to be an
equilibrium (Finus & Rundshagen, 2003). The difficulties the international community has encountered
in practice bear out these theoretical predictions, as can be seen in the history of the Kyoto Protocol.

25

A recent UNEP report suggests as much, but focuses on how pledges could be strengthened to achieve 2 degrees
Celsius. Even in their most ambitious interpretation of the pledges, they only get to roughly 2.5 degrees C (United
Nations Environmental Program, 2011).
26
See, for example, the February 2011 statement by the “BASIC” countries – Brazil, South Africa (or “Afrique du
Sud” in the BASIC acronym), India, and China – who have been particularly vocal about the developed / developing
country distinction. http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/wjb/zwjg/zwbd/t802845.htm.

17

Of course, these same models would never predict why countries like the European Union
would pursue a unilateral mitigation at exactly the moment the United States announces it is walking
away from any commitment. Or why Brazil would unilaterally pass a law to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. This leaves open the question of what economic interest drives national commitments and
action – a point highlighted by Kolstad (2011) and Olstrom (2009). Moreover, it points to a way forward
internationally: If negotiating mutually and internationally agreed commitments is not possible, both
because key developing countries cannot ratchet up their form of commitment to match the Kyoto
Protocol and because the range of views on appropriate quantitative targets cannot be bridged, then
move to a system of national pledges for all countries. This is the essence of the Copenhagen Accord
and Cancun Agreement.
Importantly, the history of the Protocol has highlighted the limited mechanisms states have
under international law to punish states that fail to live up to the full letter and spirit of the agreement.
The penalty for a noncompliant state under Kyoto would be a 30% reduction in some (unspecified)
reduction target that would be negotiated in an (unspecified) successor agreement. But, of course, any
state that found itself in a position in which that 30% reduction was onerous could simply withdraw in
the next round. 27 Legally binding targets and timetables often make sense in the context of domestic
laws and policies internal to the states that are part of the Western “zone of law”. 28 Every day in these
countries, reluctant firms, agencies, and consumers are forced to meet the provisions of laws passed
over their objections but with which they must comply. However, the international legal environment is
a completely different story -- in that context, the apparent strengths of the legally binding targets are
compromised by the legal weakness of the international system. Countries tend to be very protective of
27

In the absence of a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol that also features binding targets and
timetables, member states like Canada, that ratified the protocol but did absolutely nothing to address their
noncompliance, have been able to evade any sanction whatsoever.
28
Victor (2004) refers to the Western industrial democracies as residing within a "zone of law" that provides a
basis for the trust that must be present before any high level of asset exchange can take place.

18

their sovereignty and wary of introducing any precedent that ultimately may play out against them. 29
This again suggests a focus on a system of national pledges.
4. The Cancun Agreement
At Cancun, all major emitters (including China) made (nonbinding) mitigation pledges in what
was effectively a legitimized version of the outcome in Copenhagen. 30 In the language of the Cancun
decisions, all parties agreed to “take note” of both the “quantified economy-wide emission reduction
targets” submitted by developed countries and the “nationally appropriate mitigation actions”
submitted by developing countries. All of the developing country submissions contain aggregate
quantifications (though relative to GDP or a future baseline, as noted above). And the section heading
for developed countries reads “mitigation commitments or actions” while the (separate) developing
country heading reads “mitigation actions” only. Thus, all parties were able to interpret the decisions as
they saw fit: developing countries could emphasize the differences between developed and developing
country commitments, developed countries could emphasize the similarities. In addition, the
negotiations over a second commitment period for the Kyoto Protocol continue despite the absence of
the U.S., Japan, Russia, and (as of June) Canada.
Concrete mitigation pledges by China in an international venue, alongside pledges by other
major emitters, represent a significant turn of events since the time of the Kyoto Protocol. In his first
public address as the U.S. Special Envoy on Climate Change, Todd Stern emphasized that an
international agreement on climate change needed to reflect ambitious national actions by all major
economies – an outcome that was far from certain at that time (T. Stern, 2009a). An equally significant
29

See, for example, China and Russia’s recent opposition to resolutions against Syria in the U.N. Security Council
(CNN Wire Staff, 2011), or the U.S. delegation’s quick reaction to an effort to redefine “consensus” during the
UNFCCC meeting in Cancun (where the U.S. might suffer in other venues if it could not block consensus).
30
In Copenhagen, it proved impossible to achieve more than a general acknowledgement of the existence of the
Copenhagen Accord due to severe acrimony over the process leading to the Accord. However, most of the
Copenhagen Accord language exists almost verbatim in the Cancun Agreement.

19

and important advance is that all the major emitters have accepted (in principle) provisions for
measuring progress toward those mitigation commitments in an internationally transparent and
objective way. This was a domain in which the large developing country emitters had been particularly
wary. 31
In return for these concessions from the major developing country emitters, the developed
countries agreed to provisions providing for financial support for developing country mitigation and,
especially, adaptation. The developed economies first committed to providing resources approaching
$30 billion over the 2010-2012 period, a substantial short-run commitment offered up in return for the
concessions on mitigation commitments and transparent monitoring. In the longer run, the developed
countries committed to mobilizing $100 billion per year by 2020 to address the needs of developing
countries. However, this latter sum explicitly includes both private and public funding, and the latter
explicitly including both bilateral aid and multilateral development assistance. The Cancun Accord also
establishes a committee to improve coherence and coordination of climate finance delivery.
Can the developed countries really mobilize $100 billion per year? In March 2010, the UN
Secretary General appointed a high-level advisory group to look at possible sources of finance to achieve
this goal. One of us was heavily involved in the work of this group and helped produce the November
2010 report that concluded the goal was "challenging but feasible" (UN SyG 2010). The report argues
that the key to effective realization of this goal is the establishment of active carbon markets in the
developed world that effectively impose a price on emissions in the neighborhood of $20-$25 per ton
carbon dioxide (CO2). These markets would generate private sector demand for developing country
trading or offsets that could supply a large portion of this total on an annual flow basis. More
specifically, to the extent that the carbon markets in the industrial West could allow the purchase of

31

Corn and Sheppard (2010) describe the last minute wrangling over this issue in Copenhagen.

20

permits or offsets in developing countries, this could generate annual flows on the order of $30-$50
billion. And the carbon markets would likely stimulate hundreds of billions of dollars in related capital
investments in developing countries over time. Successfully mobilizing the private sector leaves a much
smaller role for public sector aid and allows it to focus on those areas where the private sector may fail –
including adaptation for the poorest.
The report also suggested that domestic carbon markets in developed countries, with a price of
$20-$25 per ton, could generate substantial permit auction revenues. Earmarking just 10% of these
revenues to international climate action could, in principle, generate annual flows on the order of $30
billion. In a related way, pricing emissions from the international transportation industry (maritime and
aviation) through domestically implemented but internationally harmonized mechanisms could create
revenue with fewer domestic claims and possibly a larger share dedicated to international climate
finance purposes, on the order of $10 billion per year. This industry generally requires some form of
international harmonization to avoid the rerouting of shipments through unregulated ports in any case.
It would also avoid the kind of conflict currently erupting over the E.U.’s effort to regulate emissions on
both inbound and outbound international flights (e.g., Shannon, 2011). All of this, the report notes,
however, hinges on national-level implementation and decision-making; the report was particularly
negative on any kind of internationally imposed scheme.
In a very crude sense, the deal in Cancun can be viewed as a trade where developing countries
received pledges of financial support from the developed countries and the developed countries
received mitigation pledges and commitments to transparency from the developing countries. But it is
considerably more complex than that because the important countries making mitigation pledges – the
emerging economies – are not the ones lining up for financial support – the poorest countries and Africa
in particular. And it was only through some creative ambiguity, allowing developed and developing

21

countries to interpret the outcome differently, that an agreement was reached. This makes elaboration
of some elements of the Cancun agreement elusive. For example, the U.N. climate finance report
specifically highlighted divergent views about the relative roles of public and private finance within the
$100 billion pledge. Efforts to formalize the review of pledges has also become bogged down. 32 And
meanwhile, questions surrounding the future of the Kyoto Protocol, minus the U.S., Japan, Russia, and
Canada, lurk in the background and continue to confound the negotiations.
While the serious engagement of emerging economies was a historic development in Cancun, it
is hard to see how the UNFCCC moves much beyond a struggle to implement the Cancun agreement in
the foreseeable future. This observation is based on the noted challenges and the fact that two years of
negotiations and attendance by more than 100 heads of state in Copenhagen failed to deliver more.
5. Beyond Cancun
In the much longer run, if emission targets that significantly mitigate climate change are to be
enacted, even Kyoto critics like Victor concede that they will most likely result from a strong, broadbased agreement with legally binding targets. 33 In the short run, though, the UNFCCC has demonstrated
its inadequacy as a framework within which such an agreement could be built. This has given rise to an
alternative view about how to proceed. Rather than pursue a "broad and shallow" strategy (the current
UNFCCC approach) that seeks to engage the maximal number of states by only requiring commitments
that they are all willing to accept, Victor and others instead advocates a "narrow and deep, then broad"

32

Widely divergent views can be seen in the negotiation summary released in June 2011
http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/ad_hoc_working_groups/lca/application/pdf/summary_on_ica_17_june_version_
0900.pdf.
33
As Cooper (2010) and Nordhaus (2007) have argued, these international targets can take the form of
commitments to specific carbon prices (enforced through taxes) rather than levels of emission reduction. Cooper
(2009) points out several theoretical and practical reasons why a price target may be more easily implementable
by the international system.

22

strategy that first brings together the subset of states that are willing to engage in meaningful policy
experimentation.
For advocates of this strategy, there are interesting historical parallels, some of which are the
focus of other chapters at this conference. One is the WTO itself. When it first began, as the GATT, it
was narrow in focus and in membership. The original agreement's purview was restricted to trade in
physical goods and focused almost solely on a gradual multilateral reduction in tariff rates. The initial
membership excluded the Soviet bloc, and as decolonization proceeded in the 1950s and 1960s, many
of the newly created states did not rush to join. Over the span of several decades, however, the GATT
morphed into the WTO -- an international organization with a much broader purview (that extended to
trade in services, intellectual property, and multinational investment), a near-universal membership,
and much more powerful means of adjudicating disputes and punishing offending member states than
had ever existed under the GATT. In fact, for Victor, the only current international body that possibly
has the clout to enact and enforce a meaningful international agreement to limit climate change is the
WTO.
In some ways, an even more intriguing parallel is the growth of the EU. What is now the EU
originally started as the European Coal and Steel Community, an effort by six European states to
coordinate policy and reconstruction in these two sectors. Over time, the depth of cooperation and the
extent of policy coordination broadened. Eventually, of course, the European Union became something
so important that the states of the post-Communist East and even Turkey were willing to make quite
substantial changes and amendments to their own national laws, and engage in costly concessions in
order to quality for membership.
In similar fashion, a near-term future could emerge in which a handful of states are willing to
undertake serious policy experiments to combat global warming. Rather than constrain the progress of
23

this group by forcing it to meet the objections of the least committed states, or trying to negotiate an
agreement before each nation resolves its internal political debates, it is far better to permit this group
(and other groups) to move forward, engage in policy experimentation that other states could learn
from, and turn the zone of law, or at least part of it, into a “zone of experimentation” in climate
mitigation policy. As the successes (and failures) of policies within the zones of experimentation
become manifest, and the case for action becomes more compelling, others may opt for accession into
the zone. At some point, the countries inside the zone become an important enough collective that
other countries perceive (or in fact face, through border measures discussed below) a penalty for
remaining outside. At this point, the collective experience within the zone and pressure outside the
zone is enough to anchor a Kyoto-style agreement.
As a pre-requisite to even this narrow-and-deep approach, countries will essentially take initial
steps unilaterally, as the EU ETS has done. While exercises like the GATT and the EU itself offered
significant and immediate economic benefits (overall gains to trade) for each country to be weighed
against the costs (those domestic industries hurt by freer trade), climate cooperation offers only nearterm costs and long-term potential benefits. For this reason, it may be hard to negotiate something
narrowly that leaders return home to implement within any kind of agreed window. Instead, it may be
necessary to key countries to pursue mitigation on their own terms and then seek to weave together
cooperation afterwards or as a second step.
Ultimately, the weaving together of a global approach is necessary to achieve even modest
environmental goals. The simple mathematics of emerging country growth means all major economies
must eventually participate to achieve any concentration target. There are a variety of arguments for
why cooperation could become easier over time: (1) climate change impacts will become more
compelling to laggards; (2) higher incomes will engender greater environmental concern; (3) innovation

24

may yield better, cheaper solutions; (4) policy experience will give participants and non-participants
more confidence – in the policies themselves and in each other’s capacity to enact and enforce them; (5)
the desire – political as well as economic – to be on the giving rather than receiving end of border
measures discussed below. However, we need not agree on why this may happen to recognize that is
the logical way forward. Victor coins an evocative phrase, "variable geometries of participation," to
indicate the need for flexibility, multiple approaches, and the need to let the theoretically optimal not
get in the way of the practically beneficial. Coupled with Ostrom’s idea for a polycentric approach, with
actions at multiple levels of government, we can imagine a variety of alternatives to a globally unified
approach in the short-to-medium run that ultimately coalesce to a global approach.
6. The Unsettling World of Border Measures
Moving forward, those states and groups of states taking increasingly ambitious steps to
mitigate climate change – whoever they are – will have to deal with slower moving states and the
economic and environmental leakage issues generated by their slower movement. The asymmetries of
economic size among countries are such that the actions (or inactions) of a large number of developing
countries are effectively ignorable. In the grand scheme of things, emissions from Mali or Honduras are
and will be simply too small to matter. The real question for the industrial West is what to do about
states like China that are large emitters and extremely important participants in the international
trading and financial system? Or, what Europe will do about a lagging United States?
The unsettling answer we will suggest to this question is that those in the zone of climate policy
experimentation may be driven to use tariffs or other measures that tax the carbon content of tradable
goods produced in reluctant countries. The literature has referred to these instruments as carbon
tariffs or, more generally (and euphemistically), as "border measures," and we will use both terms in
what follows. The good news is that near-term differentials across trading states in terms of the
25

stringency of their carbon control regimes is unlikely to warrant the use of these instruments. The bad
news is that, the farther some countries get ahead of others, the more pressure will build to utilize these
instruments. We will deal in this section with three questions: 1) are carbon tariffs WTO-legal?, 2) can
those in the zone of climate policy experimentation implement carbon control measures without
employing carbon tariffs, and 3) could carbon tariffs be implemented in practice.
6.1 Are Carbon Tariffs WTO-Legal?
The WTO-legality of carbon tariffs is an open question among legal scholars. Advocates see in
the so-called "shrimp turtle" case a WTO affirmation of principles that could support carbon tariffs, and
we offer here a brief review of that case. In the mid-1990s, environmental groups sued the U.S. federal
government over inadequate enforcement of a U.S. law, Public Law (P.L. 101-162, Section 609; now 16
U.S.C. 1537), that was designed to protect sea turtles from shrimp trawlers. The nets of U.S. fleets were
equipped with so-called turtle exclusion devices (TEDs) that allowed sea turtles caught in nets to escape
through a trap door mechanism. By the mid-1990s, however, the U.S. was importing large quantities of
shrimp from South and Southeast Asian nations that did not require the use of these devices. The U.S.
imposed an import ban on these nations pending adoption of TEDs.
India, Malaysia, Thailand and several other countries launched a formal dispute against the
United States, basing part of their legal argument on a longstanding principle in international trade law
that prevents importing nations from discriminating against otherwise identical products on the basis of
differences in the processes of production. In its final ruling, the WTO ruled against the United States
for technical reasons, but the ruling explicitly upheld the right of the U.S., in principle, to apply
discriminating trade measures against the shrimp exporters without TED requirements because sea
turtles were an exhaustible natural resource as covered by Article 20 of the GATT. This was true even if
the sea turtles in Asia never migrated to U.S. waters.
26

Environmental advocates have seized on this ruling as creating a precedent for carbon tariffs.
The atmosphere, they argue, is surely even more of an exhaustible natural resource than are migratory
sea turtles. In fact, the extent of the precedent created by the shrimp turtle case is unclear. Chinese
trade representatives have flatly declared carbon tariffs illegal under WTO rules and have vowed to
launch an immediate case against any nation that enacts legislation requiring the imposition of carbon
tariffs. The final legal status of this idea will likely be determined when the first attempt is made to
implement it by a WTO member state.
Other environmental advocates point to the way the international system has dealt with valueadded taxes. China, for instance, obtains the largest portion of government revenue through a valueadded tax (VAT) of 17%. When foreign goods are imported into China, the customs authority imposes
this tax on the imports, in addition to import duties. If the VAT taxes were not imposed, the foreign
goods would hold a commanding advantage in the marketplace over the domestically produced goods
subject to the VAT. Since the tax is imposed on all goods, regardless of national origin, the tax meets the
"national treatment" test. Exporters are entitled to value added tax rebates to avoid penalizing them in
global competition with producers based in other countries without such taxes. In the eyes of some
environmental advocates, carbon tariffs would function like a VAT and need pose no more of a threat to
free trade than does China's practice with respect to levying its VAT on imported tradable goods.
6.2 Are Carbon Tariffs Necessary? Part 1: The Problem in Theory
The theoretical construct of costless international trade in a homogeneous commodity between
two economies illustrates the potential gains from carbon tariffs from the standpoint of nations seeking
to reduce emissions. Imagine the home country constructs a carbon regulation regime -- for simplicity,
consider a carbon tax -- to contend with environmental externalities, but the foreign country does not.
Imagine the home economy is large enough relative to the global economy that its policies can affect
27

global prices. Consider a carbon-intensive good. The carbon tax would tilt the home country supply
curve up, but would not affect foreigners’ export supply curve. Under these conditions, the primary
impact of the carbon tax would be to shift home demand from (more expensive) domestic producers to
(cheaper) foreign producers. The global price of the carbon-intensive good would rise, but only a little.
Foreign supply would expand to meet home demand, and the ability of the domestic carbon tax to
reduce emissions associated with the carbon intensive good would be largely undermined by
international trade.
In this context, a carbon tariff that applies to imports of the carbon intensive good the same
implicit price on emissions created by the home country's carbon tax would equalize the playing field for
domestic producers, lead to a more substantial rise in the home market price of the carbon-intensive
good, and a more substantial decline in emissions. The environmental externality would be better
addressed. Home producers shrink less under this policy than under a policy of a unilateral carbon tax,
and the home economy exploits its international market power to extract surplus from foreign
producers. On the other hand, the carbon tariff would cause the foreign price of the carbon-intensive
good to decline, as imports are pushed out of the home market. This would lead to a decline in foreign
production but an increase in foreign consumption.
In simple cases, it is possible that the combination of a carbon tax and a carbon tariff on imports
could bring domestic production and consumption of the carbon-intensive good in the home country to
the same level that would obtain in a world of uniform global carbon taxes. It is obviously not possible
for the combination of domestic carbon taxes and carbon tariffs to bring about the same outcome in the
foreign country.
Moving away from our stylized example, in the real world quality and technology differences
between domestic and foreign products could blunt the impact of (initially) small differences in
28

production cost. On the other hand, to the extent that the foreign economy is open to foreign direct
investment, over time the advent of carbon regulation in only the home economy would confer upon
home producers of carbon-intensive goods a powerful incentive to transfer their technologies, brand
names, and quality-control methods to subsidiaries based in the foreign economy. Also over time, a
general equilibrium setting blunts some of the negative impact of a shrinkage of domestic production in
the home economy -- these resources would find employment elsewhere in the home economy, leading
to an expansion of the non-carbon-intensive sectors. While this might mitigate long-term concerns
about economic leakage, even a general equilibrium setting does not mitigate the problem of emission
leakage, with carbon intensive activity moving from the regulated jurisdiction to the unregulated
jurisdiction.
6.3 Are Carbon Tariffs Necessary? Part 2: The Problem in Practice in the Short Run
To what extent are these concerns likely to arise in the context of advanced Western
(post)industrial economies? Precisely because the U.S. government has long harbored concerns about
the impact of adopting carbon regulation on U.S. competitiveness when developing countries were not
also similarly constrained, there is a body of research -- some of it undertaken by the U.S. government at
the behest of nervous legislators -- to which we can turn. The following paragraphs draw heavily from
work by one of the authors (Joseph E. Aldy & Pizer, 2010) and from a U.S. government interagency
report on the competitiveness effects of the Waxman-Markey bill (H.R. 2454, formally known as the
American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009) in which one of the authors was directly involved
(Interagency Competitiveness Analysis Team, 2009; hereafter Interagency Report).
For those trade economists eager to avoid conflict between their free trade ideals and their
environmental conscience, this work offers some good news. The primary impact of carbon regulation
is to raise the price of fossil energy in the economy. The impact of such regulations on U.S. industrial
29

competitiveness is bounded by the fact that on average, energy expenditures account for less than two
percent of the value of U.S. manufacturing output. This means the vast majority of U.S. industry would
be largely unaffected by carbon regulation in the short-run: Even advocates of such policies suggest that
carbon prices would remain relatively modest ($10 - $25 per ton CO2-e) in the near-term future, and
would imply modest increases in fossil energy prices that would have very limited impact on the overall
cost structures of U.S. manufacturers.
The second factor limiting impact is that some energy-intensive activities are not subject to
much international competition. H.R. 2454 contained provisions for measures to mitigate the impact of
the bill on U.S. industrial competitiveness. "Presumptive eligibility" for these provisions was based on
an industry's energy intensity, greenhouse gas intensity, and trade intensity. The Interagency Report
concluded that only 44 of about 500 manufacturing industries would be presumptively eligible for relief,
as shown in Figure 4. Together, these energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries collectively
account for only 12 percent of total manufacturing output and 6 percent of manufacturing employment
-- and only half a percent of total U.S. non-farm employment. On the other hand, these industries
account for almost half of manufacturing greenhouse gas emissions. 34 It is exactly this concentration of
GHG emissions in a relatively small number of industries that allows a cap-and-trade approach to carbon
regulation, such as that put forward in H.R. 2454, to compensate vulnerable industries without
necessarily invoking carbon tariffs or blunting the overall impact of the regulatory regime on the gradual
decarbonization of the U.S. economy.
Having recognized that only a small number of industries are potentially impacted, the question
of the impact on those industries remains. There is an extensive economic literature on the "pollution
haven" hypothesis that evaluates the impact of environmental regulation on the shift of polluting

34

See the Interagency Report, pp. 1-2.

30

activity to less regulated environments. Important recent papers included Jaffe et al. (1995), Levinson
and Taylor (2008), Antweiler et al. (2001), Ederington et al. (2005), and Jeppesen et al. (2002). The
general findings in this literature suggest that the ability of industry to profitably relocate to less
regulated jurisdictions is significantly constrained by factors which limit the "footlooseness" of polluting
industry, and most studies find the negative impact of domestic environmental regulation on domestic
production to be quite limited.
The aforementioned studies focus on generic environmental regulation, taking advantage of
historic variation in regulatory stringency to understand its effect. It is not possible to take the same
approach for carbon regulation because such regulation has only recently been implemented (and only
in Europe). The popular alternative has been use detailed, applied general equilibrium models to
simulate effects (IPCC, 2001). Early analyses found emission leakage ranging from zero to 70 percent,
but later analyses found a narrower range of 5 to 20 percent. That is, the ratio of emission increases
outside those countries pursuing emission reductions (in these studies, typically Kyoto’s Annex I) to the
reductions achieved inside those countries, is some 5 to 20 percent.
As an alternative to these studies using assumed parameter values and large simulation models
to estimate leakage effects, Aldy and Pizer (2010) take an econometric approach using historic energy
price variation to proxy for the effects of GHG pricing. They first define the competitiveness effect as
the adverse effect (in terms of the percent decline in production) on domestic industry arising from the
absence of foreign regulation when the U.S. regulates GHGs – a more economic and less environmental
measure than the leakage rate described above.
They then run regressions of the form

Yit = α i + α t + f (rUS ,it ; β ) + δ ′X it + ε it

31

where Yit represents an industry and year-specific outcome measure – the natural logarithm of
domestic supply and demand measures; the α ’s are fixed effects for industries (i), and years (t); rUS ,it
represents the level of U.S. regulation – the natural logarithm of energy (electricity) prices; X it is a
vector of additional determinants of the industry outcome measures, including average industry tariffs
and factor intensity variables (to estimate the returns to human capital and physical capital). They show
that the difference in the effect of energy prices on demand and supply – that is, the effect of energy
prices on net imports – equals the competitiveness effect under certain assumptions. When they
estimate the effect and ask what the impact would be of regulation along the lines of H.R. 2454, they
find that even the most energy intensive industries would face a competitiveness effect of about 1
percent.
Ultimately, empirical and analytic work will never be fully satisfying as it is impossible to tease
out any long-term economic or emission leakage from a wide range of other confounding influences. To
that end, it is important to consider ways other than border measures to mitigate real or perceived
effects. The most promising work in this area has focused on the ability to substantially reduce price
impacts when permits are freely allocated and done so in proportion to output (Fischer & Fox, 2010).
While most climate change economists would support a policy that allocates emissions permits by open
auction in the long run, most climate change bills seriously entertained in the U.S. Congress (including
H.R. 2454) provide some transition path along which a significant fraction of permits are provided at no
charge to emitting industries. If this free allocation is tied to current production increases in the price of
energy-intensive goods can be muted while the incentive to reduce direct emissions within the industry
remains. Based on the Interagency Report, the allocation provisions in H.R. 2454 nullify price impacts in
the most energy-intensive industries, as seen in Figure 5.

32

For international economists who understand the importance of protecting the world's open
trading system, this is good news. It suggests that the first steps toward carbon regulation could be
taken by groups of advanced industrial countries without imposing on those countries serious
competitiveness concerns, and a regulatory framework like a cap-and-trade system can be designed to
further minimize these impacts without generating a significant need for trade intervention. Even if
there is a political need to include the specter of border measures in a national mitigation policy, their
actual scope and use can be constrained to be minimal if not non-existent in practice.
6.4 Are Carbon Tariffs Necessary? Part 3: The Problem in Practice in the Long Run
The analyses above are limited to the case in which Western carbon prices are held to relatively
low levels. However, one can argue for high ($100s per ton CO2) or low ($10s per ton CO2) over the
near term based on alternate environmental and economic concerns. The EMF-22 noted earlier found
2020 prices of between $1 and $1000 depending on the target and modeling assumptions (Leon Clarke
et al., 2009). But all economics models find prices rising over time, either because accumulated
emissions become an exhaustible resource under a concentration target (L. Clarke et al., 2007) or
because of rising marginal damages on a larger economy (IWG, 2009). Thus while both observed and
contemplated near-term prices are at the “low” end of the spectrum, it seems certain they will rise over
time.
At higher price levels, the aforementioned results emphasizing the limited import of
competitiveness concerns vanish and countries enacting carbon regulation will have an increasing need
for carbon tariffs if major economies remain outside the system. Such tariffs will be necessary either (or
both) as a stick to compel developing country compliance with Western environmental goals or as a wall
to defend against an onslaught of carbon intensive imports. If we reach that point without a
comprehensive political solution – or without a breakthrough technology solution – the global system
33

will face a number of uncomfortable choices. Those pursuing carbon regulation will have to decide
whether continued, ambitious actions can be effective and worthwhile absent some of the largest
emitters. And, if the decision is affirmative, they will have to choose between an adherence to free
trade principles that has brought a greater measure of prosperity to billions, and preservation of the
natural environment on which all of humanity ultimately depends.
6.5 Could carbon tariffs be implemented in practice?
As we wrap up our discussion of carbon tariffs, an important final question raised in some of the
literature is whether a carbon tariff could even be implemented in a meaningful way. Two particular
issues arise: supply chain and production technology. Carbon tariffs would presumably focus on the
country of importation. However, many supply chains involve components manufactured and
assembled in a multiple countries. Ascertaining where production and emissions occur, and which
emissions occur in countries without appropriate emission regulations could be quite hard. In addition,
if one country in a coalition of carbon-regulating countries fails to enact carbon tariffs, it would be
possible for non-regulating countries to ship goods to that country for final assembly. The final product
could then be imported to other carbon-regulating countries without being subject to carbon tariffs.
Distinct from supply chain issues is how one could practically address the differences in
production technology and energy supply. Carbon taxes and cap-and-trade systems are relatively simple
policies in that they focus on the point of emissions or fossil fuel use, where emissions are easy to
measure, and allow product prices to adjust based on the market. In contrast, carbon tariffs on
products would have to estimate the carbon content of that product when it appears at the border,
including indirect emissions from all sub-components. A standard tariff could be applied to similar
product imports from all unregulated countries, or the rates could be differentiated by country of origin
or even by individual producer. Differentiation would create an incentive for foreign producers to
34

improve their technology, but could prove to be prohibitively expensive to implement (Persson, 2010).
More generally, the government costs to track and apply even standard tariffs would be quite high; an
entire government agency might be necessary to implement carbon tariffs, depending on how broad
they were.
A different concern, and one that will be all too familiar to trade economists, is that it will be
impossible for any well-intentioned border measure to remain well-intentioned. Any discretion given to
officials responsible for implementing border measures would be ripe for abuse.
7 Conclusion
This essay has reviewed the history of international efforts to curb global warming and the rising
specter of carbon tariffs. Despite more than two decades of international engagement on this issue, the
international community has made only limited progress toward the goal of substantially reducing GHG
emissions. We have argued that the evolution of the Kyoto Protocol, its problems, and the difficulty key
nations have had negotiating a successor agreement that broadens and extends its binding targets and
timetables points to several lessons for policymakers and social scientists. Of particular concern for
economists is the degree to which the kinds of policies prescribed by straightforward application of
economic theory often conflict with political reality (as well as a more nuanced game-theoretic
economic analysis).
Economic theory suggests that the most efficient approach to reducing emissions is a global,
integrated approach that equalizes carbon prices across countries. It is particularly important to bring
developing countries into this system, since that is where most emissions growth will occur over the
next century and where the most inexpensive mitigation options are located. Recent modeling efforts
suggest that even if the developed Annex I nations reduce their emissions to zero by 2050, growth in

35

developing country emissions will make it all but impossible to hit even modest targets for atmospheric
stabilization of GHG emissions.
Unfortunately, the reluctance of key developing countries (and, at the moment, the United
States) to accept binding emissions reduction targets of any kind and the inability of the international
system to compel a reluctant state to accede to a global climate change agreement makes the
theoretically optimal approach impractical in the short-to-medium run. Moreover, developed countries
are no longer willing to go it alone. Given that, this essay has suggested that progress in the short-tomedium run is likely to take place at the national or regional level through policies that are not globally
enforced. Evidence suggests that the policies envisioned over this horizon on the one hand produce
modest carbon prices and limited emissions reductions (relative to a no control baseline) but on the
other hand nations or groups of nations can engage in this meaningful and useful policy
experimentation without substantially harming their competitiveness.
The international agreements reached at Copenhagen and in Cancun have moved away from
top-down, Kyoto-style global agreements with binding targets and instead have embraced a more
bottom up, pluralistic approach along these lines. Current negotiations also establish the practical and
political goal to mobilize significant financial flows – public and private – to developing countries to
promote climate change mitigation and adaptation. The implementation of modest market-based
carbon regulation regimes in the Western countries, along with provisions allowing developing country
offsets, could generate private capital flows that would go a long way toward meeting these goals.
Market-based policies in developed countries could also generate substantial domestic revenues, of
which a portion might be directed towards developing country efforts.
As those nations willing to engage in meaningful carbon regulation proceed down this path and
other key countries lag behind, there is increasing pressure for them to use "border measures" to
36

prevent the leakage of carbon-intensive emissions and economic activity out of these countries and into
more lightly regulated jurisdictions. Most analyses suggest that such effects are not large enough over
the near term to require such a border-measure response and that alternatives such as output-based
free allocation are more effective and practical to implement. Nonetheless, political pressure could
easily lead to a roadblock where domestic policies will not proceed without at least the threat of trade
measures – as they did during the development of H.R. 2454 – bringing the goals of trade openness and
effective mitigation of climate change into conflict. Over time, with higher prices and without a
comprehensive agreement or a technology breakthrough, ambitious action will almost certainly require
border measures, although such action may not make a lot of sense if large sources of unregulated
emissions remain unchecked, let alone the conflicting goal of trade openness.
Over time, the simple mathematics of stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases mean a global approach is necessary. In addition to the possible use of border measures, which
would provide incentives for laggards to join in as well as help protect participants from leakage, a
variety of trends may make such an approach easier in the future: increased evidence of climate change
impacts, higher incomes, improved technologies, and experience with domestic regulation will all ease
the transition to a global approach.
Will border measures become a significant, albeit transitory, fixture in the climate policy
debate? For many in the environmental community, the grumblings of economists over conflicts with
free trade are virtually inconsequential compared to the broader consequences of having abandoned
pursuit of global legally binding targets. However, many of those grumbling economists will disagree.
As noted earlier, analyses of the targets agreed to in Cancun and Copenhagen point to 3 degrees or
more of warming, which is still less than the counterfactual of no mitigation effort where expected
temperature change would be in the 6 degree (or higher) range. Arguably, the incremental advances in

37

Copenhagen and Cancun will reduce the negative economic impact of climate change, but still risk
significant impacts including reduced agricultural productivity, water shortages, ecosystem loss and
extinctions, increased coastal flooding, and increased health burdens (IPCC 2007). More importantly,
they may simply be the necessary and unavoidable institutional steps that precede a more robust
international response.

38

Figure 1 The Majority of Emissions Now Comes from Developing Countries

billions of tons of carbon dioxide / year

20
18
16

Annex I minus Russia

14
12

Non-Annex I plus
Russia

10
8

BRICs

6
Other Countries

4
2
0
1980

1990

2000

2010

Source: Energy Information Administration (2011). Groupings were chosen to match those used by the Energy
Modeling Forum below: Annex I (referring to a listing in the UNFCCC) includes the traditional “developed
countries” and former Soviet republics. BRICs include Brazil, Russia, India, and China.

billions of tons of carbon dioxide / year

Figure 2 Expected Emissions Growth Is Overwhelmingly in Developing Countries
70
60
50

Annex I minus Russia

40

Non-Annex I plus
Russia

30

BRICs

20
Other countries

10
0
2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Source: SGM reference case, Energy Modeling Forum (2009). Annex I (referring to a listing in the UNFCCC)
includes the traditional “developed countries” and former Soviet republics. BRICs include Brazil, Russia, India, and
China.

39

Figure 3: Limiting Warming to 2 degrees C (450 CO2e) Requires Immediate Participation by
All Countries and Negative Global Emissions.

Source: Clark et al (2009). The figure shows the relationship between concentration targets (x-axis) and
emissions (y-axis) and highlights the consequences of a delay in developing country actions (“delay”) and
the requirement that atmospheric GHG concentrations are not to exceed (“NTE”) the long-run target.

40

Figure 4
The bulk of carbon dioxide emissions come from a small number of industries that
have high energy and/or trade intensity; these are “presumptively eligible” for free allowances under
H.R. 2454

41

Figure 5

Effect of Domestic Cap-and-Trade Program on Marginal Production Costs of EnergyIntensive Trade-Exposed Industries without and with Allocations to Local Distribution
Companies and Output-Based Allocations to "Trade-Vulnerable" Industries

42

Bibliography
Aldy, J. E., Krupnick, A. J., Newell, R. G., Parry, I. W. H., & Pizer, W. A. (2010). Designing Climate
Mitigation Policy. Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4), 903-934.
Aldy, Joseph E., & Pizer, William A. (2010). The competitiveness impacts of climate change mitigation
policies.
Antweiler, Werner, Copeland, Brian R., & Taylor, M. Scott. (2001). Is free trade good for the
environment. American Economic Review, 91(4), 877-908.
Barrett, Scott. (1993). Strategic environmental policy and international competitiveness. In OECD (Ed.),
Environmental Policies and Industrial Competitiveness (pp. 158-167). Paris: OECD.
Barrett, Scott. (1994). Self-enforcing international environmental agreements. Oxford Economic Papers,
46, 878-894.
Buckley, Chris. (2010, November 23). China says is world's top greenhouse gas emitter, Reuters.
Retrieved from http://af.reuters.com/article/energyOilNews/idAFTOE6AM02N20101123
Carraro, Carlo, & Siniscalco, Domenico. (1993). Strategies for the international protection of the
environment. Journal of Public Economics, 52(3), 309-328.
Clarke, L., Edmonds, J., Jacoby, H., Pitcher, H., Reilly, J., & Richels, R. (2007). Sub-report 2.1A of Synthesis
and Assessment Product 2.1 by the U.S. Climate Change
Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. Washington, DC: Department of
Energy, Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
Clarke, Leon, Edmonds, Jae, Krey, Volker, Richels, Richard, Rose, Steven, & Tavoni, Massimo. (2009).
International climate policy architectures: Overview of the EMF 22 International Scenarios.
Energy Economics, 31(Supplement 2), S64-S81. doi: 10.1016/j.eneco.2009.10.013
CNN Wire Staff. (2011, October 4). China, Russia vetoes thwart U.N. Security Council resolution on Syria,
CNN.com.
Collins, William, Colman, Robert, Haywood, James, Manning, Martin R., & Mote, Philip. (2007). The
physical science behind climate change. Scientific American, 297(2), 64-73.
Cooper, Richard. (2010). The case for charges on greenhouse gas emissions. In Joseph E. Aldy & Robert
N. Stavins (Eds.), Post-Kyoto International Climate policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Corn, David, & Sheppard, Kate. (2010, December 18). Obama's Copenhagen Deal, Mother Jones.
Dellink, Rob, & Corfee-Morlot, Jan. (2010). Costs and Effectiveness of the Copenhagen Pledges:
Assessing global greenhouse gas emissions targets and actions for 2020. Paris: OECD.
den Elzen, MGJ , Hohne, N., van Vliet, J. , & Ellermann, C. (2009). Exploring Comparable Post-2012
Reduction Efforts for Annex I Countries. Amsterdam: Netherlands Environmental Assessment
Agency.
Edenhofer, Ottmar, Knopf, Brigette, Barker, Terry, Baumstark, Lavinia, Bellevrat, Elie, Chateau, Bertrand,
. . . van Vuuren, Detlef P. (2010). The Economics of Low Stabilization: Model Comparison of
Mitigation Strategies and Costs. Energy Journal, 31(Special Issue), 11-48.
Ederington, J., Levinson, A., & Minier, J. (2005). Footloose and pollution-free. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 87(1), 92-99.
Energy Information Administration. (2011). International Energy Statistics Retrieved August 11, 2011,
from http://www.eia.gov/countries/data.cfm
Energy Modeling Forum. (2009). EMF 22 - Climate Change Control Scenarios, International Data
(updated).

43

http://emf.stanford.edu/events/emf_briefing_on_climate_policy_scenarios_us_domestic_and_i
nternational_policy_architectures/
EU ready to renegotiate Kyoto. (2001, April 7). BBC News. Retrieved from
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/1266221.stm
Finus, Michael, & Rundshagen, Bianca. (2003). How the Rules of Coalition Formation Affect Stability of
International Environmental Agreements. (2003-62). FEEM.
Fischer, Carolyn, & Fox, Alan. (2010). On the scope for output-based rebating in climate policy: When
revenue recycling isn't enough (or isn't possible). Washington: RFF.
Hochstetler, Kathryn, & Viola, Eduardo. (2010). Brazil and the Multiscalar Politics of Climate Change.
Hoel, Michael. (1992). Emission taxes in a dynamic game of CO2 emissions. In R. Pethig (Ed.), Conflict
and Cooperation in Managing Environmental Resources. Springer Publishing House.
Hoel, Michael. (1994). Efficient Climate Policy in the Presence of Free Riders. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 27(3), 259-274.
Houser, Trevor. (2010, February 4). Evaluating Copenhagen: Does the Accord Meet the Challenge?
Retrieved from http://www.piie.com/realtime/?p=1173
Interagency Competitiveness Analysis Team. (2009). The effects of H.R. 2454 on international
competitiveness and emission leakage in energy-intensive trade-exposed industries, from
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/pdfs/InteragencyReport_CompetitivenessEmissionLeakage.pdf
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (IWG). (2009). Technical Support Document: Social
Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866. Washington.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001). IPCC Third Assessment Report: Climate
Change 2001: Working Group III: Mitigation. Geneva: IPCC.
Jaffe, Adam B., Peterson, Steven R., Portney, Paul R., & Stavins, Robert N. (1995). Environmental
regulation and the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing: what does the evidence tell us?
Journal of Economic Literature, 33, 132-168.
Jeppesen, tim, List, John A., & Folmer, Henk. (2002). Environmental regulations and new plant location
decisions: Evidence from a meta-analysis. Journal of Regional Science, 42(1), 19-49.
Kaya, Yōichi, & Yokobori, Keiichi. (1997). Environment, energy, and economy [electronic resource] :
strategies for sustainability. Tokyo ;New York: United Nations University Press.
Kolstad, Charles D. (2011). Bridging Reality and the Theory of International Environmental Agreements.
Symposium in Honour of Tom Schelling. University of Manchester. Manchester.
L'Aquila Declaration of Leaders. (2009). Declaration of the Leaders: The Major Economies Forum on
Energy and Climate Retrieved August 29, 2011, from
http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/summit/2009laquila/2009-mef.html
Levinson, Arik, & Taylor, M. Scott. (2008). Unmasking the pollution haven effect. International Economic
Review, 49(1), 223-254.
Mendelsohn, Robert O. (2006). A Critique of the Stern Report. Regulation, 29(4), 42.
Nordhaus, William. (2007). The Challenge of Global Warming: Economic Models and Environmental
Policy Retrieved August 18, 2011, from
http://nordhaus.econ.yale.edu/dice_mss_072407_all.pdf
Nordhaus, William D. (2007). A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. Journal
of Economic Literature, 45(3), 686-686.
Nordhaus, William D. (2008). A question of balance : weighing the options on global warming policies.
New Haven, Conn. ; London: Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D., & Boyer, Joseph G. (1998). Requiem for Kyoto: An Economic Analysis of the Kyoto
Protocol. Energy Journal, 20(special), 93-130.
44

Open Energy Info. (2011). LEDS Program Workshop, from
http://en.openei.org/wiki/LEDS_Program_Workshop
Ostrom, Elinor. (2009). A polycentric approach for coping with climate change Policy Research Working
Paper. Washington: World Bank.
Pachauri, R.K., & Reisinger, A. (Eds.). (2007). Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC.
Persson, Sofia. (2010). Practical aspects of border carbon adjustment measures Retrieved August 19,
2011, from http://ictsd.org/downloads/2011/05/persson-ictsd-practical-aspects-of-bordercarbon-adjustment-measures.pdf
Peters, Glen P., & Hertwich, Edgar G. (2008). Post-Kyoto greenhouse gas inventories: production versus
consumption. Climatic Change(86), 51-66.
Pew Center on Global Climate Change (Pew). (2010). Adding up the Numbers: Mitigation Pledges under
the Copenhagen Accord Retrieved August 19, 2011, from
http://www.pewclimate.org/copenhagen-accord/adding-up-mitigation-pledges
Reklev, Stian, & Garside, Ben. (2011, August 9). CO2 caps not enough to save China CDM, Point Carbon.
Retrieved from http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1567227?date=20110809&sdtc=1
Schmalensee, Richard, Stoker, Thomas, & Judson, Ruth. (1998). World Carbon Dioxide Emissions 19502050. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1), 15-27.
Shannon, Darren. (2011, June 9). ALTA joins dissent against EU ETS, Aviation Week. Retrieved from
http://www.aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=comm&id=news/avd/20
11/06/09/10.xml
Soraghan, Mike. (2010, November 3). Obama talks up gas drilling, alternatives to cap and trade, E&E
News PM. Retrieved from http://www.eenews.net/eenewspm/2010/11/03/archive/1
Sperling, Gene, McGinty, Katie, & Tarullo, Daniel. (1997). Climate change scenarios. Washington:
George Washington University National Security Archive Retrieved from
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB303/Document%208.pdf.
Stern, N. H., & Great Britain, Treasury. (2007). The economics of climate change : the Stern Review: the
Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: New York :Cambridge University Press.
Stern, Todd. (2009a). Keynote remarks at the U.S. Climate Action Symposium Retrieved August 17,
2011, from http://www.state.gov/g/oes/rls/remarks/2009/119983.htm
Stern, Todd. (2009b). Press Roundtable with Todd Stern Special Envoy on Climate Change. Berlin: U.S.
Embassy Retrieved from http://germany.usembassy.gov/events/2009/mar-29-stern/.
UN Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing (UN SyG). (2010). Report
of the Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing. New York:
United Nations.
United Nations. (1994). United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. New York: United
Nations.
United Nations Environmental Program. (2011). The emission gap report: are the Copenhagen pledges
sufficient to limit global warming to 2 degrees Celsius or 1.5 degrees Celsius Retrieved October
11, 2011, from http://www.unep.org/publications/ebooks/emissionsgapreport/
Victor, David G. (2004). The collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the struggle to slow global warming.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Waggoner, P. E., & Ausubel, J. H. (2002). A framework for sustainability science: A renovated IPAT
identity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(12), 7860-7865. doi:
10.1073/pnas.122235999
Weber, Christopher, Peters, Glen, Guan, Dabo, & Hubacek, Klaus. (2008). The contribution of Chinese
exports to climate change. Energy Policy, 36, 3572-3577.
45

Weitzman, M. L. (2009). On Modeling And Interpreting The Economics Of Catastrophic Climate Change.
Review Of Economics And Statistics, 91(1), 1-19.
Weitzman, Martin L. (2007). A Review of The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. Journal
of Economic Literature, 45(3), 703-703.
World Climate Report. (2011). Biggest Drop in U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. In Patrick J. Michaels
(Ed.), World Climate Report, .

46

