                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       UNIONS IN A FRICTIONAL LABOR MARKET

                                           Per Krusell
                                         Leena Rudanko

                                      Working Paper 18218
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w18218


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2012




We are grateful toMarina Azzimonti, Matteo Cacciatore, Steve Davis, Fatih Guvenen, William
Hawkins, Patrick Kehoe, John Kennan, Guido Menzio, Fabien Postel-Vinay, Victor Rios-Rull,
Robert Shimer, seminar and conference audiences, as well as the editor and referee for comments.
Rudanko thanks the Hoover Institution for its hospitality and financial support, and the Fulbright
Program for financial support. Financial support from the NSF is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2012 by Per Krusell and Leena Rudanko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Unions in a Frictional Labor Market
Per Krusell and Leena Rudanko
NBER Working Paper No. 18218
July 2012, revised May 2016
JEL No. E02,E24,J51,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

A labor market with search and matching frictions, where wage setting is controlled by a
monopoly union that follows a norm of wage solidarity, is found vulnerable to substantial
distortions associated with holdup. With full commitment to future wages, the union achieves
efficient hiring in the long run, but hikes up wages in the short run to appropriate rents from
firms. Without commitment, in a Markov-perfect equilibrium, hiring is too low both in the short
and the long run. The quantitative impact is demonstrated in an extended model with partial
union coverage and multi- period union contracting.


Per Krusell
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 STOCKHOLM
SWEDEN
and NBER
per.krusell@iies.su.se

Leena Rudanko
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
leena.rudanko@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Labor unions play an important role in many labor markets in many countries. There
is also a large body of literature within labor economics focusing on how union presence
influences labor market outcomes. Yet, there is relatively little work studying the impact of
this institution on the labor market when this market is described as having frictions and
featuring unemployment due to these frictions. Since search and matching models have come
to play a central role as a workhorse for macroeconomic labor market analyses, this gap in the
literature leaves open important questions: What is the impact of unions on unemployment
and wages? How do unions affect how strongly unemployment varies over the business cycle?
What institutional settings are desirable, when considering rules regarding union coverage?
   The model can be interpreted as representing either the aggregate labor market or an
industry labor market, but in either case, the focus is on the case of a “large” union, which
has monopoly power over some group of workers. This case is particularly relevant for
many European economies, in which there is a nationwide union or cooperation/agreements
among unions representing different industries. It is also relevant in other settings in which
workers cannot easily move across industries and competition among different unions within
an industry is limited. The union is assumed to be fully rational, taking job creation into
account when making its wage demands, and its objective to be the welfare of all workers
covered by union wages.
    In the model, all workers have the same productivity and fulfill equally productive jobs.
We start with the view that union operations are governed by a norm of solidarity and
egalitarianism among workers, which leads to the assumption that unions impose identical
wages across these workers. This view can be motivated in part by the broad empirical
evidence documenting that unions compress the distribution of wages. Such fairness is found
to come at a nontrivial cost, however, as it leaves the unionized labor market vulnerable to
a potentially severe holdup problem, which leads to inefficiently high wages and low job
creation.
    Under the egalitarian wage policy, the degree to which the union can commit to future
wages becomes qualitatively and quantitatively important for outcomes.1 If the union can
fully commit to future wages, it attains an efficient level of unemployment in the long run.
In the short run, however, unemployment is inefficiently high because the union uses its
market power to raise current wages above the efficient level to extract rents from firms with
preexisting matches. Specifically, labor market tightness is shown to be inefficiently low in
the initial period but efficient from then on. These elements give rise to a time inconsistency:
If a union had decided on a commitment plan yesterday, but had the opportunity to revise
it today, the union would indeed revise the plan to benefit again from preexisting matches.
    What would happen if the union did not have commitment to future wages? What
effects would it have on the labor market? The paper answers this question by analyzing
    1
    The degree of commitment to wages is important in holdup problems in general, with full commitment
potentially avoiding the holdup problem entirely. In the dynamic model with an egalitarian wage policy, the
situation is more involved, however, because even in the union problem with full commitment there are some
workers who were hired in the past and whose wages will in part be set after they have already been hired.


                                                    2
differentiable Markov perfect equilibria.2 In a calibrated model, the presence of the union
raises wages by 11%, consequently raising unemployment from 5% to 16%, and reducing
output by 12%, relative to efficient outcomes. The distortions associated with the union
diminish as the duration of union contracts increases, but this effect appears quantitatively
weak; the effects remain very similar as duration varies from one to three years, viewed as
the empirically relevant range of union contract durations (Taylor 1983).
    In a classic paper, Calmfors and Driffill (1988) reconsidered the impact of unions on
the level of aggregate economic activity. It has long been recognized that unions, through
their monopoly power in the labor market, tend to raise wages above their competitive lev-
els, suggesting that a greater union presence in the labor market has a primarily negative
impact on economic activity. Calmfors and Driffill (1988) propose an additional factor for
understanding the cross-country evidence on unions: They argue that the degree of coor-
dination in union bargaining works to counteract the negative effects of monopoly power.
Our model generates a related hump-shaped relationship, illustrated in Section 4, which
allows partial union coverage of the workforce. Because union wages tend to be higher than
nonunion wages, greater union coverage tends to lead to higher unemployment in our model
as well. But greater union coverage also increases the extent to which the union takes into
account the effects of its wage demands on hiring, borne by union and nonunion workers
alike, leading to moderation in union wage setting. As union coverage increases, the second
effect eventually takes over the first, leading to a hump-shaped relationship.
    An important motivation for macroeconomists to consider unions has been the idea that
union wages are less responsive to shocks, potentially helping to understand the observed
variability of employment (see, e.g., Blanchard and Fischer 1989, pp. 438–455). The model
studied in Section 4 builds in significant stickiness in wages, because the union recontracts
only every one to three years. The stickiness has a substantial impact on shock propagation
in the model, with amplification in the responses of vacancy creation, employment, and
output to shocks.
    Finally, while we view egalitarianism as a characteristic of union operations, it is also
shown that relaxing the egalitarian wage policy, for example by allowing a tenure premium
in union wages, can provide the union sufficient instruments to avoid the holdup problem,
perhaps entirely. In this case, the union extracts rents from firms with high wages for
senior workers, while setting the wages of junior workers low enough to encourage hiring
nevertheless. Unless the union runs into a binding constraint on how low the wages of junior
workers can be (possibly negative), efficient hiring is attained. The model thus implies a
rationale for a tenure premium in union wages.


Related literature There are papers developing extensions of the Mortensen-Pissarides
model with a union/unions governing wage determination. Perhaps closest in spirit to our
paper is Pissarides (1986), which first introduces a monopoly union into the Pissarides (1985)
framework and studies the impact on equilibrium outcomes in the labor market. As with
the literature following it, Pissarides (1986) focuses on steady states, however, side-stepping
   2
     We extend the solution approach of Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith (2002) for the generalized Euler equation
to allow solving for labor market outcomes with partial union coverage and multiperiod union contracting.


                                                     3
the dynamic issues highlighted here.3 The more recent papers are more applied: Garibaldi
and Violante (2005) and Boeri and Burda (2009) study the effects of employment protection
policies; Ebell and Haefke (2006) study the effects of product market regulation; and Acikgoz
and Kaymak (2014) study the evolution of skill premia and unionization rates over time.
These papers generally adopt frameworks imposing exogenous wage compression into union
wage setting, with the exception of Taschereau-Dumouchel (2011), who develops a framework
where it is endogenous. Delacroix (2006) extends the framework of Ebell and Haefke (2006)
to capture the U-shaped relationship between the degree of coordination in union bargaining
and economic performance postulated by Calmfors and Driffill (1988).
    Other related work includes Acemoglu and Pischke (1999), who argue that union wage
compression across workers of differing skill levels can encourage firms to provide training;
Alvarez and Veracierto (2000), who study an extension of the Lucas and Prescott (1974)
island model with unions quantitatively, considering several alternative ways of modeling
union behavior (worker coalition vs. union boss, equal treatment vs. insider-outsider frame-
work); and Alvarez and Shimer (2011), who study a further extension of the Lucas and
Prescott model that allows search also on the islands, emphasizing the role of seniority for
union hiring and layoff decisions.
   The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 begins with a brief overview of the empirical
evidence on unions. Section 3 analyzes the benchmark model: first, a one-period model to
provide intuition, and then an infinite-horizon model with and without commitment. Section
4 turns to a quantitative illustration in the context of an extended model, and Section 5
concludes.


2       Evidence on unions, wages and unemployment
Most workers in the OECD, outside the U.S., have their wages determined by union agree-
ments. This cross-country evidence is discussed by Nickell and Layard (1999), who report
that in most European countries, the share of workers covered by union wages exceeds 70%.
An important feature of the cross-country evidence is that union coverage rates—the share
of the labor force whose wages are determined by union wage bargaining—generally exceed
union membership rates outside the US. Even in countries in which union membership rates
are low, such as France, within firms many nonunion workers are paid the union wage, and
in many countries, union wages are legally extended to cover nonunion firms as well. Visser
(2003) also documents union membership and coverage rates across countries, reporting an
average coverage rate of 73% across European countries for the period 1985–1997. While
union membership has been on the decline in Europe as well as in the U.S., coverage levels
    3
    Lockwood and Manning (1989) and Modesto and Thomas (2001) have studied union wage setting in labor
markets in which firms face adjustment costs to labor, developing the idea that dynamic concerns become
important for thinking about union decision-making when labor markets are not fully frictionless. The simple
partial equilibrium quadratic adjustment cost framework adopted in these papers affords closed-form results
that speak to the level of union wage demands, as well as to the speed of adjustment in firm-level employment.
Our work brings these ideas into an equilibrium framework, which allows us to consider unemployment and
vacancy creation as well.


                                                      4
                               France
                              Austria
                             Belgium
                              Finland
                             Sweden
                         Netherlands
                           Denmark
                                 Italy
                                Spain
                             Norway
                            Portugal
                            Australia
                           Germany
                         Switzerland
                           Argentina                                    Density
                              Greece                                    Coverage
                                   UK
                              Canada
                                  USA
                                         0   20     40        60       80          100
                                                         %



                       Figure 1: Unionization Rates across Countries in 2013
Notes: The figure displays union coverage and density rates for 2013 based on data available from the
International Labor Organization (www.ilo.org/ilostat/). Coverage refers to the share of workers to
whom a collective agreement applies, and density to the share who are union members. The density for
Argentina is from 2008, the most recent figure reported.


remain substantially higher in Europe, as Figure 1 shows.4
    In terms of the effects of unions, Nickell and Layard (1999) show that a cross-country
regression of unemployment on measures of union membership and coverage reveals a pos-
itive relationship between union presence and unemployment. But there is also significant
heterogeneity across countries in the degree of centralization and coordination in union bar-
gaining, as highlighted by Calmfors and Driffill (1988), and it turns out that this positive
relationship between union presence and unemployment can be partly offset by measures of
coordination in bargaining.
   Nickell and Layard (1999) also report that union membership is associated with higher
wages on the individual level across countries. An extensive literature has studied this
union/nonunion wage gap, using a variety of data sources and econometric approaches.
Lewis (1986) reviews the literature for the U.S., concluding that the evidence points to an
upper bound of 15% for the union wage gap. More recently, Blanchflower and Bryson (2003)
confirm that the estimates of the wage gap have remained relatively stable, with perhaps
a modest decline over time. They also report estimates across countries, noting that in
many European countries the extensive coverage of union wages reduces these gaps. An
important concern with the estimates of the union wage gap in general involves selection on
unobservables: It is likely that higher union wages attract better workers, but the data do
not allow these differences to be controlled for properly, biasing the estimates of the wage
gap. When DiNardo and Lee (2004) adopt a regression discontinuity design to get around
some of the issues, they find a negligible wage gap, seemingly contradicting a large body of
  4
      See also Visser, Hayter, and Gammarano (2015) for more background and broader cross-country evidence.



                                                     5
evidence.5
    A robust finding appears to be that unions reduce wage inequality, compressing the distri-
bution of wages (Card, Lemieux, and Riddell 2003). Do they compress wages across degrees
of seniority as well? Certainly formal pay scales appear to be common in union compensation
practices, but arguably wages rise with tenure in nonunion settings as well. Perhaps because
unions tend to compress the distribution of wages, a number of earlier studies have actually
reported a stronger association between tenure and earnings in nonunion settings. But prop-
erly estimating returns to tenure is challenging and the comparison is confounded by the
fact that the estimates tend to be biased by worker and job heterogeneity, generally found
to be greater in nonunion than in union settings.6 Recognizing these challenges, Abraham
and Farber (1988) find a stronger association between tenure and earnings in the unionized
setting, supporting the idea that seniority plays an important role in union operations. At
the same time, Topel (1991) finds no significant difference in returns to tenure based on
union status. Again, data limitations leave us short of a conclusive answer, but the evidence
in favor of overall wage compression does appear to be robust.


3       The model
This section begins with a description of the simple Mortensen-Pissarides search and match-
ing environment that the analysis is based on. A monopoly union is then introduced, and
its behavior characterized, within that framework.


A frictional labor market Time is discrete and the horizon infinite. The economy is
populated by a continuum of measure one identical workers, together with a continuum of
identical capitalists who employ these workers. All agents have linear utility and discount
the future at rate β < 1. Capitalists have access to a linear production technology, producing
z units of output per period for each worker employed. In addition to this market production
technology, unemployed workers also have access to a home production technology, producing
b(< z) units of output per period.
     The labor market is frictional, requiring capitalists seeking to hire workers to post vacan-
cies. The measure of matches in the beginning of the period is denoted by n ∈ [0, 1], leaving
1 − n workers searching for jobs. Searching workers and posted vacancies are matched ac-
cording to a constant-returns-to-scale matching function m(v, 1 − n), where v is the measure
of vacancies. With this, the probability with which a searching worker finds a job within
a period can be written µ(θ) = m(θ, 1), and the probability with which a vacancy is filled
q(θ) = m(1, 1/θ), where θ = v/(1 − n) is the labor market tightness. It is assumed that
µ′ (θ) is positive and decreasing and q ′ (θ) negative and increasing. With this, employment
    5
     Their study focuses on close union election outcomes in the U.S. Of course, it is possible that wage gaps
in workplaces with close election outcomes are smaller than in those with clear-cut outcomes, and that wages
in newly unionized workplaces are different from those with an established union presence.
   6
     The magnitude of returns to tenure is a debated topic; see, for example, Altonji and Williams (2005)
and Buchinsky, Fougre, Kramarz, and Tchernis (2010).


                                                      6
equals n plus the measure of new matches, µ(θ)(1 − n). Jobs are destroyed each period
with probability δ. Thus, the measure of matches evolves over time according to the law of
motion

                                         nt+1 = (1 − δ) (nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt )) .                           (1)
                                                        |        {z          }
                                                                    employedt



Firms Capitalists operate production through firms, and these firms need to post vacancies
to find workers, at a cost κ per vacancy. Competition drives profits from vacancy creation
to zero, with firms taking into account the union wage-setting behavior today and in the
future. The zero-profit condition thus determines the current market tightness according to
current and future wages {wt+s }∞s=0 as follows:

                                                       ∞
                                                       X                         
                                          κ = q(θt )         β s (1 − δ)s z − wt+s .                       (2)
                                                       s=0



Union Wages are set unilaterally by a labor union, with universal coverage. The union
sets wages to maximize the welfare of all workers, with equal pay for all those employed.7
The union objective thus becomes
                       ∞
                       X                                                                
                              βt         nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt ) wt + (1 − nt )(1 − µ(θt )) b .               (3)
                                       |         {z          }     |        {z         }
                        t=0
                                              employedt                     unemployedt


The union takes as given the evolution of employment according to equation (1). It also
internalizes the effect of its wage-setting decisions on hiring. Therefore, the union’s problem
is to choose a sequence of wages {wt }∞  t=0 to maximize the objective (3) subject to the law of
motion (1) and zero-profit condition (2). The union must also respect the constraint that
the firms, at each point in time, make a nonnegative present value of profits on existing
matches, as they could simply end them otherwise. This is implied by positive vacancy
posting, however, because if firms posting vacancies break even, existing matches must have
strictly positive value.
      The following timeline summarizes the events in period t

                 nt given                  vacancy posting, vt                  production

                              union sets wt               vt and 1 − nt search               separations


    Given the path of wages {wt }∞   t=0 , then, equation (2) determines the path of market
tightness {θt }t=0 , which in turn determines the evolution of employment.
               ∞

  7
      Note that if one normalizes b = 0, then the union objective becomes the total wage bill.




                                                                7
3.1     One-period example
To illustrate key forces at play, the impact of the union is first considered in a very simple
setting: a one-period version of the previous economy. Many features present here will be
present in the subsequent analysis.


Planner A natural starting point is the efficient benchmark—the output-maximizing level
of vacancy creation a social planner would choose. Here the planner solves the problem
                                                          
                max n + µ(θ)(1 − n) z + (1 − n) 1 − µ(θ) b − θ(1 − n) κ,               (4)
                  θ   |      {z      }     |       {z      }    | {z }
                                  employed                    unemployed                vacancies


taking as given preexisting matches n. The planner’s optimum is characterized by the first-
order condition −κ+µ′ (θ)(z −b) = 0, which pins down θ independent of n. For concreteness,
consider the matching function m(v, u) =
                                       pvu/(v +u), such that µ(θ) = θ/(1+θ). In this case,
                                   p
the planner’s optimum is given by θ = (z − b)/κ − 1, with market tightness an increasing
function of market productivity. Of course, it must be that z − b > κ for vacancy creation
to be optimal.


Union The union instead aims to maximize the welfare of workers
                                                         
                      n + µ(θ)(1 − n) w + (1 − n) 1 − µ(θ) b,                                                (5)
                      |     {z      }     |       {z      }
                                          employed                 unemployed


by choice of w and θ, subject to the zero-profit condition: κ = q(θ)(z − w). The tradeoff the
union faces here is that while higher wages increase the welfare of employed workers, they
also reduce the job-finding probability because of reduced job creation.
    To see how this problem relates to the planner’s problem, one can use the zero-profit
condition to solve for the wage, as w = z − κ/q(θ), and substitute it into the union objective
to yield a maximization problem in θ only:
                                                  κ                    
        max n + µ(θ)(1 − n)                  z−        + (1 − n) 1 − µ(θ) b                                  (6)
         θ  |     {z      }                       q(θ)   |       {z      }
                     employed                                 unemployed
                          nκ                                                  
         = max −                         + n + µ(θ)(1 − n) z + (1 − n) 1 − µ(θ) b − θ(1 − n)κ,               (7)
              θ          q(θ)             |                        {z                       }
                         |{z}                                     planner’s objective
                    capitalists’ share


also taking as given n.8 From the second line, one can see that the union objective differs
                                                   nκ
from the planner’s objective only by the term − q(θ)  . To understand how the two objectives
relate to each other, recall that while the planner cares about all agents in the economy, the
   8
    This substitution assumes some vacancy creation is optimal. The union could also opt to simply set
w = z in the original problem, achieving the value b + n(z − b) for the objective (forgoing vacancy costs
entirely). To ensure the solution in the text is optimal, it is necessary to make sure the value of the objective
exceeds this value.

                                                          8
union only cares about workers. The union objective thus equals the planner’s objective less
                                                                                    nκ
the capitalists’ share of total output: the profits on existing matches n(z − w) = q(θ) , where
the equality follows from the zero-profit condition.
                                                                                                        ′
                                                                                    n q (θ)
    An interior union optimum is characterized by the first-order condition −κ + κ 1−n q(θ)2
                                                                                             +
µ (θ)(z −b) = 0, which implies that the union’s
  ′
                                            √ choice
                                                   p of θ does depend on n. In our example,
an interior union optimum is given by θ = 1 − n (z − b)/κ − 1. Labor-market tightness
is thus again an increasing function of market productivity but now decreases in preexisting
matches. Clearly, the union implements the socially optimal level of vacancy creation if
n = 0. But if n > 0, the union has an incentive to raise wages above the efficient level, to
appropriate surpluses from firms with existing matches.9
       Finally, note that a nonegalitarian union would instead solve the problem

                           max nw e + µ(θ)(1 − n)w n + (1 − µ(θ))(1 − n)b                                    (8)
                          θ,w e ,w n

                             s.t. q(θ)(z − w n ) = κ,                                                        (9)
                                  w e ≤ z,                                                                  (10)

where the union is allowed to pay different wages to newly hired workers, w n , and workers in
existing matches, w e . Allowing different wages for the two groups immediately implies that
the union sets w e = z. Substituting this into the union objective then yields the planner
objective above, along with the same condition for optimal hiring: −κ + µ′ (θ)(z − b) = 0.
With this market tightness, the wage in new matches is then given by w n = z − κ/q(θ),
implying a tenure premium in union wages: w n < w e .
    This non-egalitarian case demonstrates that the inefficiency in the initial union problem
stems from the constraint to treat workers identically.10 The theory thus implies a rationale
for tenure premia in union wages, which could—in the absence of a binding lower bound on
the wages of junior workers—even allow the union to attain efficient hiring.
    The next section returns to the dynamic infinite horizon setting, where the measure of
initial matches is endogenous.
   9
      Introducing curvature into the problem via a concave production function or a convex vacancy cost
would bring about an added distortion reminiscent of that in static union problems, which also works
to reduce hiring below efficient. The linearity of the baseline Mortensen-Pissarides model thus serves to
isolate the dynamic distortion emphasized in this paper from the distortion appearing in static analyses of
unionized labor markets. It also allows a relatively straightforward comparison of dynamics between the
unionized labor market and efficiency, by making the efficient dynamics simple to characterize. See the
online appendix, Section B, for more.
   10
      These distortions arise because search frictions render existing matches a form of firm-specific capital,
which is subject to a holdup problem. As is typically the case, the degree of commitment to wages is
important for the severity of the holdup problem. In the extreme case, if wages are set after vacancy
creation takes place (rather than before), the union would simply set (both) wages equal to z, with no new
hiring taking place. The timing here allows the union to commit to wages before vacancy creation, however,
making outcomes less severe.




                                                      9
3.2       Efficient outcomes
Beginning with the efficient outcome provides a useful benchmark for characterizing union
wage-setting also when the time horizon is infinite. The planner now chooses a sequence
{θt }∞
     t=0 , with θt ≥ 0, to maximize

                ∞
                X                                                                                   
                          βt         nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt ) z + (1 − nt )(1 − µ(θt )) b − θt (1 − nt ) κ     (11)
                                   |         {z          }    |        {z         }     | {z }
                    t=0                                                                      vacancies t
                                          employedt                    unemployedt

               s.t. nt+1 = (1 − δ) (nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt )),                                                 (12)
                                   |        {z          }
                                                      employedt

with n0 given.
   For what comes later, it will be useful to formulate problems recursively. The recursive
form for the planner’s problem reads
                                                                                 
  V p (n) = max n + µ(θ)(1 − n) z + (1 − n) 1 − µ(θ) b − θ(1 − n)κ + βV p N(n, θ) , (13)
                θ
                                        
where N(n, θ) ≡ (1 − δ) n + µ(θ)(1 − n) . Notice that the state variable is n, the number
of matches at the beginning of the period, and that the control variable—market tightness
θ—determines n′ according to the law of motion N(n, θ).
       The first-order condition, assuming an interior solution, is
                                                                  
                                κ = µ′ (θ) z − b + β(1 − δ)V p′ n′ .                                       (14)

It equalizes the cost of an additional vacancy, κ, to its benefits: an increase in matches
of µ′ (θ), with each new worker delivering the flow surplus z − b today, together with a
continuation value reflecting future flow surpluses.
       The envelope condition gives the value of an additional beginning-of-period match, as
                                                                               
                     V p′ (n) = (1 − µ(θ) + θµ′ (θ)) z − b + β(1 − δ)V p′ (n′ ) .         (15)

This value takes into account that the increase in initial matches hampers current hiring by
shrinking the pool of searching workers. To see this in the expression, note that the derivative
of the matching function with respect to unemployment, mu (θ, 1), equals µ(θ) − θµ′ (θ).
       Eliminating the derivative of the value function in (14) yields the Euler equation
                                    κ                                                   κ
                                         = z − b + β(1 − δ) 1 − µ(θ′ ) + θ′ µ′ (θ′ )             .         (16)
                               µ′ (θ)                                                   µ′ (θ′ )
This equation states the efficiency condition for the Mortensen-Pissarides model, solving
a tradeoff between the costs and benefits of creating a new match today. The cost of an
additional match today is κ/µ′ (θ): the cost of a vacancy, κ, times the measure of vacancies
required for one match.11 The benefits of an additional match include the flow surplus z − b
  11
   Since a unit increase in vacancies increases market tightness by 1/(1 − n) units, and a unit increase in
market tightness yields (1 − n)µ′ (θ) new matches, one new vacancy creates µ′ (θ) new matches.

                                                                  10
today, together with the expected value of the match next period. The expected value takes
into account that the match survives to the next period with probability 1 − δ, and that the
increase in matches shrinks the pool of searching workers tomorrow, so that any planned
vacancy creation next period will yield fewer matches, leading to a net increase in matches
of 1 − µ(θ′ ) + θ′ µ′ (θ′ ). Finally, the value of a match tomorrow is again given by κ/µ′ (θ′ ).
    Note that the planner’s Euler equation does not feature the state variable n explicitly
at all, so a natural guess for the solution is a constant tightness independent of n. It is
straightforward to show that the planner’s value function is linear in n, and the efficient
allocation is thus characterized by a constant market tightness θt = θp , for all t ≥ 0.


3.3          A union with commitment
Turning to the unionized labor market, consider the problem of the egalitarian union choosing
a sequence of wages {wt }∞t=0 to maximize the objective (3) subject to the law of motion (1)
and zero profit condition (2) holding at each point in time.
   To relate the union problem to the planner’s problem, one can again use the zero-profit
conditions to rewrite the union objective. To this end, note that the union’s choice of a
sequence of wages determines, at each instant, the expected present
                                                                 P∞ value    of union wages
paid out over the course of an employment relationship: Wt = s=0 β (1 − δ)s wt+s . The
                                                                         s

sequence {Wt }∞
              t=0 further pins down the sequence {θt }t=0 through the zero-profit conditions,
                                                      ∞

assuming some vacancy creation occurs each period. Conversely, given a sequence {θt }∞   t=0 ,
one can back out per-period wages by first using the zero-profit condition to find Wt each
period, and then computing wages as wt = Wt − β(1 − δ)Wt+1 .
       Using the zero-profit condition to eliminate wages, the union objective (3) can be written
as:
                          ∞
                n0 κ   X                            
             −       +    β t [ nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt ) z + (1 − nt )(1 − µ(θt ))b − θt (1 − nt )κ],               (17)
               q(θ0 ) t=0

revealing an identical objective to that of the planner except for the first term.12 This term—
familiar from the one-period example—reflects the share of the present discounted value of
output accruing to capitalists. To see this, note that the capitalists’ share, i.e., the present
value of profits to firms, can be written as
       ∞
       X                             ∞
                                     X                          ∞
                                                                X
              t       t                     t
 n0          β (1 − δ) [z − wt ] +         β [µ(θt )(1 − nt )         β s (1 − δ)s [z − wt+s ] − θt (1 − nt )κ]. (18)
       t=0                           t=0                        s=0

Here, the first term captures the present value of profits on existing matches, and the second
those on new vacancies created in periods t = 0, 1, . . .. The expression reduces to representing
initial matches only, however, as free entry drives the present value of profits to new vacancies
to zero.13 Preexisting matches, on the other hand, are due a strictly positive present value
  12
    See online appendix, Section A.                    P∞                       P∞
  13
    The second term in equation (18) can be written as t=0 β t (1−nt )θt [q(θt ) s=0 β s (1−δ)s [z −wt+s ]−κ],
which equals zero because of the free entry condition (2).

                                                          11
of profits, because these firms paid the vacancy cost in the past, anticipating positive profits
in the future to make up for it. Using the zero-profit condition, this remaining present value
can be expressed as n0 κ/q(θ0 ).
    The union objective (17) reflects the fact that while the planner maximizes the present
discounted value of output, the union only cares about the workers’ share of it. As a result,
the union will have an incentive to appropriate some of this present value from capitalists
by raising wages above the efficient level—and this is exactly how the solutions to the two
problems will differ.

Proposition 1. If the union is able to commit to future wages, hiring is efficient after the
initial period. In the initial period, hiring is efficient if n0 = 0 and below efficient if n0 > 0.

   Note that after the initial period, the union effectively solves the planner’s problem (13),
and consequently chooses the planner’s solution θt = θp ∀t ≥ 1. In the initial period,
however, the union chooses θ0 to maximize
        n0 κ                                                                                    
  −           + n0 + µ(θ0 )(1 − n0 ) z + (1 − n0 ) 1 − µ(θ0 ) b − θ0 (1 − n0 )κ + βV p N(n0 , θ0 ) ,
       q(θ0 )
                                                                                                 (19)

where n0 is given, and V p solves the planner’s problem (13).14
   Deriving the optimality condition for this initial period is straightforward, using the
same methods as above. Using the fact that the efficient market tightness θp will prevail in
subsequent periods, the resulting condition can be written as
                      n0 q ′ (θ0 ) κ                                   p       p ′ p
                                                                                        κ
             [1 −                 ]         = z − b + β(1 − δ) 1 − µ(θ   ) + θ  µ (θ )           .        (20)
                    1 − n0 q(θ0 )2 µ′ (θ0 )                                             µ′ (θp )

Comparing with the efficiency condition (16), the cost of creating an additional match today
(on the left) is higher for the union than for the planner. This occurs because in order to
increase hiring, the union must lower wages, giving up some of the surplus it could have
appropriated from firms with existing matches. Moreover, the more existing matches there
are, the greater this additional cost.
       Using the efficiency condition (16), equation (20) can be further rewritten as

                                             n0 q ′ (θ0 )    1          1
                                    [1 −                  ]        =          .                           (21)
                                           1 − n0 q(θ0 )2 µ′ (θ0 )   µ′ (θp )

Because q ′ (θ) < 0 and µ′ (θ) is decreasing, this equation implies that the market tightness
will generally be lower in the initial period than the efficient value it takes on after that,
and the more initial matches, the lower its initial value. Thus, as in the one-period example,
the initial market tightness depends negatively on the measure of existing matches. This is
  14
    Again, using the zero-profit condition to substitute out wages assumes positive vacancy creation each
period. The union could, as an alternative, also choose to set the initial present value of wages so high as to
shut down hiring in the first period entirely, allowing matches to depreciate. This becomes more attractive
when initial matches are plentiful.

                                                        12
a key feature of the model, which becomes even more important when the union does not
have commitment.
    That the outcome in the initial period differs from later periods reflects a time incon-
sistency issue in the union wage-setting problem. If the union were to reoptimize after the
initial period, it would face a different objective and choose a different path of wages. While
the union can thus get relatively close to the efficient outcome when it can commit, this
immediate time inconsistency begs the question: What happens if the union cannot commit
to future actions? To study time-consistent union decision-making, the next section turns
to a game-theoretic setting, which will be based on the recursive formulation of the union
problem set up above.


3.4    A union without commitment
The union problem (19) suggests that if the union were to reoptimize at any date, its choice
of initial θ would depend on n, the measure of matches in the beginning of the period. In
particular, a higher n should imply a lower θ. How would outcomes change if the union
could not commit to not reoptimizing? In answering this question, this paper focuses on
(differentiable) Markov perfect equilibria with n as a state variable. That n is a payoff-
and action-relevant state variable should be clear from the problem under commitment.
In a Markov perfect equilibrium, the union anticipates its future choices of θ to depend
(negatively) on n, a relationship labeled Θ(n). The task, then, is to characterize Θ(n).
   The function Θ(n) solves a problem similar to (19), namely
                    nκ                                                                  
Θ(n) ≡ arg max −        + n + µ(θ)(1 − n) z + (1 − n)(1 − µ(θ))b − θ(1 − n)κ + βV N(n, θ) ,
              θ    q(θ)
                                                                                   (22)

where the continuation value V satisfies the recursive equation
                                                                                  
V (n) = n + µ(Θ(n))(1 − n) z + (1 − n)(1 − µ(Θ(n)))b − Θ(n)(1 − n)κ + βV N(n, Θ(n)) .
                                                                                (23)

Here, the union recognizes that its future actions will follow Θ(n), and this is reflected in the
continuation value V (n). Because Θ(n) will generally not be efficient, V (n) will not equal
V p (n), the continuation value under commitment.
   A Markov perfect equilibrium is defined as a pair of functions Θ(n) and V (n) solving (22)–
(23) for all n. The functions are assumed to be differentiable, and equilibria characterized
based on this assumption.
   From equation (22), the first-order condition for market tightness becomes

                              n q ′ (θ)                                    
                     [1 −              2
                                         ]κ = µ′ (θ) z − b + β(1 − δ)V ′ n′ ,               (24)
                            1 − n q(θ)

and the equation paralleling the envelope condition—now not formally an envelope condition


                                                13
since the union does not agree with its future decisions—becomes
                                                                            
                    V ′ (n) =(1 − µ(θ) + θµ′ (θ)) z − b + β(1 − δ)V ′ (n′ )
                                 ′     ′
                                                             n q ′ (θ) κ 
                              + µ (θ) Θ (n)(1 − n) − θ −                       .                         (25)
                                                            1 − n q(θ)2 µ′ (θ)

Equation (25) is derived by differentiating equation (23) and using equation (24) to arrive
at a formulation close to the equivalent condition (15) for the planner. Compared with the
planner’s envelope condition, this equation includes some additional terms, which appear
because the envelope theorem does not hold. These terms work to reduce the value of
additional initial matches n, as the union sets the market tightness too low—following Θ(n)—
and to an extent that increases in n.
   One can further combine the above two equations to eliminate V ′ , obtaining
         n q ′ (θ) κ                                 ′     ′ ′ ′
                                                                         n′ q ′ (θ′ ) κ
  [1 −            ]       = z − b + β(1 − δ)[ 1 − µ(θ ) + θ µ (θ ) [1 −               ]
       1 − n q(θ)2 µ′ (θ)                                               1 − n′ q(θ′ )2 µ′ (θ′ )
  |         {z          }                                           |         {z              }
      cost of match today                                                      value of match tomorrow
                                                                                n q (θ )
                                                                                   ′     ′ ′
                                                                                              κ
                                        + µ′ (θ′ )(Θ′ (n′ )(1 − n′ ) − θ′ )(−            2
                                                                                           ) ′ ′ ],
                                                                              1 − n q(θ ) µ (θ )
                                                                                   ′   ′
                                          |                           {z                        }
                                                      loss in value from lack of commitment
                                                                                                         (26)

which is a generalized Euler equation. It is a functional equation in the unknown policy
function Θ, where the derivative of Θ appears. The equation is written in a short-hand
way: θ is short for Θ(n), θ′ is short for Θ(N(n, Θ(n))), and n′ is short for N(n, Θ(n)). The
task is to find a function Θ that solves this equation for all n. Note that in contrast to the
planner’s Euler equation, n appears nontrivially in this equation and will generally matter
for the tightness. It is easily verified that a constant Θ will not solve the equation.
    Equation (26), as with the planner’s Euler equation (16), represents the tradeoff between
the costs and benefits of creating matches today. The cost of an additional match for
the union exceeds the cost for the planner, however, because in addition to the increase
in vacancy costs κ/µ′ (θ), the union also takes into account that increasing hiring requires
reducing wages, thereby giving up some of the surplus it could have appropriated from
                                   n q ′ (θ) κ
firms, captured by the term: − 1−n   q(θ)2 µ′ (θ)
                                                  . This additional cost appears also in the Euler
equation (20) for the union with commitment, but here it appears both today and tomorrow
symmetrically, unlike in the commitment solution where tomorrow’s union simply carries
out today’s plan. Beyond this difference, the union also takes into account its inability
to commit to future wages: Creating more matches today will reduce hiring tomorrow, as
tomorrow’s union will raise wages to exploit those matches. A marginal increase in matches
reduces hiring by µ′ (θ)(Θ′ (n)(1 − n) − Θ(n)), with each lost worker valued at the size of the
distortion in the union objective—the marginal surplus appropriated from capitalists.
   Note that equation (26) differs from standard Euler equations in that the derivative of
the function Θ appears in the equation. This means that even solving for a steady state will
be more complicated than usual, requiring information about the shape of the Θ function.

                                                14
Steady state refers here to a level of initial matches n and corresponding market tightness
θ = Θ(n) such that the law of motion maintains the same level of matches: N(n, Θ(n)) = n.
In this case, one cannot simply use equation (26) together with the law of motion to solve
for a steady state (n, θ)-pair because the derivative appears as an additional unknown.
    It is hard to establish theoretically that Θ(n) is indeed decreasing. In the one-period
example of Section 3.1, Θ became a decreasing function of n, and in our numerically solved
examples below, this also holds. What is possible to show for the infinite-horizon case,
however, is that whenever Θ(n) is decreasing, steady-state market tightness is strictly below
its efficient level.

Proposition 2. If Θ(n) is decreasing in n, then the steady-state market tightness, θ, in the
unionized labor market (without commitment) is strictly below its efficient level.

    It follows that steady-state unemployment in the unionized labor market is strictly above
its efficient level.


3.5    A nonegalitarian union
Relaxing the equal pay constraint by allowing the union to pay different wages to newly
hired workers (wtn ) and workers in existing matches (wte ), the union objective becomes
                   ∞
                   X                                                            
                         β t nt wte + µ(θt )(1 − nt )wtn + (1 − nt )(1 − µ(θt ))b ,      (27)
                   t=0

and the zero-profit condition
                                             ∞
                                             X
                                        n
                                                                       
                         κ = q(θt ) z − wt +   β s (1 − δ)s (z − wt+s
                                                                  e
                                                                      ) .                (28)
                                                  s=1

In this case a separate condition must be imposed, to ensure that firms make a nonnegative
present value of profits on existing workers:
                              ∞
                              X
                                     β s (1 − δ)s (z − wt+s
                                                        e
                                                            ) ≥ 0, ∀t ≥ 0.               (29)
                               s=0


   The nonegalitarian union chooses two sequences of wages, {wtn }∞          e ∞
                                                                  t=0 and {wt }t=0 , to max-
imize the objective (27) subject to the law of motion (1), zero-profit conditions (28), and
constraints (29) holding at each point in time.
   In setting the wages of existing workers, the best the union can do is to set wte = z each
period, leaving firms with zero surplus on existing matches. The zero-profit condition then
implies that wtn = z − κ/q(θt ), ∀t ≥ 0. Using this expression to substitute out wages in the
union objective, it is easy to see that the union problem becomes identical to the planner
problem, thus leading to efficient hiring: θt = θp , ∀t ≥ 0. The solution therefore involves a


                                                    15
constant and efficient market tightness over time, as well as constant wages that exhibit a
tenure premium: wtn = z − κ/q(θp ) and wte = z ∀t ≥ 0.
    Thus, one can conclude that in the infinite horizon setting as well, the union may be able
to attain efficient hiring through a wage tenure premium. A potential concern is that the
implied wages of new workers may be quite low—they need to be low enough to allow firms
to make the entire present value of profits associated with efficient hiring in the first period
of the match. In the presence of a binding lower bound on the wages of junior workers,
the union wage policy will still involve a tenure premium, but the market tightness will be
distorted down.
    In sum, wage solidarity comes at a cost in this economy, suggesting a role for tenure
premia in union wages as a means to avoid the resulting distortions in hiring. And yet, the
empirical evidence does not point to clearly greater returns to tenure in unionized settings.
Is this simply because of the measurement problems involved in the empirical work? Or
are the distortions perhaps too insignificant in magnitude to warrant giving up (the benefits
underlying) wage solidarity? To shed light on this question, the next section turns to a
quantitative illustration looking at the impact of the egalitarian union on labor market
outcomes.


4      Quantitative illustration
The presence of an egalitarian union affects the levels and dynamics of wages, unemployment,
and output in the economy. This section illustrates these effects, in the context of an extended
model.


4.1     Extended model
For added realism, the model is first extended to incorporate partial unionization of the labor
market and multiperiod union contracting. To this end, it is assumed that: i) a fraction α of
workers are covered by union wages, with a worker’s union status fixed over time, while the
rest bargain their wages individually, and ii) instead of the union recontracting each period,
it recontracts in any given period with probability λ, implying that contracts are expected
to last 1/λ periods.15
   For the nonunion workers in the labor market, one can write standard Bellman equations,
which can then be used to derive the following equation for the match surplus:

                              St = z − b + β(1 − δ)(1 − µ(θt+1 )γ)St+1 .                                (30)

The equation uses the fact that nonunion workers bargain their wages individually, such
that the bargaining outcome divides the match surplus according to the workers’ bargaining
  15
    Search is modeled as undirected, an assumption that plays a key role in the discussion in Section 4.4. If
the search were fully directed, based on union status, the market would separate into two independent parts:
one that follows the full unionization model and one following the standard Mortensen-Pissarides model.


                                                     16
power γ: Workers get γSt and firms (1 −γ)St .16 Note that the surplus equation (30) depends
on the union’s actions only through the market tightness.
   The firms’ zero-profit condition can then be written to reflect the presence of both union
and nonunion workers in the labor market as
                                      z
                   κ = q(θt )[α(              − Wt ) + (1 − α)(1 − γ)St ].               (31)
                                 1 − β(1 − δ)

As the right-hand side states, firms expect a present value of profit of (1 − γ)St on the 1 − α
nonunion workers, and a present value of profit of z/(1 − β(1 − δ)) − Wt on the α union
workers. The latter hinges on the expected present
                                              P        value of union wages paid out over the
course of an employment relationship: Wt = ∞     s=0 β s
                                                         (1 − δ)s wt+s .
   One can then think about how union wages {wt }∞    t=0 are determined, by returning to the
union objective in equation (3). As before, one can rewrite this objective using the zero-profit
condition (31), arriving at the expression
∞
X                                                                             κ 1−α
       β t [(nt + µ(θt )(1 − nt ))z + (1 − µ(θt ))(1 − nt )b − θt (1 − nt )     +   (1 − γ)µ(θt )(1 − nt )St ]
t=0
                                                                              α   α
     n0 κ     1−α
−           +     (1 − γ)n0 S0 .                                                                        (32)
    αq(θ0 )    α

Comparing this expression with the corresponding expression (17) earlier, note that with
partial unionization, the nonunion surpluses enter into the union objective because of their
impact on vacancy creation.
    The next step would be to implement multiperiod contracting in this setting, aiming
for a recursive representation that could be used to solve the model, as before. Note that
as far as union wages are concerned, the object of interest for both the union and the
firms is the expected present value of wages paid out over the course of an employment
relationship, Wt . This present value determines the profitability of hiring union workers,
governing vacancy creation through equation (31). In this sense, the allocative measure of
wages here is Wt . What one would like to do, then, is to specify that in periods when the
union does not recontract, Wt is held fixed, while in periods when the union does recontract,
Wt is reoptimized. With full unionization, this would imply that in periods when the union
does not recontract, θt remains fixed, while in periods when the union does recontract,
θt adjusts (due to equation (31)). With partial unionization, this need not hold exactly,
because of the presence of the nonunion surpluses in the zero-profit condition. However, it
turns out to be clearly simpler to solve the partial union model under the specification that
what the union holds fixed in nonrecontracting periods is θt directly.17 This also appears
a reasonable approximation to holding Wt fixed, in the sense that changes in Wt during
nonrecontracting periods appear minor compared with the adjustments upon recontracting.
  16
    See online appendix, Section C, for a derivation.
  17
    Solving the partial union model with Wt held fixed leads to systems of nonlinear equations for the
nonunion surpluses and their derivatives, while the current specification instead yields linear equations
allowing analytical solutions, which is attractive from the point of view of minimizing error associated with
numerical complexity.

                                                      17
With these concerns in mind, it is assumed in what follows that what is held fixed in periods
when the union does not recontract is θt .18
    To arrive at a recursive representation characterizing labor market outcomes, then, con-
sider first recursive versions of the equations for the nonunion surpluses. Based on equation
(30), in periods when the union recontracts, the surplus satisfies:

              S r (n) = z − b + β(1 − δ)[λ(1 − µ(Θ(N(n, Θ(n))))γ)S r (N(n, Θ(n)))
                                           + (1 − λ)(1 − µ(Θ(n))γ)S f (N(n, Θ(n)), Θ(n))],   (33)

while in periods when the union does not recontract, respectively:

                   S f (n, θ) = z − b + β(1 − δ)[λ(1 − µ(Θ(N(n, θ)))γ)S r (N(n, θ))
                                                   + (1 − λ)(1 − µ(θ)γ)S f (N(n, θ), θ)].    (34)

Note that in periods when the union does not recontract, the market tightness is held fixed,
while in periods when the union does recontract, the tightness is determined via the equi-
librium function Θ(n). Union decision-making in recontracting periods then determines the
function Θ(n) as the solution to the problem:
                                                                                   κ   nκ
 Θ(n) ≡ arg max(n + µ(θ)(1 − n))z + (1 − µ(θ))(1 − n)b − θ(1 − n)                    −
                    θ                                                              α αq(θ)
              1−α                                                                        
          +       (1 − γ)(n + µ(θ)(1 − n))S r (n) + βλV r N(n, θ) + β(1 − λ)V f N(n, θ), θ ,
               α
                                                                                         (35)
where the union value satisfies
                                                                                      κ
V r (n) = (n + µ(Θ(n))(1 − n))z + (1 − µ(Θ(n)))(1 − n)b − Θ(n)(1 − n)
                                                                                      α
              1−α                                                                               
         +        (1 − γ)µ(Θ(n))(1 − n)S r (n) + βλV r N(n, Θ(n)) + β(1 − λ)V f N(n, Θ(n)), Θ(n)
               α
                                                                                       (36)
in recontracting periods, and
                                                                              κ
  V f (n, θ) = (n + µ(θ)(1 − n))z + (1 − µ(θ))(1 − n)b − θ(1 − n)
                                                                              α
                   1−α                                                                      
               +       (1 − γ)µ(θ)(1 − n)S f (n, θ) + βλV r N(n, θ) + β(1 − λ)V f N(n, θ), θ
                    α
                                                                                           (37)

in nonrecontracting periods. These equations follow from the union objective (32) as before.
    The next section proceeds to calibrating and illustrating the impact of unions in the
context of this model. The focus will, for the most part, be on steady states: A level of
initial matches n and a corresponding tightness θ = Θ(n), such that N(n, θ) = n. With
this level of initial matches, if the union recontracts today, it will keep the market tightness
unchanged, leading to the same level of initial matches next period.
 18
      This distinction matters only for Section 4.4, which allows partial union coverage.

                                                      18
4.2     Calibration and solution approach
The model is parameterized such that the efficient outcome corresponds to the U.S. labor
market, to then study how introducing the union changes outcomes in this market.19 The
period length is set to one month, and the discount rate to correspond to a 5 percent
annual rate of return, with β = 1.05−12 . Labor productivity for the market technology is
normalized to z = 1 and for the home technology set at b = 0.4.20 The matching function
is m(v, u) = µ0 vu/(v + u), as in den Haan, Ramey, and Watson (2000). The remaining
parameters δ, κ, and µ0 , are pinned down as follows: First, attaining an average duration
of employment of 2.5 years requires a separation rate of δ = 0.033. Second, to be consistent
with a steady-state unemployment rate of 5 percent, the average job-finding rate must be
µ(θ) = 0.388. Finally, to also match the slope of the Beveridge curve, documented by Shimer
(2007) to equal −1, this requires setting µ0 = 0.652 and a steady-state value of θ = 1.47.
The latter can be achieved by setting κ = 0.109.
    The basic Mortensen-Pissarides model is straightforward to solve, as is the planner prob-
lem previously discussed. The union problem without commitment is clearly more chal-
lenging, however. Issues to bear in mind include the fact that there are few results on the
existence of equilibrium for differentiable Markov perfect equilibria; that these equilibria
may not be unique and that nondifferentiable equilibria may exist as well.21 In solving for a
differentiable equilibrium, a natural starting point would be the generalized Euler equation
of the problem. Here, the complexity of the system (33–37) does not allow us to derive such
an equation explicitly, but it turns out that one can proceed along the same lines without
this formal step. The focus will be on steady states; the solution method adopted follows
the approach of Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith (2002), which looks for a Taylor expansion ap-
proximation to the unknown function Θ(n) around the steady state. The approach involves
solving successively larger systems of equations based on the first-order condition (and suc-
cessive derivatives of the first-order condition) of problem (35), looking for convergence in
the coefficients of the polynomial as the order increases. A description of how the approach is
implemented here can be found in the online appendix, Section D. The next sections describe
the results.


4.3     Level effects
This section begins by looking at the impact that introducing the union has on the levels
of wages, unemployment, and output, relative to the efficient outcome, in the case of full
coverage. To that end, recall from the theory that the duration of union contracts should
  19
     For consistency, the parameterization strategy follows that described in Shimer (2005), aside from adopt-
ing a matching function which is better suited for a discrete time model. He calibrates a decentralized labor
market to the U.S. labor market, but the calibration strategy implies that the equilibrium outcome coincides
with the socially optimal one.
  20
     The results for levels do not change substantially if one raises this to b = 0.75.
  21
     For examples where no differentiable equilibria exist but a nondifferentiable equilibrium does, see Krusell,
Martin, and Rios-Rull (2005), and for examples with a continuum of nondifferentiable equilibria along with
one or more differentiable ones, see Krusell and Smith (2003); Phelps and Pollak (1968) focus on differentiable
equilibria and find multiplicity as well.


                                                       19
                         Wages                     Unemployment                           Output
            1                               0.2                              1


           0.8                                                              0.8
                                           0.15

           0.6                                                              0.6
                                            0.1
           0.4                                                              0.4

                                           0.05
           0.2                                                              0.2
                                                                                                    Union
                                                                                                    Efficient

            0                                0                               0
             10     20           30   40      10     20        30      40     10     20            30           40
                  Duration (months)                Duration (months)               Duration (months)


                                       Figure 2: Level effect of union
Notes: The figure plots steady-state wages, unemployment, and output, as a function of the expected
duration of a union contract 1/λ.


be an important determinant of the magnitude of the distortions associated with the union.
Available evidence seems to point to one to three years as the relevant range of union contract
durations, and accordingly λ is set to 1/24, implying an expected duration of union contracts
of two years.22 With this duration of union contracts, introducing the union into the labor
market is found to raise wages by 11 percent, leading to an increase in unemployment from
5 to 16 percent, and a reduction in output of 12 percent, relative to efficient outcomes. As
expected, wages and unemployment thus rise, leading to lower output, but the calculation
reveals the quantitative impact to be substantial as well.
    To see how the effects depend on contract duration, Figure 2 plots the steady-state levels
of wages, unemployment, and output as a function of the expected duration, 1/λ. The bench-
mark in the figure—the efficient outcome—is naturally independent of λ. The figure shows
that the impact of the union diminishes as contract duration increases, as one would expect.
But the figure also reveals that for the relevant range of contract durations this effect turns
out to be rather weak. Even though there is a visible decrease in unemployment as contract
duration increases from one to three years, the magnitude of this decrease is overshadowed
by the overall level effect associated with the union. Note that there is no reason to expect
the union outcome to converge with the efficient one as the duration of contracts approaches
infinity: Recall that in the commitment union problem analyzed in Section 3.3, the union
distorts θ down in the initial period but attains the efficient θ thereafter. This multiperiod
contracting specification, on the other hand, constrains θ to remain fixed between recon-
tracting periods. Thus, it would seem natural for the union to set this fixed tightness above
the efficient level when recontracting.
       Finally, recall that the decentralized outcome in the Mortensen-Pissarides model is effi-
  22
    For example, for the U.S., Taylor (1983) considers one to three years as the relevant range of union
contracts, Card (1990) documents an average contract duration of 26 months, and Rich and Tracy (2004)
a median duration of 36 months. Fregert and Jonung (2006) document similar durations for Sweden, and
Avouyi-Dovi, Fougere, and Gautier (2013) an average duration of just under a year for France.



                                                          20
cient only if the private bargaining power of workers coincides with the one implementing
efficient allocations (Hosios 1990). Unemployment can thus exceed the efficient level also in
the decentralized equilibrium, if workers are strong bargainers. The next section returns to
this issue, in considering the case of partial union coverage.


4.4    Union coverage
In a classic paper, Calmfors and Driffill (1988) reconsider the impact of unions on the level
of economic activity. It has long been recognized that unions, through their monopoly power
in the labor market, tend to raise wages above their competitive levels. This suggests that
a greater union presence in the labor market has a primarily negative impact on economic
activity, as high union wages lead to higher unemployment. Calmfors and Driffill (1988)
propose an additional factor for understanding the cross-country evidence on unions: They
argue that the degree of coordination in union bargaining works to counteract the negative
effects of monopoly power. A related hump-shaped relationship emerges in our model as
well, when the coverage of union wages across the workforce is varied.
    Two competing forces come to play in the model as union coverage varies: First of all,
because union wages tend to exceed nonunion wages, greater union coverage tends to lead
to higher unemployment here as well. But greater union coverage also increases the extent
to which the union takes into account the effects of its wage demands on hiring, borne by
union and nonunion workers alike, leading to moderation in union wage setting. As union
coverage increases, the second effect eventually takes over the first, leading to a hump-shaped
relationship between union coverage and unemployment.
    Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between union coverage and unemployment in the
model, contrasting two cases that differ in the bargaining power of the nonunion workers
in their private wage bargains. In the first, nonunion workers are strong bargainers, with
γ = 0.8. The top panels of Figure 3 plot the steady-state levels of wages and unemployment
in this case. The plot on the left first shows how union and nonunion wages vary with
union coverage. As union coverage falls, union wages rise until they equal productivity
and cannot rise further. In the meantime, the wages of nonunion workers remain mostly
unaffected, although they reflect changes in the outside options of these workers, which are
worse at intermediate levels of coverage. What enters into firms’ profits is the weighted
average of these wages across the pool of unemployed shown in the middle. Averaging
across workers yields a hump-shaped relationship between union coverage and the average
wage, which further gives rise to the hump-shaped relationship between union coverage and
unemployment shown on the right.
   Note that unemployment well exceeds the efficient level of 5 percent here even without
the union because of the high private bargaining power of workers, and that introducing
the union can improve outcomes over that alternative, if the coverage is high enough. One
could also ask what level of union coverage would be expected to emerge if workers could
choose (in the beginning of time) whether to be union or nonunion. In Figure 3, an interior
union coverage level exists where workers would be indifferent between being union versus
nonunion in terms of the wages being equal. At that coverage level, unemployment is lower

                                              21
                            Nonunion workers strong bargainers
                          Wages                                  Average wage                  Unemployment
              1.02                                    0.92                           0.4
                                     Union
                1                    Non-union
                                                                                    0.35
                                                     0.915
              0.98

                                                                                     0.3
              0.96
                                                      0.91
              0.94
                                                                                    0.25

              0.92
                                                     0.905
                                                                                     0.2
               0.9

              0.88                                     0.9                          0.15
                     0       0.5                 1           0       0.5        1          0        0.5       1
                             α                                        α                             α

                              Nonunion workers weak bargainers
                          Wages                                  Average wage                  Unemployment
              1.05                                    0.92                          0.25


                1                                      0.9
                                                                                     0.2
              0.95                                    0.88


               0.9       Union                        0.86                          0.15
                         Non-union

              0.85                                    0.84
                                                                                     0.1
               0.8                                    0.82


              0.75                                     0.8                          0.05
                     0       0.5                 1           0       0.5        1          0       0.5        1
                             α                                        α                             α


                                        Figure 3: Role of unionization rate
Notes: The figure plots union and nonunion wages, the average wage, and unemployment as a function of
union coverage α. The nonunion bargaining power is γ = 0.8 in the top panel, and γ = 0.6 in the bottom
panel.


than it would be if unions were outlawed completely but higher than with universal coverage
of union wages.
    To see how the picture changes when workers are weaker bargainers, the bottom panels
of Figure 3 consider the case in which the worker’s bargaining power yields efficient outcomes
(here γ = 0.6). The figure is qualitatively similar, but in this case, unemployment is always
higher in the unionized labor market than it would be without the union. Union wages also
always exceed nonunion wages and by a clear margin. Given a choice, all workers would
prefer to be in the union, but it would be welfare improving to outlaw the union instead.


4.5     Shock propagation
An important reason that macroeconomists have been interested in labor unions is the notion
that unions create rigidity in wages, affecting how the economy responds to shocks (see, e.g.,
Blanchard and Fischer 1989, pp. 438–455). This section illustrates the impact of unions on
shock propagation, in the context of our model with full unionization.


                                                                   22
                       W                     Unemployment                   Employment
                                         0
             1
                                                                    4
                                       -10
       %




                                   %




                                                                %
           0.5                                                      2
                                       -20
             0                                                      0
                 0     10                    0       10                 0       10

                       θ                         Vacancies                    Output
                                                                    6
            40                          40
                                                                    4
        %




                                    %




                                                                %
            20                          20                                             Union
                                                                    2
                                                                                       Efficient
                                                                                       Fixed Wage
             0                           0                          0
                 0     10                    0       10                 0       10
                     Months                       Months                      Months

                                    Figure 4: Impulse responses
Notes: The figure plots the responses of the present value of wages, market tightness, unemployment,
vacancies, employment, and output to a 1 percent unanticipated permanent increase in productivity. The
figure shows the response for the economy with full coverage of union wages with two-year contracts, the
efficient response, and the response with fully fixed wages. What is plotted are expected values in each
period after the increase in productivity, across possible realizations of the recontracting shock.


     The focus is on the effects of a one-time, unanticipated, permanent increase in labor
productivity. Having first solved for the steady state before the shock, one can then look
at how the transition to higher productivity plays out when the expected duration of wage
contracts is two years. Figure 4 plots the responses, comparing the unionized labor market
(solid line) with the efficient (dashed line), as well as fully fixed wages (dotted line). In the
efficient response, the wage and market tightness adjust immediately to their new steady-
state levels. With fixed wages, the market tightness also adjusts immediately to its new
steady-state level, although in this case, larger than what is efficient. The union response
lies between these two extremes but also differs in exhibiting significant inertia in wages
because of the multiperiod union contracting.
     In terms of the magnitudes of these responses, the efficient response reflects a sizable
on-impact response of the wage to the shock, which leads to small responses in quantities.
This is the unemployment volatility puzzle discussed by Shimer (2005): The magnitude of
these responses is an order of magnitude lower than what would be needed to be consistent
with business cycle fluctuations in the data. If wages are fixed in response to the shock,
quantities respond substantially more strongly, as highlighted by Hall (2005), allowing the
model to match the magnitude of fluctuations observed. The stickiness in union wages,
with two-year contracting, increases the volatility of quantities substantially relative to the
efficient responses.


                                                    23
    Hidden behind the stickiness in wages associated with multiperiod contracting, there is
also a mechanism generating endogenous real wage rigidity in the model: The wage increase
in response to the increase in productivity takes some time to play out, as the union distortion
which works to raise wages becomes stronger as matches accumulate over time after the
shock. In Figure 4, the quantitative impact of this endogenous rigidity is overwhelmed by
that of the stickiness associated with multiperiod contracting, however.


5    Conclusions
A holdup problem emerges when an egalitarian union sets wages in a frictional labor mar-
ket. After demonstrating the issue in a theoretical setting, this paper studies the severity
of the holdup problem quantitatively in an extended model with partial union coverage and
multiperiod union contracting. It is shown to raise wages and unemployment significantly
above their efficient levels. The relationship between union coverage and unemployment is
hump-shaped in the model, with intermediate levels of coverage featuring higher unemploy-
ment than either very low or very high coverage, and the bargaining power of nonunion
workers playing a key role in determining which of the two extremes is closer to efficient
allocations. Multi-period union contracts generate significant stickiness in the response of
wages to shocks. Finally, the theory implies a rationale for a tenure premium in union wages,
as a means of avoiding the distortions associated with holdup.
    The analysis is conducted in a stylized setting, to isolate key forces at play, but many
extensions would seem natural, such as incorporating market power/decreasing returns, phys-
ical capital, worker heterogeneity, an insider-outsider wedge, as well as thinking more about
the decisions of workers to join versus leave the union in a dynamic setting.


References
Abraham, K. G., and H. S. Farber (1988): “Returns to seniority in union and nonunion
 jobs: a new look at the evidence,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 42(1), 3–19.
Acemoglu, D., and J.-S. Pischke (1999): “The Structure of Wages and Investment in
 General Training,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 539–572.
Acikgoz, O., and B. Kaymak (2014): “The Rising Skill Premium and Deunionization in
 the United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 63, 37–50.
Altonji, J., and N. Williams (2005): “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassess-
  ment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58, 370–97.
Alvarez, F., and R. Shimer (2011):             “Unions and Unemployment,” Unpublished
  manuscript, University of Chicago.
Alvarez, F., and M. Veracierto (2000): “Labor-Market Policies in an Equilibrium
  Search Model,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 265–316.

                                              24
Avouyi-Dovi, S., D. Fougere, and E. Gautier (2013): “Wage Rigidity, Collective
  Bargaining, and the Minimum Wage: Evidence from French Agreement Data,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 94(4), 1337–51.

Blanchard, O., and S. Fischer (1989): Lectures on Macroeconomics. The MIT Press,
  Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Blanchflower, D. G., and A. Bryson (2003): “Changes over Time in Union Relative
  Wage Effects in the U.K. and the U.S. Revisited,” in International Handbook of Trade
  Unions, ed. by J. T. Addison, and C. Schnabel, chap. 7, pp. 197–245. Edward Elgar
  Publishing.

Boeri, T., and M. C. Burda (2009): “Preferences for Collective versus Individualised
 Wage Setting,” Economic Journal, 119, 1440–1463.

Buchinsky, M., D. Fougre, F. Kramarz, and R. Tchernis (2010): “Interfirm Mo-
 bility, Wages and the Returns to Seniority and Experience in the United States,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 77(3), 972–1001.

Calmfors, L., and J. Driffill (1988): “Bargaining structure, corporatism and macroe-
 conomic performance,” Economic Policy, 88, 13–61.

Card, D. (1990): “Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment Determination in
 Union Contracts,” American Economic Review, 80(4), 669–88.

Card, D., T. Lemieux, and C. Riddell (2003): “Unions and the Wage Structure,” in
 International Handbook of Trade Unions, ed. by J. T. Addison, and C. Schnabel, chap. 8,
 pp. 246–292. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Delacroix, A. (2006): “A multisectorial matching model of unions,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 53, 573–596.

den Haan, W. J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000): “Job Destruction and Propagation
  of Shocks,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 482–498.

DiNardo, J., and D. S. Lee (2004): “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private
  Sector Employers: 1984–2001,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1383–1441.

Ebell, M., and C. Haefke (2006): “Product Market Regulation and Endogenous Union
 Formation,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2222.

Fregert, K., and L. Jonung (2006): “Policy Rule Evaluation by Contract-Makers: 100
  Years of Wage Contract Length in Sweden,” European Comission Economic Papers.

Garibaldi, P., and G. Violante (2005): “Employment Effects of Severance Payments
 with Wage Rigidities,” Economic Journal, 115, 799–832.

Hall, R. E. (2005): “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 95(1), 50–65.

                                          25
Hosios, A. (1990): “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and
 Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 279–298.

Krusell, P., B. Kuruscu, and A. Smith (2002): “Equilibrium Welfare and Government
 Policy with Quasi-Geometric Discounting,” Journal of Economic Theory, 105, 42–72.

Krusell, P., F. Martin, and V. Rios-Rull (2005): “Time Consistent Debt,” Unpub-
 lished manuscript, University of Rochester.

Krusell, P., and A. Smith (2003): “Consumption-Savings Decisions with Quasi-
 Geometric Discounting,” Econometrica, 71, 365–375.

Lewis, H. G. (1986): “Union Relative Wage Effects,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed.
  by O. Ashenfelter, and R. Layard, chap. 20, pp. 1140–81. Elsevier.

Lockwood, B., and A. Manning (1989): “Wage-Employment Bargaining with Employ-
  ment Adjustment Costs,” Economic Journal, 99, 1143–58.

Lucas, Jr, R., and E. C. Prescott (1974): “Equilibrium search and unemployment,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 7, 188–209.

Modesto, L., and J. P. Thomas (2001): “An analysis of labor adjustment costs in
 unionized economies,” Labour Economics, 8, 475–501.

Nickell, S., and R. Layard (1999): “Labor Market Institutions and Economic Perfor-
  mance,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 3,
  chap. 46, pp. 3029–84. Elsevier.

Phelps, E., and R. Pollak (1968): “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
 Equilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 35, 185–199.

Pissarides, C. (1985): “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies,
  and Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 75(4), 676–690.

        (1986): “Trade Unions and the Efficiency of the Natural Rate of Unemployment,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 4(4), 582–595.

Rich, R., and J. Tracy (2004): “Uncertainty and Labor Contract Durations,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 270–87.

Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
  American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.

        (2007): “Mismatch,” American Economic Review, 97(4), 1074–1101.

Taschereau-Dumouchel, M. (2011): “The Union Threat,” Unpublished manuscript,
  Princeton University.

Taylor, J. B. (1983): “Union Wage Settlements During a Disinflation,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 73(5), 981–993.

                                          26
Topel, R. (1991): “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages,” Journal of Political Economy,
 99(1), 145–176.

Visser, J. (2003): “Unions and Unionism Around the World,” in International Handbook
  of Trade Unions, ed. by J. T. Addison, and C. Schnabel, chap. 11, pp. 366–413. Edward
  Elgar Publishing.

Visser, J., S. Hayter, and R. Gammarano (2015): “Trends in collective bargaining
  coverage: stability, erosion or decline?,” ILO: Labour Relations and Collective Bargaining
  Issues Brief No. 1.




                                            27
