                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  TARGET REVALUATION AFTER FAILED TAKEOVER ATTEMPTS – CASH VERSUS
                               STOCK

                                         Ulrike Malmendier
                                        Marcus Matthias Opp
                                            Farzad Saidi

                                        Working Paper 18211
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18211


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




Previously circulated as "Cash is King - Revaluation of Targets after Merger Bids." This paper benefited
significantly from the comments of an anonymous referee and discussions by Nihat Aktas, Audra Boone,
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf and Pavel Savor, as well as the detailed input from Javed Ahmed, Dirk Jenter,
and Marlena Lee. We also acknowledge helpful comments by Yakov Amihud, Malcolm Baker, Xavier
Gabaix, Boyan Jovanovic, Steven Kaplan, Alessandro Lizzeri, Atif Mian, Adair Morse, Stewart Myers,
Terrance Odean, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Michael Weber, Jeffrey Wurgler, David Yermack,
as well as seminar participants at Berkeley, Princeton, LSE, NYU Stern, Ohio State, Harvard, MIT
Sloan, ESMT Berlin, Columbia GSB, University of Houston, the Kellogg Junior Finance conference,
the 2011 NBER Summer Institute, the 2012 EFA Meeting, and the 2012 WFA Meeting. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ulrike Malmendier, Marcus Matthias Opp, and Farzad Saidi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Target Revaluation after Failed Takeover Attempts – Cash versus Stock
Ulrike Malmendier, Marcus Matthias Opp, and Farzad Saidi
NBER Working Paper No. 18211
July 2012, Revised April 2015
JEL No. G14,G34,D03,D82

                                                ABSTRACT

Cash- and stock-financed takeover bids induce strikingly different target revaluations. We exploit
detailed data on unsuccessful takeover bids between 1980 and 2008, and show that targets of cash
offers are revalued on average by +15% after deal failure, whereas stock targets return to their pre-announcement
levels. The differences in revaluation do not revert over longer horizons. We find no evidence that
future takeover activities or operational changes explain these differences. While the targets of failed
cash and stock offers are both more likely to be acquired over the following 8 years than matched
control firms, there are no differences between cash and stock targets, neither in the timing nor in the
value of future offers. Similarly, we cannot detect differential operational policies following the failed
bid. Our results are most consistent with cash bids revealing prior undervaluation of the target. We
reconcile our findings with the opposite conclusion in earlier literature (Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983)
by identifying a "look-ahead" bias built into their sample construction.


Ulrike Malmendier                                       Farzad Saidi
Department of Economics                                 Cambridge Judge Business School
549 Evans Hall # 3880                                   Trumpington Street
University of California, Berkeley                      Cambridge CB2 1AG
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                 United Kingdom
and NBER                                                fs412@cam.ac.uk
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Marcus Matthias Opp
UC Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
mopp@haas.berkeley.edu
1.       Introduction

    Takeovers are among the largest and most disruptive events in a corporation’s life-
time. The proper assessment of their value implications has been of foremost interest to
policymakers and academic researchers alike. One set of stylized facts the literature has
been wrestling to explain is the large difference in returns of cash- and stock-financed
takeovers, as well as the different motives of acquirers for choosing one type of payment
over the other (see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 2003; Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan,
2004; Fishman, 1989). Announcement returns of cash deals are consistently found to be
higher than those of stock deals, both in the short run (Huang and Walkling, 1987) and
in the long run (Loughran and Vijh, 1997), and not only for the acquirer but also for the
target (Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford, 2001).1
    The correct interpretation of the return differences between cash and stock bids de-
pends on the underlying information the market responds to (see, for instance, Bradley,
Desai, and Kim, 1983). A bid might reveal information about the value implications
of the takeover, e.g., match-specific synergies reaped by the acquirer or the size of the
premium paid to target shareholders. A bid might also reveal information about value
implications that are independent of the specific takeover, e.g., information about the
parties’ stand-alone values or about the target firm’s general attractiveness as a takeover
target. As Bhagat, Dong, Hirshleifer, and Noah (2005) argue, disentangling these non-
exclusive sources is a first-order building block in estimating the real value created by
mergers and acquisitions.
    Our paper contributes to this debate by identifying and quantifying the economic rel-
evance of the different channels in the context of failed takeover attempts. The difference
in valuations before bid announcement and after bid failure allows us to separate out
the value implications of the takeover itself, and to estimate the extent to which firms
are revalued in response to the bid, independently of the completion of the takeover.
Focusing on the target, we then go one step further, and distinguish between revaluation
due to expected future takeover activity (i.e., the target firm’s general attractiveness as
a takeover target) and revaluation of the target’s stand-alone value.
   For our empirical analysis, we collect a detailed data set on unsuccessful merger bids
and tender offers in the U.S. between 1980 and 2008, including hand-collected information
about the failure reasons. We show that, on average, targets of cash offers are revalued
by +15%, but there is no revaluation of stock targets.2 Specifically, after an initial
announcement effect (including the 25-trading-day run-up) of +25% for cash targets
and +15% for stock targets,3 the value of the average cash target remains at +15%

     1
     See also the overview paper by Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008).
     2
     We also show that, consistent with previous studies, stock acquirers trade on average at significantly
lower prices post failure (−17.6%), while cash acquirers remain at their pre-announcement level. See
Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005) and Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson, and Teoh (2006)
for similar findings on acquirers. Savor and Lu (2009) compare unsuccessful and successful bids, and
find that unsuccessful stock acquirers perform worse.
   3
     The estimates are almost identical to those found by Huang and Walkling (1987) in their sample

                                                    1
cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) at the time of deal failure, relative to the pre-
announcement level, while the CAR of stock targets is statistically insignificant (with a
slightly negative point estimate). These results hold controlling for a host of deal- and
firm-level characteristics, including target size, relative deal size, offer premium, hostility,
and deal form (tender offer versus merger). We also show that this difference persists in
the long run. Over the next five years after failure of the bid, targets of cash and stock
offers do not exhibit abnormal stock-market performance.
   Since deal failure is not exogenous, we cannot easily generalize our findings beyond
the sample of failed deals. The issue is not that deals that ultimately fail are different
from deals that do not fail; common deal-failure bias would not affect the differential
revaluation of cash and stock targets.4 Instead, the concern is a more subtle selection
bias, namely that selection into bid failure differs between cash and stock targets.
    We address the concern of differential sample-selection bias following the approach of
Savor and Lu (2009). We classify failure reasons for failed deals into categories such as
regulatory intervention, negative shocks to the bidder, or uncovering of new information
about the target post announcement of the bid. Based on our hand-collected news-search
analysis and detailed categorization of failure reasons, we replicate our analysis for each
of the 12 identified failure categories. We find that the cash-stock revaluation difference
for targets is positive in every category other than failure due to “market-wide shocks,”
although the statistical significance naturally varies given the small subsamples.
    Such categorization involves an inevitable amount of judgment, and none of the failure
categories can be definitely established as exogenous to target value as convincingly as in
a randomized experiment. However, endogeneity concerns (with respect to target value)
should be less relevant for deals that failed due to regulatory intervention or negative
shocks to the bidder compared to bids that failed because of negative shocks to the target,
such as the uncovering of accounting fraud in the due-diligence process. Based on the
extent of such endogeneity concerns, we then aggregate deal-failure categories into larger
subsamples. Our results are robust, regardless of variations in how exactly we form these
subsamples.
    To investigate the source of revaluation, we first test whether future takeover bids
explain our findings. Do targets of (failed) cash bids receive significantly more or signifi-
cantly higher future bids than stock targets? For each target of a failed deal, we measure
the time from the date of deal failure until the arrival of a future successful offer (or the
censoring event determined by the data sample). Employing hazard-rate models, we find
that both cash and stock targets are significantly more likely to be targeted in subsequent
offers, compared to a sample of matched control firms. For example, after 5 years, 50%
of the targets with failed bids have received a successful bid, compared to 20% in the

of successful and unsuccessful deals, +29.3% for cash and +14.4% for stock deals, suggesting that the
market assesses (eventually) failed deals to be quite similar ex ante.
   4
     If, hypothetically, revaluations were lower in failed than in completed transactions by a common
percentage for both cash and stock deals, the revaluation difference between cash and stock deals in the
sample of failed bids would be representative of that in the full sample.


                                                   2
control group. The abnormally high subsequent takeover activity persists until year 8
after deal failure. However, comparing targets of unsuccessful cash and stock bids with
each other, we do not detect any differences in frequency. Similarly, we do not detect any
differences in future takeover premia in the subsample of targets that receive a successful
follow-up bid, though the statistical power of the latter analysis is low.
    Another plausible explanation is that bids induce value-increasing operational-policy
changes. This catalyst channel could explain our results if targets of failed cash bids re-
sponded more than targets of failed stock bids. However, employing operational outcome
variables used by Safieddine and Titman (1999), we do not find any robust evidence for
differential post-failure policies.
    In a nutshell, our paper, first, documents significant differential revaluation of cash
and stock targets in failed takeover bids. By construction, such revaluation is independent
of the value created by the intended takeover. Second, the differential revaluation is
neither explained by future takeovers nor by common proxies of operational change. Our
evidence is most consistent with a differential reassessment of cash and stock targets, i.e.,
a pure informational channel. At the same time, our results do not indicate the absence of
synergies or operational improvements as a result of takeover bids. Instead, our empirical
approach of comparing cash and stock targets of failed bids is specifically designed to
isolate information effects: we exploit that cash and stock targets are similar in that they
are both exposed to a failed takeover, allowing us to difference out any associated real
effects while identifying the differential information content embedded in the medium of
exchange. Thus, our empirical results should be interpreted as ruling in the possibility
of significant information effects, which contrasts with the previous literature.

Contribution to literature. Our paper relates to an earlier literature on mergers and
acquisitions exploiting bid failure. Dodd and Ruback (1977) document a large revalu-
ation of targets after failed tender offers. Dodd (1980) compares revaluations of target
firms that vetoed the bid to those that did not. He finds that only target firms whose
management opposed the bid are positively revalued. Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983)
analyze the role of future bids. They compare target firms that are taken over within five
years following the initial (failed) tender offer to firms that are not. They report that
firms without a subsequent takeover offer exhibit negative abnormal returns after deal
failure, and return to pre-offer valuations: the CAR point estimate from 1 month prior
to announcement of the original bid until 5 years after the announcement is virtually
zero, namely −1.07%. They conclude that “the gains to the stockholders of unsuccessful
targets stem from the anticipation of a future successful acquisition and not simply from
the revelation of new information regarding the ‘true’ value of the target resources.”
    The conclusion of this seminal paper has remained the presumed status quo in the lit-
erature (see Davidson, Dutia, and Cheng, 1989, and Fabozzi, Ferri, Fabozzi, and Tucker,
1988, for follow-up studies on merger bids and tender offers, respectively). Our findings
suggest that the evidence in these studies needs to be reinterpreted. We argue that
forward-looking sample construction biases the returns of firms without future takeover
activity downwards. The magnitude of this bias is economically significant. We show


                                             3
that matched control firms are taken over about 20% of the time over the span of 5 years.
This amount of future takeover activity should be priced in the stock-market valuation,
also in the case of actual targets prior to the announcement of the (initial) takeover offer.
Conditioning on the absence of takeover activity for 5 years after deal failure therefore
induces a negative look-ahead bias of about 20% of the typical takeover premium. Using
the average historical premium of 46.2% (cf. Panel A of Table 1), a back-of-the-envelope
calculation (ignoring discounting) suggests that the magnitude of this bias is roughly
46.2% · 0.2 ≈ 9%. Since Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983) find that targets in their sam-
ple (almost exactly) return to pre-announcement levels despite this bias, their empirical
results are consistent with a positive (offsetting) informational effect of the failed bid.
Therefore, their conclusion of ruling out information effects may not be warranted based
on their own evidence.
    The issue of forward-looking sample selection implies that the point estimate of the
long-run CAR is a (downward) biased measure of the informational effect of a bid, since
the estimation conditions on the absence of future bids. A separate, more general concern
is the precision of long-run CAR estimates, which affects all studies calculating long-run
returns: since the standard error of the CAR grows with the square root of the return
horizon (e.g., Fama, 1998), a one-time event triggering a significant short-run effect in
the range of 10 − 20% is unlikely to be detected over a 5-year horizon. Concretely, in the
sample of Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983), the standard error of the CAR estimate for
the window from 1 month before the bid until 60 months after the bid is economically
large at 15.37%.5 As a result, even after correcting the CAR estimate of −1.07% for
a “look-ahead” bias of 9%, a long-run-returns analysis would not allow us to reject the
existence of any informational effect of a takeover bid between [−22%, +38%] at the 5%
level. We conclude that the noise inherent in long-run CARs clouds the ability to make
precise quantitative assessments of the informational effect.6
    The empirical approach proposed in this paper, i.e., the comparison of cash and stock
targets at announcement and failure, addresses both issues. First, forming comparison
groups based on the medium of exchange does not introduce a look-ahead bias, as the
choice of cash versus stock is already publicly known at the time of the announcement.
Second, our main CAR estimates are orders of magnitude more precise than above-
mentioned long-run-returns calculations, since the average time from announcement to
failure is 60 days in our sample. Concerns about noise in long-run-returns calculations do
affect our additional analysis of the value of future bids due to the longer period between
the initial bid and the subsequent bid. However, in the complementary analysis of the
likelihood of a future bid, a longer observation horizon allows us to estimate hazard rates
more precisely.

   5
      The monthly standard error of 1.952% (see Table 3 in Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983) implies that
the
√    standard  error of the long-run CAR from 1 month before the bid until 60 months after the bid is
  62 · 1.952% = 15.37%.
   6
      In the Online Appendix, we calculate long-run returns in the spirit of Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983)
using our larger sample and employing a calendar-time-portfolio approach. Our results are subject to
noise concerns of similar magnitude.


                                                    4
    The results in our paper are consistent with earlier evidence by Sullivan, Jensen,
and Hudson (1994).7 Our paper is also closely related to Savor and Lu (2009), whose
classification of failure reasons we implement. Different from our approach, they use
this classification to compare successful and failed bids. In a similar spirit, Malmendier,
Moretti, and Peters (2010) assess the long-run returns to takeovers by comparing the
returns of competing bidders in contested takeovers. They find that winners of (long-
duration) bidding contests underperform losers in the long run.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our
data, and explain our sample selection. Section 3 presents all empirical results. Section
4 concludes.


2.       Data

   We collect data on failed merger bids and tender offers in the U.S. between 1980 and
2008 from the SDC Mergers and Acquisitions database, and merge the data with stock-
market and accounting data from CRSP and Compustat. To research failure reasons, we
run a news search in LexisNexis, and use the deal synopses provided by SDC.
     Our initial sample contains all bids with sufficient information for a basic analysis of
the relation between the medium of exchange and target revaluation. That is, first, we
require a valid announcement date and a valid completion or failure date within 5 to 250
trading days after the announcement.8 Second, we exclude bids with competing offers,
i.e., offers that are announced before failure of the initial bid, to avoid capturing returns
to the competing offer.9 Third, to ensure meaningful ownership changes, we drop targets
of which less than 50% was publicly traded before the takeover bid. Fourth, we require
a match in the merged CRSP/Compustat database.10 Fifth, our analysis requires infor-
mation about the medium of exchange (cash, stock, or other) and the deal premium. We
extrapolate missing deal premia by regressing the available SDC premia on transaction
values divided by the target’s market capitalization 25 days prior to the bid, and predict
out-of-sample premia based on transaction value and market capitalization (where avail-
able). Following Officer (2003), we truncate deal premia below 0 and above 200%. Sixth,
target stock-market data need to be available 25 days prior to announcement until 25
days post failure. The use of 25 days for the run-up period is motivated by the finding of
Schwert (1996) that run-ups do not occur until 21 days before the announcement. The

     7
     Sullivan, Jensen, and Hudson (1994) is based on a very small sample (36 observations, 66 without
controls), lacks essential control variables (such as hostility, offer premium, market-to-book ratio or other
valuation measures), and does not include tender offers.
   8
     We impose an upper bound on the days post announcement to avoid capturing information that is
unrelated to the offer. None of our results depend on this bound, which affects 5% of the sample.
   9
     We correct some of the competing-bid information in SDC based on our news search in LexisNexis.
As a robustness check, we have included targets with competing bids in a previous version of the paper.
The results with regard to the medium of exchange are robust.
  10
     We use the six-digit CUSIP provided in the SDC database to merge the data. When matched with
more than one CRSP CUSIP, we choose the CUSIP with the lowest 7th digit (typically 1).


                                                     5
resulting initial data set consists of 969 failed bids.
    For our main analysis, we impose three further restrictions. First, we eliminate lever-
aged buyouts (LBOs), most notably buyouts by target management, given that the in-
formation revealed naturally differs from transactions with third-party bidders, leaving
us with 809 deals.11 Second, to rule out other factors that are correlated with the choice
of cash versus stock, we require information about hostile bids, deal form (tender offer
versus merger), market value of equity, and target q ratios (market value of equity plus
assets minus the book value of equity, all divided by assets). This reduces our sample to
675 deals of which 518 deals are pure-cash or pure-stock deals (henceforth pure deals).
This constitutes our large sample. Third, we account for the fact that only public ac-
quirers have a meaningful choice between cash and stock financing and, thus, restrict our
sample to public-to-public transactions. The latter restriction also allows us to control
for the relative deal size, i.e., the ratio of the transaction value over the market value of
the acquirer’s equity, as well as the acquirer’s q ratio. The resulting data set constitutes
our main sample. It consists of 236 unsuccessful takeover bids (183 pure deals). The
corresponding sample of successful bids amounts to 1,846 observations (1,268 of which
are pure), implying that roughly one-eighth of all deals are unsuccessful. The last restric-
tion focuses our sample on larger and economically important acquisitions, similar to the
sample of Healy, Palepu, and Ruback (1992), which is also a prerequisite for obtaining
detailed information on failure reasons in our news-search analysis. However, our main
results also hold in the large sample of 675 deals.12

Summary statistics. The summary statistics for the main sample are in Panel A of
Table 1, separately for successful and unsuccessful bids. Successful and unsuccessful deals
in our sample are remarkably similar along many dimensions, including the percentage
of cash payment offered, transaction value, relative deal size, and offer premium. They
differ in the percentage of stock and other payment offered, with less stock and more
other payments in successful deals. We also see that deals take longer to be completed
than to be withdrawn or rejected. Successful bids are less likely to be hostile, and more
likely to be tender offers, than unsuccessful bids. They also feature a higher fraction of
experienced bidders. Finally, there is a marginally significant difference in the q ratio of
the target, which is higher among successful bids. There are no significant differences,
however, in the q ratio of the acquirer nor in the proportion of bids for which the acquirer’s
q is greater than the target’s q.
    Panel B of Table 1 provides more details on pure deals within the subsample of
unsuccessful bids.13 These deals make up roughly four-fifths of the main sample. There
are only few significant differences between cash and stock transactions. Cash deals are
more likely to be hostile or tender offers, and both bidders and targets have lower q
ratios. There are no significant differences in the acquirer-to-target q ratios.

  11
     We thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out. All results are robust to including LBOs.
  12
     See, in particular, Appendix-Table B.3.
  13
     For completeness, we also show the characteristics of successful pure deals in Appendix-Table B.1.



                                                  6
Failure reasons. We categorize the reasons for bid failure based on a detailed news
search in LexisNexis and on the deal synopses in SDC. Table 2 shows the main cate-
gories. The first five categories summarize cases in which the deal failed due to a negative
response of the target to the bid, or due to (typically negative) news about the target.
Specifically, “Price too low” indicates that the parties could not agree on the transac-
tion price. “Management rejection” indicates that the target management prevented the
takeover, for example by adopting poison pills, by repurchasing shares from the bidder
(greenmail), or by deliberately breaching merger covenants. “Shareholder rejection” in-
dicates rejection by shareholders, e.g., leading to an insufficient number of shares being
tendered. “Target news (public)” refers to failed deals associated with (typically bad)
public news about the target.14 “Target problems (private)” refers to failed deals where
the acquirer discovered bad information in the due-diligence process.
   The next two categories summarize reasons that likely affect both the target and the
acquirer. “Market problems” summarizes failures due to market-wide downturns, mostly
the October 1987 crash, September 11, and the subprime crisis. “Industry problems” are
industry-wide shocks such as adverse oil-price developments for oil companies.
    The next four categories are all cases in which the endogeneity of failure with respect
to target value should be less of a concern. “Regulator” refers to lack of regulatory
approval as revealed by our news search or the SDC data. For example, General Elec-
tric’s proposed acquisition of Honeywell in October 2000 was blocked by the European
Commission, in a decision that deviated from the U.S. Department of Justice’s view.
“Management terms” refers to cases where target management and acquirer manage-
ment could not agree on organizational issues, such as the nomination of a CEO of the
future company. “Bidder problems” summarizes failures due to financing problems on
the part of the bidder or other negative news about its business. “Bidder acquired” are
sudden cancelations because the bidder itself became the target of an acquisition.
   Lastly, the stand-alone category “Alliance” denotes cases in which the bidder and
the target entered into another type of cooperation, instead of the takeover. We were
unable to retrieve any information about the failure reason for 35 of 236 deals, and had
no information beyond which party canceled the takeover for another 51 deals.
    We will use this categorization of failure reasons to form two subsamples for which
endogenous selection (with respect to target value) should be less of a concern. First,
we denote as sample N the subset of deals excluding bids whose failure was clearly
endogenous to the target’s value or related to extreme market volatility, namely the
categories “Target news (public),” “Target problems (private),”“Market problems,”and
“Industry problems.” Second, we consider a more conservative sample C, which contains
only those deals for which we have identified a failure reason that is most likely unrelated
to the target’s value: regulatory intervention (“Regulator”), unexpected issues on the
side of the bidder (“Bidder problems” and “Bidder acquired”), and disagreement on

  14
     One deal in our sample failed due to positive news about the target: in August 1996, U.S. Diagnostic
Labs called off the acquisition of Alliance Imaging because of a run-up in Alliance’s stock price.


                                                   7
management terms or positions (“Management terms”).


3.     Empirical analysis

    Our empirical analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we establish the revaluation
difference between cash and stock deals – both in the raw data and in a controlled
regression framework – and show its long-run persistence. Second, we test whether the
differential revaluation of cash and stock targets can be explained by differences in future
takeover activity or differences in subsequent operational policies.

3.1.    Revaluation
   To evaluate revaluation differences in the short run, we examine target returns from
25 trading days pre announcement to 25 trading days post failure. The choice of 25
days is motivated by the findings of Schwert (1996) on pre-bid run-ups. We calculate
cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) as follows:
                                                t
                                                X
                                    CARit =           (rij − rmj ) ,                               (1)
                                                j=1


where rij and rmj denote firm i’s equity return and the CRSP value-weighted market
return at time j, respectively.15 Note that cumulative abnormal returns can be compared
across deals with different window lengths from bid to failure as long as the underlying
equilibrium asset-pricing model is correctly specified. Moreover, in our analysis, any such
model misspecification is likely a second-order concern due to the relatively short length
of the event window.16

Univariate results. Figure 1 previews our first key empirical result. It plots the
evolution of cumulative abnormal returns from 25 trading days prior to the announcement
to 25 trading days after failure, separately for pure-cash and pure-stock bids and both
for targets and for acquirers. The graph illustrates three sets of raw empirical findings.
The left part of the graph, from B − 25 to B + 1, indicates the average announcement
return to the bid, including the run-up period (as in Asquith, 1983). The right part
of the graph, from F − 1 to F + 25, captures the announcement return to bid failure.
The middle part, from B + 1 to F − 1, captures the returns during the intermediate
period between announcement and failure. Note that, for the graphical illustration of
the intermediate period, we normalize trading days (in percent) since the time from bid
announcement to failure differs across deals.17 For example, 50% refers to trading day

  15
      We follow the literature in using equity-market values. Ideally, one would use enterprise values,
i.e., include the market values of debt, but it is difficult to obtain daily market values of debt. Our
approximation mistakes are likely of second order since debt is less sensitive to information.
   16
      See, among others, Barber and Lyon (1997), Fama (1998), and Brav (2000) on the statistical
concerns affecting the calculation of long-run abnormal returns.
   17
      We linearly interpolate between trading days if needed. See Appendix A.1 for details.

                                                  8
                      40%
                                                                                 Cash Target
                                                                                 Stock Target
                      30%                                                        Cash Bidder
                                                                                 Stock Bidder


                      20%


                      10%
                CAR




                      0%


                  -10%


                  -20%


                  -30%      -20   -10                                       10      20
                                        B   20%   40%       60%   80%   F
                                              Trading Days


Fig. 1. Announcement Effects at Bid and at Failure (+/− 25 days). Cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs) from 25 trading days before announcement of the initial bid (B) to 25 trading days after
deal failure (F). The sample consists of 81 pure-cash and 102 pure-stock deals (see summary statistics
in Panel B of Table 1).


50 if a bid fails after 100 trading days, but refers to trading day 20 if a bid fails after 40
trading days. We note that the intermediate returns reflect continuous updating about
the probability of failure, in addition to changes of the valuation conditional on success
and failure, respectively.
    We observe strong cumulative announcement returns to targets of both cash and
stock offers, of 25% and 15% on average, respectively. These magnitudes are very similar
to those estimated by Huang and Walkling (1987) in their earlier sample of cash and
stock bids, which also included successful bids. Thus, the market assesses (eventually)
failed deals to be similar ex ante. At the time of deal failure, however, the value of stock
targets falls slightly below the pre-announcement level, to which it ultimately returns.
The value of cash targets, instead, remains significantly higher. The typical cash target
features cumulative abnormal returns of 15% relative to pre-announcement. Despite a
small upward trend for both cash and stock targets after deal failure, stock targets remain
on average more than 15% below cash targets.
   For completeness, the graph also plots the corresponding acquirer returns. Stock
acquirers trade on average at significantly lower prices post failure (−17.6%), whereas
the typical cash acquirer is not revalued significantly.
   Next, we test whether the 15% revaluation difference between cash and stock targets
reverts, or whether it persists over longer horizons. We estimate the long-run abnormal
performance of targets in the post-failure period over various horizons up to five years.


                                                        9
Due to the significantly longer horizon, we can no longer rely on the simple abnormal-
return calculations shown in equation (1). Instead, we adopt the calendar-time-portfolio
approach advocated by Fama (1998) (see also earlier work by Jaffe, 1974, and Mandelker,
1974) to account for the cross-sectional correlation between target firms. For each month
from January 1980 until December 2008, we form an equal-weight portfolio of all firms
that received an unsuccessful cash or stock offer in the previous m months, where m ∈
{12, 24, 36, 48, 60}. For example, medical-device company Cyberonics received a cash
offer by St. Jude Medical in April 1996 that was withdrawn in October 1996. Upon
deal failure, Cyberonics was in the 60-month cash portfolio between November 1996 and
October 2001. We then calculate the alphas of the respective cash and stock portfolios,
as well as the long-short (cash minus stock) portfolio in time-series regressions using
the CAPM as the underlying asset-pricing model.18 Since the number of firms in the
portfolios is time-varying, we efficiently estimate the coefficients by weighted least squares
(see Appendix A.2 for details). We note that one would not expect to see abnormal
post-failure returns in an efficient market, as this portfolio strategy can be implemented
without forward-looking information.
    Table 3 presents our results on long-run post-failure returns. Note that the alpha
estimate of the long-short portfolio is generally not the difference between the respective
cash and stock alphas, since a monthly observation is included only if both the cash and
the stock portfolio are non-empty. We find that, for both the main sample and the large
sample, all portfolio alphas (cash, stock, long-short) are insignificant for each horizon m.
Hence, we do not find evidence that the revaluation difference between cash and stock
targets reverses in the long run.

Multivariate-regression analysis. Next, we return to our chosen event-study window
(B − 25, F + 25), and estimate revaluation differences in a controlled regression frame-
work. In this manner, we test whether revaluation differences between cash and stock
targets reflect other observable deal- or entity-specific characteristics such as hostility,
tender offers, or relative deal size.
    The multivariate-regression analysis is presented in Table 4. As a benchmark, we
first regress the target CAR on the fraction of cash offered without further controls. This
replicates the graphical evidence, and provides robust standard errors. We estimate a
cash coefficient of 22.4% in the main sample (column 1) and 22.1% in the pure-deals
sample (not shown in the table). Both estimates are significant at the 1% level.
    In columns 2 and 3, we add control variables for deal- and entity-specific character-
istics that are correlated with the medium of exchange and might reflect the target’s
stand-alone value: relative deal size, acquirer q and target q (which correlate negatively
with the use of cash), as well as dummies for hostile and tender bids (which both correlate
positively with the use of cash).19 Including such controls is important since Jensen and
Ruback (1983) find that only targets in unsuccessful tender offers are positively revalued.

 18
      All of our results are robust to using the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model.
 19
      See Appendix-Table B.2 for an analysis of the correlates of the medium of exchange.


                                                   10
In addition, we control for target size, offer premium, industry fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. Note that the industry and year fixed effects should also mitigate confounds with
accounting-rule changes, such as Statement 142 of the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB) abolishing the pooling-of-interests method in 2001.20
   After including these controls, the cash coefficient remains similar, 19.9% in the main
sample (column 2) and 22.6% in the pure-deals sample (column 3). The analysis also
reveals that, in addition to the medium of exchange, deal premia correlate strongly with
target CARs. Intuitively, the more the bidder is willing to pay, the higher is the market
revaluation. We also find that smaller targets are revalued more, possibly reflecting that
a bid conveys more new information to the market if the target is small.
   The cash effect is also present in the large sample of 675 bids, which includes non-
public acquirers (see Appendix-Table B.3). The point estimates become somewhat
smaller, but are still statistically and economically significant. The smaller magnitudes
may be explained by the fact that private acquirers have less of a choice between cash
and stock, making a cash offer a weaker signal of target value.

Endogenous selection into deal failure. So far, we have shown that variables known
at the time of deal announcements do not explain the differential revaluation of cash
targets. A different concern is selection into deal failure, as the choice of cash versus
stock payment might be correlated with deal failure. The summary statistics in Panel
A of Table 1 reveal that the fraction of the total payment offered in cash does not
correlate with deal failure, i.e., the fraction of cash offered in successful deals (45.93%)
is very similar to that in unsuccessful deals (44.03%). However, it is still possible that
revaluation differences between cash and stock targets are driven by differential sorting
of cash and stock deals into failure. For example, good news about the target might
make cash deals, but not stock deals, more likely to fail because a financially constrained
bidder is unable to increase the bid in cash, leading to overproportional failure of cash
bids for targets with high (re-)valuation.
    We have previously addressed this specific concern in the example above by controlling
for financial constraints of the acquirer (as measured by the Kaplan and Zingales, 1997,
index). In all specifications based on Table 4, the coefficients on the KZ index as well
as its interactions with cash are insignificant.21 However, even if this specific concern

  20
     FASB Statement 142 requires acquirers to record net target assets at their fair value (purchase
method) for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2001. The difference between purchase price and
asset value is allocated to goodwill and amortized over a maximum period of 40 years. Until 2001,
stock acquirers (but not cash acquirers) could also use the pooling-of-interests method and combine
the balance sheets of the merging entities to a consolidated balance sheet. Acquirers often preferred
the pooling-of-interests method to avoid the amortization of goodwill and, thus, future reductions in
reportable earnings, see Aboody, Kasznik, and Williams (2000) and Jennings, LeClere, and II (2001),
possibly tilting the medium of exchange towards stock. Lys and Vincent (1995) describe an extreme case
– AT&T’s acquisition of NCR – of the bidder’s interest in having the acquisition qualify as a pooling
of interests. In additional regressions (unreported), we include an interaction term between cash and a
dummy for the pre-2002 period, but fail to find a significant effect.
  21
     We omit these results, which are available upon request, in the paper for the sake of brevity.


                                                  11
does not apply, the more general argument remains, and can be illustrated as follows.
Suppose that there are only two failure reasons, A and B. Failure reason A is associated
with targets that will be revalued by 30%, and failure reason B is associated with targets
that will be revalued by −10%, which holds for both cash and stock targets. If 75% of all
cash deals, but only 25% of all stock deals, occur in category A, then we should observe
an overall revaluation effect of 20% for cash deals and 0% for stock deals, even though,
within each category, there is no differential revaluation effect of cash and stock deals.
    To address the concern that our differential revaluation estimates may be driven
by specific deal-failure categories, we make use of our hand-collected sample of failure
reasons. We re-estimate the cash coefficient for the sample N , described in Section 2,
which excludes bids whose failure was endogenous to the target’s value or caused by
market- or industry-wide problems, which (also) affect the target. The results are shown
in columns 4 to 6 of Table 4. In all regression specifications, we continue to estimate a
positive cash coefficient, statistically significant and very similar in size to those estimated
for the main sample in columns 1 to 3.
    We also re-estimate the cash coefficient for the more conservative sample C. As
outlined in Section 2, sample C consists only of deals that failed due to regulatory
intervention, news about the bidder, or disagreement on management terms. The results
are shown in the second-to-last row of Table 2. Here, the small sample size confines us
to a univariate regression, mirroring columns 1 and 4 of Table 4. It is interesting to see
that we estimate a very similar cash coefficient of 19.2%, which is significant at the 5%
level. Moreover, as shown in the second column of Table 2, we also re-estimate the cash
coefficient separately for every single failure category identified by our news search. We
find a positive cash coefficient for all of the 12 categories except “Market problems.” The
latter reflects that revaluation estimates for individual companies during market crashes
like “September 11” or “October 1987” are extremely volatile, even after adjusting for
market returns.
    Subject to the caveat that we can only address selection based on publicly available
information, the robustness of our results across failure categories suggests that selection
into deal failure is unlikely to drive the (differential) cash effect on target CARs.

3.2.   Possible channels

    To understand the source of the revaluation difference between cash and stock targets,
we consider two channels that the literature has deemed important. First, a failed offer
identifies a firm as a likely target of further takeover bids, and the anticipated future
takeover premia lead to revaluation (see Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983, and, more re-
cently, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2012). Second, a failed takeover bid might induce
the target management to make operational improvements (see, e.g., Safieddine and Tit-
man, 1999). For our purposes, the relevant question is whether cash and stock deals are
differentially exposed to these channels. Do failed cash bids induce higher future takeover
premia than failed stock bids? Do they prompt better operational changes?



                                              12
3.2.1.   Future takeover activity
    To assess the empirical significance of future takeovers for the cash-stock revaluation
difference, we test whether the likelihood and timing of subsequent offers as well as their
value are related to the medium of exchange used in the prior (failed) takeover attempt.
We benchmark the analysis against matched firms that have similar characteristics as
the target firms in our sample but did not receive a bid. We identify these control
firms employing propensity-score matching. Within the universe of Compustat firms,
we estimate a fixed-effects (conditional) logit model for the event that firm i receives a
takeover offer (successful or not) in year t:

                             Pr {takeoverit = 1|xi,t−1 } = G(β 0 xi,t−1 ),                               (2)

where G(·) denotes the cumulative logistic distribution and xi,t−1 is a vector of control
variables that includes firm i’s q ratio, market capitalization (in 2010 $), book value of
total assets (in 2010 $), and return on equity (net income over book value of equity),
all measured at the end of year t − 1, as well as industry-year fixed effects (according to
two-digit SIC codes).
   We use the predicted probabilities, or propensity scores, from the logit regression to
match each target firm in the sample of failed bids to the control firm with the closest
propensity score in the year of the respective failed bid. In doing so, we limit the set of
potential control firms to those (i) operating in the same industry (according to two-digit
SIC codes) as the matched target firm and (ii) not having received any publicly disclosed
takeover offer in the previous five years.
   For each failed bid in our sample, we measure the time from deal failure to the
announcement date of an eventually successful bid or, in case the target never receives
a successful takeover bid, the censoring date, which is determined by the minimum of
the target’s bankruptcy date and the last trading day in our data.22 Future successful
bids include returning bidders of an earlier failed deal, although the vast majority are
made by other bidders.23 For control firms, we measure the time to arrival of a successful
takeover bid starting from deal failure of the matched sample firm.
    Figure 2 plots the corresponding Kaplan-Meier graphs of future takeovers for sample
firms and matched control firms. Since this step of the analysis does not rely on the
detailed data requirements of our main sample, we make use of our large sample (675
observations), which includes non-public acquirers. We eliminate 8 observations for which

   22
      We use the following CRSP delisting codes to identify bankruptcy: any type of liquidation (400-
490); price fell below acceptable level; insufficient capital, surplus, and/or equity; insufficient (or non-
compliance with rules of) float or assets; company request, liquidation; bankruptcy, declared insolvent;
delinquent in filing; non-payment of fees; does not meet exchange’s financial guidelines for continued
listing; protection of investors and the public interest; corporate governance violation; and delist required
by Securities Exchange Commission (SEC).
   23
      In Appendix-Table B.4, we summarize information on follow-up bids by the same bidder. Successful
takeovers by returning bidders occur on average after one and a half years after the original failed bid;
future unsuccessful bids occur about one and two-third years after the original bid.


                                                     13
                                    100%

                                    90%

                                    80%

                 Survival Percent
                                    70%

                                    60%

                                    50%

                                    40%

                                    30%
                                           Treatment: Failed Offer
                                    20%    Treatment: Failed Cash Offer
                                           Treatment: Failed Stock Offer
                                    10%    Control: Failed Offer
                                           Control: Failed Offer (Exp. Fit)
                                     0%
                                       0          5                 10        15      20
                                                                  Years


Fig. 2. Kaplan-Meier Survival Estimator. This graph plots the arrival rates of takeover bids for
sample firms and matched control firms over 20 years after an unsuccessful takeover bid (adjusted for
bankruptcy-induced censoring). For each year, the base is the set of surviving firms, and the event is the
announcement day of an eventually successful takeover bid. The sample consists of all deals in the large
sample (starting January 1985) for which we can identify prior takeover activity. Within this sample of
667 failed bids, there are 348 pure-cash and 164 pure-stock bids. The estimated exponential arrival rate
for matched control firms is 4.1%.


we cannot verify whether the firm received an offer in the previous five years, resulting
in a sample of 667 failed bids. (The graphs look essentially identical if we include these 8
deals. The graphs also look the same if we use our main, rather than the large, sample.)
    Figure 2 illustrates several important facts. First, recipients of a previously failed
offer (“Treatment: failed offer”) are significantly more likely to be ultimately taken over
than the control group of firms matched on observable characteristics (“Control: failed
offer”). For example, after five years 50% of the firms with an initial failed bid have
been taken over, relative to 20% in the control sample. Second, even control firms are
taken over at a high rate, 4.1% per year as determined by exponential fit. Hence, the
stock prices of control firms – and therefore also the stock prices of actual target firms
just before the announcement of the (ultimately failed) takeover bid – should reflect
substantial expected future takeover activity and corresponding takeover premia. Third,
target firms with a failed offer exhibit higher takeover activity for a long period, namely
over the subsequent 8 years post failure. After 8 years, the arrival rate of takeovers is
(almost) perfectly described by an exponential arrival rate of 4.3%, which is very close
to the arrival rate of the matched control firms.
   Finally, and of greatest importance to our analysis, Figure 2 reveals that cash and
stock targets exhibit no differential takeover activity over the next 20 years following


                                                               14
the failed takeover attempt. We verify the lack of statistically significant differences in
Cox proportional-hazard regressions, both for the main sample and for the large sample.
Table 5 reports hazard ratios for the event that the target of a failed bid eventually
receives another, successful takeover offer. Hazard ratios for the cash coefficient in excess
of 1 indicate by how much the rate of future takeover offers exceeds the rate for stock
targets. As can be seen across all columns of Table 5, targets of failed cash bids are no
more likely to receive future takeover offers than targets of failed stock bids, irrespective
of whether we consider the main sample, the large sample, or the subset of pure deals.
We conclude that cash and stock targets are not subject to differential future takeover
activity in terms of their timing.
    We now turn to the value of future offers. Even if the frequencies of future bids for
cash and stock targets are not significantly different, the higher revaluation of cash targets
might reflect higher future bids. In Table 6, we relate the dollar value of the next offer to
the medium of exchange in the initial failed offer, controlling for the usual array of firm,
deal, industry and time variables, and conditional on the existence of successful future
takeover attempts.24 We use two alternative measures of target size as control variables,
which allows us to capture two different hypothetical counterfactuals. In columns 1 and
2, target size is measured as market capitalization one month prior to the failed bid and,
thus, prior to any revaluation induced by the bid. Using this measure of target size, any
difference in future bids, even if proportional to the differential revaluation of cash and
stock targets post failure, is attributed to the original medium of exchange. A caveat of
using the value of the target before the original bid to normalize takeover premia is that
the resulting regression estimates are subject to the usual precision problems of long-run-
returns studies (see our discussion of Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983 in the introduction).
In columns 3 and 4, instead, we control for the value of the target one month prior to the
subsequent bid, as motivated by the findings of Schwert (1996). This approach ensures
that stock-market noise between announcements does not affect our estimates. In all
specifications, we account for the timing of subsequent takeover bids by controlling for
the time between announcements (in years).
   In both sets of regressions, the coefficient estimate for cash is insignificant. That is,
regardless of whether we test for differences in bid value relative to the original target
value or relative to its value at the time of the next bid, we cannot reject the hypothesis
that cash and stock targets receive equal dollar premia on subsequent bids. In the last
two columns of Table 6, we control for both previous and contemporaneous target size.
The cash coefficient is again insignificant.25 Note that, in the specification controlling for
previous target size (columns 1 and 2), the coefficient on the control for time between
bids (10.1% and 5.8%) can be interpreted as the annualized real risk-adjusted discount
rate.26

  24
     See Appendix-Table B.5 for the same analysis in the subsample of pure deals.
  25
     The much larger magnitude of the contemporaneous-size coefficient, compared to the previous-size
coefficient (both of which add up to roughly one), and the comparison of the R2 across specifications
imply that contemporaneous target size is the relevant reference point, consistent with Schwert (1996).
  26
     By estimating the discount rate, we do not have to impose an appropriate discount rate on our own.


                                                  15
   In sum, we find that future takeovers of cash and stock targets are similar in their
timing and value, suggesting that the revaluation difference pertains to the target’s stand-
alone value. We now analyze whether the changes in stand-alone value can be related to
anticipated changes of operational policies, the catalyst channel.

3.2.2.   Change in operational policies
    Failed takeover attempts can serve as a catalyst inducing target managers to improve
their operational policies. For example, Safieddine and Titman (1999) report that targets
of failed takeover attempts tend to increase their leverage, especially after hostile bids,
and that such targets with increased leverage exhibit superior operating performance and
are less likely to be taken over in the future.
    The catalyst effect can explain our results if it is stronger for cash than for stock
deals. In light of the analysis of Safieddine and Titman (1999), we first note that all
of our multivariate regressions, in particular in Table 4, control for hostility. We then
consider the following outcome variables, which have been used as proxies for operational
change in prior literature: the sum of short-term and long-term debt, employment, capital
expenditure, R&D expenses, and – as a proxy for asset sales – the book value of assets.
For each of these outcome variables y, we consider raw changes (∆ log y), changes scaled
by assets A (∆ log(y/A)), and scaled changes relative to the respective matched control
firm (∆T,C ∆ log (y/A) = ∆ log(y/A) − ∆ log(yC /AC )), from the calendar year-end before
(the year of) deal announcement to the calendar year-end after (the year of) deal failure.27
For example, for the variable “debt” this reflects total changes in debt, changes in book
leverage, and changes in book leverage relative to the matched control firm.
   For both the main and the large sample, we regress these outcome variables on cash
and our usual set of control variables (offer premium, indicator variables for hostility and
tender offer, and q of target). We include industry and year fixed effects when we do not
subtract the corresponding change in the matched control firm, as the control firms were
matched in part based on those variables. For ease of exposition, Table 7 reports only
the cash coefficients from 26 separate regressions. Note that, in the specifications with
the book value of assets as the dependent variable (last column), scaling (by assets) is
not feasible in a meaningful manner.
    In 25 of our 26 regression specifications, the cash coefficient is insignificant, suggesting
that there are no meaningful differences in the operational changes between cash and
stock targets. We find only one instance in which the cash coefficient is significant: in
the main sample, targets of cash offers feature a higher growth rate of employment if
scaled by assets. However, this result for employment is neither existent in the large
sample, nor is it robust to the other two definitions of the outcome variable.
    In unreported regressions, we also analyze CEO turnover as a possible catalyst out-

The size of the estimated coefficients is economically sensible.
 27
    This selection requires survival of the respective companies as a stand-alone entity.



                                                   16
come. For example, Mikkelson and Partch (1997) provide evidence of a positive relation-
ship between takeover activity and top-management turnover during the hostile-takeover
wave in the 1980s. Here, we investigate whether the use of cash versus stock in the
initial takeover bid is related to CEO turnover after deal failure. We can analyze this
relationship only within the (smaller) set of targets that is covered by the ExecuComp
database, which starts only in 1992. We fail to find any indication that failed cash bids
are more likely than failed stock bids to be followed by CEO turnover.
    In sum, we cannot detect any post-failure operational differences between cash and
stock targets. It is important to stress that the lack of operational differences does
not imply that the catalyst channel is irrelevant altogether. The result merely states
that the catalyst channel may not be differentially at work for cash and stock targets,
which is the main concern in our analysis. Moreover, our analysis relies on the usual
metrics of operational policies (see, for instance, Safieddine and Titman, 1999) based on
public databases such as Compustat/ExecuComp. Hence, our approach potentially fails
to detect differences in operational policies along dimensions that would require deeper
drilling into managerial decision making at a granular level for a large number of firms.


4.   Conclusion

    Our paper documents a robust link between revaluation of targets in failed takeover
bids and the medium of exchange: targets of cash offers typically trade 15% above their
pre-announcement level, whereas targets of stock offers are not revalued on average. We
relate our differential revaluation estimates for cash and stock targets to future takeover
activity, a plausible channel for revaluation (Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983). While we
find strong evidence that targets of failed bids are more likely to receive future takeover
bids than matched control firms for up to 8 years post failure, we do not detect any
differential effects for cash and stock targets. Our results imply that the differential
revaluation of cash and stock targets is not a by-product of future takeover activities.
We also cannot detect differential subsequent operational policies between cash and stock
targets. Hence, our findings are most consistent with papers such as Rhodes-Kropf and
Viswanathan (2004), which suggest that the choice of the medium of exchange reveals
information to the market about the stand-alone value of the entities involved.
    By “ruling in” the possibility of information effects of takeover bids, in contrast to
earlier literature, we hope that our results will help to rekindle the classical debate about
the relative importance of information revelation about the target vis-à-vis real effects
induced by takeover bids. Our evidence suggests that future work in this area ought to
account for the informational implications of the medium of exchange not just on the
bidder side (see Bhagat, Dong, Hirshleifer, and Noah, 2005), but also on the side of the
target.




                                             17
Appendix A.       Methodology

A.1.   Linear approximation
    The time interval between announcement of the initial bid and failure of the deal
varies across the sample. For the graphical illustration, we normalize this window to
relative time, i.e., between tR = 0 and tR = 100%. Suppose a deal has 40 days between
announcement and failure, i.e., Ti = 40. Then, the cumulative abnormal return after
tR = 5% relative time, CAR [ i (5%), is equal to the cumulative abnormal return after
40 · 5% = 2 actual trading days, i.e., CARi (tR Ti ). If tR Ti is not an integer number, we
use linear interpolation between the actual trading days, i.e.,
                                
        [ i (tR ) = 1 − w(i,tr ) CARi (btR Ti c) + w(i,tr ) CARi (btR Ti c + 1) ,
        CAR                                                                              (A.1)

where bxc refers to the floor function and w(i,tr ) = tR Ti − btR Ti c. For example, if Ti = 40
days and tR = 8%, then w(i,tr ) = 40 · 8% − b40 · 8%c = 0.2, so that the cumulative
abnormal return after 8% relative time has passed is given by CAR[ i (8%) = 0.8CARi (3)+
0.2CARi (4).

A.2.   Long-run abnormal returns
    Denote the calendar-month return on our post-failure target portfolio by Rp,t . To
calculate the corresponding abnormal returns, we use the capital asset pricing model
(CAPM), and run the following regression:

                         Rp,t − Rf,t = αp + βp (Rm,t − Rf,t ) + εp,t ,                   (A.2)

where Rf,t is the one-month treasury bill rate, Rm,t is the monthly return on the CRSP
value-weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ broad market index, and αp captures the monthly
abnormal return on the post-failure target portfolio.
    We account for the fact that monthly returns with more firms entering the respective
portfolio are more precisely estimated than months with few firms. The residual variance
of portfolio p in month t with Np,t equally-weighted firms is given by:
                                 X          
                                     1          V ar (εi ) Np,t − 1
             V ar (εp,t ) = V ar         εi,t =           +         ρ̄V ar (εi ),        (A.3)
                                    Np,t          Np,t      Np,t

where V ar (εi ) is the average residual variance of all stocks and ρ̄ is defined such that
ρ̄V ar (εi ) represents the average covariance across all stocks. (Target firms in a given
month are predominantly in similar industries, so that we expect residuals to be positively
correlated.) Since the most important change from month to month concerns the number
of firms, Np,t , variations in V ar (εi ) and ρ̄ are second order, so that the variance of
an equal-weight portfolio scales with N1p,t + NNp,tp,t−1 ρ̄. Based on the empirical results of
Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), we choose ρ̄ = 0.1. We then apply weighted
least squares.

                                              18
   For the long-short portfolio, the monthly variance is given by:

              V ar (εC,t − εS,t ) = V ar (εC,t ) + V ar (εS,t ) − 2Cov (εC,t , εS,t )
                                                                    
                                                           1       1
                                  = V ar (εi ) (1 − ρ̄)         +       .               (A.4)
                                                          NC,t NS,t

The second line follows from assuming that cash and stock firms share average residual
variances and average residual covariances. For the long-short portfolio, we thus obtain
that the variance scales with N1C,t + N1S,t .


References
Aboody, D., Kasznik, R., Williams, M., 2000. Purchase versus pooling in stock-for-stock
 acquisitions: Why do firms care? Journal of Accounting and Economics 29, 261–286.

Andrade, G., Mitchell, M., Stafford, E., 2001. New evidence and perspectives on mergers.
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103–120.

Asquith, P., 1983. Merger bids, uncertainty, and stockholder returns. Journal of Financial
  Economics 11, 51–83.

Barber, B.M., Lyon, J.D., 1997. Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The em-
  pirical power and specification of test statistics. Journal of Financial Economics 43,
  341–372.

Betton, S., Eckbo, B.E., Thorburn, K.S., 2008. Corporate takeovers, in: Eckbo, B.E.
  (Ed.), Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance. Elsevier/North-
  Holland. volume 2. chapter 15, pp. 291–430.

Bhagat, S., Dong, M., Hirshleifer, D., Noah, R., 2005. Do tender offers create value?
  new methods and evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 76, 3–60.

Bradley, M., Desai, A., Kim, E.H., 1983. The rationale behind interfirm tender offers:
  Information or synergy? Journal of Financial Economics 11, 183–206.

Brav, A., 2000. Inference in long-horizon event studies: A Bayesian approach with
  application to initial public offerings. Journal of Finance 55, 1979–2016.

Campbell, J.Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B.G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become
  more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of Finance
  56, pp. 1–43.

Davidson, Wallace N, I., Dutia, D., Cheng, L., 1989. A re-examination of the market
  reaction to failed mergers. Journal of Finance 44, 1077–1083.

Dodd, P., 1980. Merger proposals, management discretion, and stockholder wealth. Jour-
 nal of Financial Economics 8, 105–137.


                                                19
Dodd, P., Ruback, R., 1977. Tender offers and stockholder returns: An empirical analysis.
 Journal of Financial Economics 5, 351 – 373.

Dong, M., Hirshleifer, D., Richardson, S., Teoh, S.H., 2006. Does investor misvaluation
 drive the takeover market? Journal of Finance 61, pp. 725–762.

Edmans, A., Goldstein, I., Jiang, W., 2012. The real effects of financial markets: The
  impact of prices on takeovers. The Journal of Finance 67, 933–971.

Fabozzi, F.J., Ferri, M.G., Fabozzi, T.D., Tucker, J., 1988. A note on unsuccessful tender
  offers and stockholder returns. The Journal of Finance 43, pp. 1275–1283.

Fama, E.F., 1998. Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. Journal
  of Financial Economics 49, 283–306.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
  Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fishman, M.J., 1989. Preemptive bidding and the role of the medium of exchange in
  acquisitions. Journal of Finance 44, 41–57.

Healy, P.M., Palepu, K.G., Ruback, R.S., 1992. Does corporate performance improve
  after mergers? Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135 – 175.

Huang, Y.S., Walkling, R.A., 1987. Target abnormal returns associated with acquisition
 announcements: Payment, acquisition form, and managerial resistance. Journal of
 Financial Economics 19, 329–349.

Jaffe, J.F., 1974. Special information and insider trading. The Journal of Business 47,
  410–428.

Jennings, R., LeClere, M., II, R.B.T., 2001. Goodwill amortization and the usefulness of
  earnings. Financial Analysts Journal 57, 20–28.

Jensen, M.C., Ruback, R.S., 1983. The market for corporate control: The scientific
  evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5–50.

Kaplan, S.N., Zingales, L., 1997. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
 measures of financing constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169–215.

Loughran, T., Vijh, A.M., 1997. Do long-term shareholders benefit from corporate ac-
  quisitions? Journal of Finance 52, 1765–1790.

Lys, T., Vincent, L., 1995. An analysis of value destruction in AT&T’s acquisition of
  NCR. Journal of Financial Economics 39, 353–378.

Malmendier, U., Moretti, E., Peters, F., 2010. Winning by Losing: Evidence on Over-
 bidding in Mergers. Mimeo. University of California, Berkeley.



                                           20
Mandelker, G., 1974. Risk and return: The case of merging firms. Journal of Financial
 Economics 1, 303–335.

Mikkelson, W.H., Partch, M.M., 1997. The decline of takeovers and disciplinary man-
 agerial turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 44, 205–228.

Officer, M.S., 2003. Termination fees in mergers and acquisitions. Journal of Financial
  Economics 69, 431–467.

Rhodes-Kropf, M., Robinson, D.T., Viswanathan, S., 2005. Valuation waves and merger
 activity: The empirical evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561–603.

Rhodes-Kropf, M., Viswanathan, S., 2004. Market valuation and merger waves. Journal
 of Finance 59, 2685–2718.

Safieddine, A., Titman, S., 1999. Leverage and corporate performance: Evidence from
  unsuccessful takeovers. Journal of Finance 54, 547–580.

Savor, P.G., Lu, Q., 2009. Do stock mergers create value for acquirers?      Journal of
  Finance 64, 1061–1097.

Schwert, G.W., 1996. Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions. Journal of Financial
  Economics 41, 153–192.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 2003. Stock market driven acquisitions. Journal of Financial
  Economics 70, 295–311.

Sullivan, M.J., Jensen, M.R.H., Hudson, C.D., 1994. The role of medium of exchange in
  merger offers: Examination of terminated merger proposals. Financial Management
  23, pp. 51–62.




                                          21
                                                         Table 1. Summary Statistics

Statistics for the main sample, as described in Section 2. Time to completion/failure is measured in trading days. Dollar values are based
on historical transaction values, converted to 2010 $bn using Consumer Price Index (CPI) Conversion Factors. Target size is the target’s
market value of equity in 2010 $bn. Relative deal size is the transaction value over the acquirer’s market value of equity. Offer premium
is the payment to target shareholders normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the announcement of the
bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. Hostile and Tender offer are dummy variables indicating hostile bids and tender offers, respectively.
The q ratio is the market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity, all over assets. Experienced acquirers (dummy
variable) have attempted (successfully or not) at least ten acquisitions in the five years up to the year of the takeover bid in question.
All non-deal-related variables are measured at the end of the year prior to the deal’s announcement, and all q variables are winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The p-values in the last column are for a two-sided difference-in-means test. Both panels show the main
sample, i.e., bids for which all control variables are available. In Panel B, the sample is restricted to unsuccessful pure deals.

 Panel A: Successful and Unsuccessful Bids
                                                Successful Bids                                Unsuccessful Bids
 Variable                        Mean    Median Std. dev.         Min     Max     Mean    Median Std. dev. Min          Max     p-value
 Cash in %                       45.93    37.16       45.47        0       100    44.03    19.19     45.71        0      100     0.546
 Stock in %                      46.48    43.06       45.39         0      100    55.49    75.18     45.79        0      100     0.004
 Other payment in %              7.59     0.00        18.20        0       100    0.48     0.00       5.94        0      100     0.000
 Time to completion/failure      76.10    68.00       43.16         5      245    62.93    50.50     47.46         5     232     0.000
 Transaction value in 2010 $bn    1.46     0.31        4.34       0.00    70.51    1.64     0.15      7.04       0.01   77.04    0.601
 Target size in 2010 $bn          0.91     0.18        2.98       0.00    65.16    1.24     0.11      5.61       0.00   56.04    0.156
 Relative deal size              1.54      0.21       25.34       0.00   830.22    1.16     0.52      2.24       0.00   17.57    0.816
 Offer premium in %              46.24    37.72       38.66        0       200    46.59    38.56     42.77        0      200     0.897
 Hostile                         0.01      0.00        0.12         0       1      0.14    0.00       0.35        0       1      0.000
 Tender offer                    0.24      0.00        0.42         0       1      0.10    0.00       0.30        0       1      0.000
 q of acquirer                    2.51     1.70        2.42       0.51    15.20    2.36     1.47      2.58       0.51   15.20    0.396
 q of target                      2.06     1.45        1.73       0.50     9.91    1.85     1.23      1.61       0.50    9.91    0.080
 q of acquirer > q of target      0.63     1.00        0.48         0       1      0.62     1.00      0.49         0      1      0.796
 Experienced acquirer            0.22     0.00        0.41         0        1     0.14     0.00       0.35        0       1      0.010
 % of target sought              98.76   100.00        6.09       50.2     100    96.86   100.00      9.04      50.80    100     0.000
 N                                                  1,846                                            236
Panel B: Unsuccessful Pure Cash and Stock Bids
                                             Cash Bids                                    Stock Bids
Variable                      Mean Median Std. dev.       Min    Max     Mean    Median     Std. dev.    Min    Max     p-value
Time to failure               60.27    51.00    45.40      5      188    59.90    47.00       47.58        5     232     0.958
Transaction value in 2010 $bn  0.66    0.12      1.49    0.01     8.88    1.36     0.10        5.79      0.01   55.64    0.289
Target size in 2010 $bn        0.40    0.09      0.77    0.00     4.09    1.32     0.09        5.76      0.00   56.04    0.155
Relative deal size            1.22     0.41     2.32     0.00    11.42    0.84     0.50        1.18     0.01     8.49    0.157
Offer premium in %            53.13   45.80     38.55      0      200    45.02    37.98       43.76       0      200     0.192
Hostile                       0.27     0.00     0.45       0       1      0.04    0.00        0.20        0       1      0.000
Tender offer                  0.23     0.00     0.43       0       1      0.01    0.00        0.10        0       1      0.000
q of acquirer                  1.74    1.32      1.61    0.51    13.72    2.95     1.65        3.16     0.58    15.20    0.002
q of target                    1.47    1.12      1.26    0.50     9.91    2.27     1.52        1.85      0.55    9.91    0.001
q of acquirer > q of target    0.64    1.00      0.48      0       1      0.60     1.00        0.49       0        1     0.546
Experienced acquirer          0.10     0.00     0.30       0       1     0.13     0.00        0.34        0       1      0.548
% of target sought            94.78   100.00    11.86    50.80    100    97.63   100.00        7.87     62.00    100     0.053
N                                               81                                           102
                                 Table 2. Failure Categories

The category Price too low denotes failed deals where the parties could not agree on the
transaction price. Management rejection refers to deals that failed because the shareholders
and/or management or board refused the bid, whereas Shareholder rejection indicates rejection
by shareholders, e.g., leading to an insufficient number of shares being tendered. Target news
(public) refers to failed deals associated with (good or bad) public news about the target, and
Target problems (private) to failed deals where the acquirer discovered bad information in the
due-diligence process. Market problems denotes deal failure due to shifting market conditions
(typically stock-market plunges), whereas Industry problems are pertinent to the target’s and/or
the acquirer’s industry. Regulator refers to deal failure where the news search revealed lack
of regulatory approval. Management terms describes all failed deals where acquirer and target
were unable to agree on terms other than the price (e.g., the nomination of a CEO of the future
company). Bidder problems summarizes deal cancelations due to financing problems or other
bad news on the part of the bidder. Bidder acquired are sudden cancelations triggered by the
acquisition of the bidder. Alliance denotes failed bids after which bidder and target entered
into other cooperations. A deal could be assigned to multiple categories. We denote the sample
of bids that were not withdrawn due to news regarding the target or market/industry problems
as sample N ; the results are in Table 4. We denote the sample containing only bids that
were canceled due to regulatory issues, bidder news, or disagreement on management terms as
sample C. The sample Main is the main sample of all unsuccessful bids as defined in Section
2. The column entitled Average % cash shows the average percentage of the transaction value
offered in cash. The columns Cash coefficient target and Cash coefficient acquirer show the
coefficient estimates from regressing, respectively, the target’s and the acquirer’s CAR from 25
days before announcement to 25 days after deal failure on the fraction offered in cash and a
constant. */**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

 Failure reason                 Avg. % cash    Cash coeff. target   Cash coeff. acquirer    N
 Price too low                     57.0%            0.241**                0.075            25
 Management rejection              57.5%              0.234                0.103            27
 Shareholder rejection             66.7%           0.833**                 0.241           12
 Target news (public)              40.2%             0.489                 -0.067           19
 Target problems (private)         28.9%             0.084                 0.312             8
 Market problems                   43.3%             -0.335              0.616***           15
 Industry problems                 29.4%             0.045                 0.014            4
 Regulator                         48.1%           0.321**                0.251**          49
 Management terms                  33.1%             0.101                 0.185            13
 Bidder problems                   20.6%             0.090               0.787***          22
 Bidder acquired                   33.3%             0.789                 0.422            3
 Alliance                          35.9%             0.146                 0.247            11
 All bids with failure reason      42.4%            0.166*               0.231***          150
 All bids in sample C              39.3%            0.192**              0.347***           81
 All bids (Main)                   44.0%           0.224***               0.127**          236
           Table 3. Long-term Persistence of Cash vs. Stock Revaluation Differences

CAPM calendar-time-portfolio estimates of alpha (in percent per month) based on WLS regres-
sions of monthly premium of portfolio relative to the one-month treasury rate (as the dependent
variable) on monthly market return, as well as long/short difference between portfolio returns.
We form equal-weight portfolios of targets that received an unsuccessful pure-cash or pure-stock
bid in the previous n years, where n varies from 1 to 5 (across rows). We use the main sample
in the first three columns, and the large sample with (also) targets of non-public acquirers in
the last three columns. Long/short portfolios go long in cash targets, and short in stock targets.
N is the number of months with non-empty portfolios. Observations are weighted as explained
in Appendix A.2. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at
the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                Main sample                                Large sample
 Alpha                 Cash     Stock Long/short                  Cash      Stock Long/short
 1 year                 0.65     0.44       0.21                   -0.29     0.61      -1.08
                       (0.75)   (0.71)    (1.14)                  (0.37)    (0.61)    (0.70)
 R2                     0.13     0.13       0.00                   0.28      0.19       0.02
 N                      267      275        249                     309      290        290
 2 years                0.11     0.69      -0.36                   0.05      0.65      -0.70
                       (0.57)   (0.55)    (0.81)                  (0.33)    (0.46)    (0.52)
 R2                     0.17     0.26       0.01                    0.35     0.33       0.04
 N                      293      290        290                     321      293        293
 3 years                0.41     0.40       0.27                   0.29      0.52      -0.20
                       (0.53)   (0.46)    (0.67)                  (0.29)    (0.39)    (0.43)
 R2                     0.19     0.34       0.02                    0.42     0.42       0.08
 N                      293      293        293                     330      293        293
 4 years                0.48     0.27       0.34                   0.26      0.38      -0.06
                       (0.48)   (0.42)    (0.60)                  (0.28)    (0.36)    (0.39)
 R2                     0.21     0.38       0.03                    0.43     0.45       0.07
 N                      293      293        293                     331      293        293
 5 years                0.55     0.42       0.20                   0.26      0.51      -0.16
                       (0.44)   (0.40)    (0.53)                  (0.26)    (0.35)    (0.35)
 R2                     0.25     0.40       0.03                    0.47     0.47       0.08
 N                      293      293        293                     331      293        293
 Table 4. Cash vs. Stock Revaluation Differences in a Controlled Regression Framework

OLS regressions with target CAR from 25 days before announcement to 25 days after deal failure
as the dependent variable. The sample Main consists of all unsuccessful bids in the main sample
as defined in Section 2, the sample Main, Pure of all unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids
from the main sample. In the last three columns, we limit the respective samples to bids that
were not withdrawn due to any news regarding the target or market/industry problems (N
and N , Pure). Cash is expressed as a fraction of the total payment (and hence equal to a
dummy for cash in the sample of pure deals in the third and sixth column). Target size is
the target’s market value of equity in 2010 $bn. Relative deal size is the transaction value
over the acquirer’s market value of equity. Offer premium is normalized by the target’s market
capitalization at one month prior to the announcement of the bid, and truncated between 0
and 2. We include indicator variables for whether the bid was hostile or a tender offer. All
non-deal-related variables are measured at the end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s
announcement, and all q variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed
effects are based on one-digit SIC codes. A constant term is always included in the absence of
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the
10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                                 Target CAR (B-25, F+25)
 Cash                       0.224***    0.199**     0.226** 0.244*** 0.195**          0.224**
                             (0.07)       (0.09)     (0.11)   (0.07)     (0.08)        (0.10)
 Log(target size)                        -0.042* -0.067**                -0.031       -0.053*
                                          (0.02)     (0.03)              (0.02)        (0.03)
 Log(relative deal size)                  0.016      0.023               0.013          0.020
                                          (0.03)     (0.03)              (0.03)        (0.03)
 Offer premium                          0.306*** 0.297**               0.358***      0.350***
                                          (0.11)     (0.14)              (0.08)        (0.09)
 Hostile                                0.178**      0.075               0.083         -0.005
                                          (0.08)     (0.11)              (0.07)        (0.10)
 Tender offer                             0.013      0.057               0.015          0.035
                                          (0.10)     (0.13)              (0.11)        (0.13)
 q of acquirer                            0.033*     0.039*              0.016          0.021
                                          (0.02)     (0.02)              (0.02)        (0.03)
 q of target                              -0.011      0.013              -0.003         0.014
                                          (0.03)     (0.03)              (0.04)        (0.04)
 Industry & year FE            N             Y          Y       N          Y              Y
 Sample                       Main         Main      Main,      N          N             N,
                                                      Pure                              Pure
 N                             236          236        183     192        192            152
                            Table 5. Frequency of Future Takeovers

This table reports hazard ratios from Cox proportional-hazard regressions estimating the prob-
ability that the target of a failed takeover receives another, successful takeover bid after a failed
bid. The sample Main consists of all unsuccessful bids in the main sample as defined in Sec-
tion 2, the sample Main, Pure of all unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids from the main
sample. In the third and fifth column, we extend the respective samples to unsuccessful bids
by non-public acquirers (Large and Large, Pure). Cash is expressed as a fraction of the total
payment (and hence equal to a dummy for cash in the sample of pure deals in the last two
columns). Target size is the target’s market value of equity in 2010 $bn. Offer premium is
normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the announcement of
the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. We include an indicator variable for whether the bid
was hostile or a tender offer. Target CAR (B-25, F+25) is the cumulative abnormal return from
25 days before announcement until 25 days after deal failure. All non-deal-related variables are
measured at the end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s announcement, and q of target
is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed effects are based on one-digit SIC
codes. A constant term is always included in the absence of fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                                   Successful takeover bid in future
 Cash                                       1.106   1.147       0.866      1.513      1.089
                                            (0.22) (0.36)      (0.12)     (0.63)      (0.18)
 Log(target size)                                   1.058       0.977     1.194*      1.009
                                                    (0.08)     (0.03)     (0.12)      (0.04)
 Offer premium                                      1.283      0.739*      0.918      0.702*
                                                    (0.38)     (0.13)     (0.36)      (0.14)
 Hostile                                            0.389*      0.776     0.350*     0.642**
                                                    (0.19)     (0.15)     (0.22)      (0.14)
 Tender offer                                       1.456       1.091     1.343       1.110
                                                    (0.60)     (0.23)     (0.69)      (0.25)
 q of target                                       0.819** 0.847*** 0.737*** 0.857**
                                                    (0.08)     (0.05)     (0.09)      (0.06)
 Target CAR (B-25, F+25)                            0.732       1.088     1.094       1.278
                                                    (0.19)     (0.17)     (0.40)      (0.24)
 Industry & year FE                           N       Y           Y          Y          Y
 Sample                                     Main     Main      Large      Main,       Large,
                                                                           Pure        Pure
 N                                           236     236         675        183        518
                          Table 6. Value of Future Takeover Bids

OLS regressions of the value of next takeover bid (log in 2010 $bn) following a failed takeover
bid for the same target as the dependent variable. The sample Main* consists of all unsuccessful
bids in the main sample as defined in Section 2 that were followed by a successful takeover bid
for the same target, conditional on the availability of the dollar value of the next offer. The
sample Large* also includes non-public acquirers. Cash is expressed as a fraction of the total
payment. Previous (contemporaneous) target size is the target’s market value of equity in 2010
$bn one month prior to the previous unsuccessful (next) bid’s announcement. Offer premium
is normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the announcement
of the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. We include an indicator variable for whether the
bid was hostile and for tender offers, and control for the years passed between the two deal
announcements under consideration (Years between). The target’s q ratio is measured at the
end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s announcement, and is winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed effects are based on one-digit SIC codes. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                                  Log(next offer value)
 Cash ∈ [0, 1]                0.040      0.112     -0.111      -0.037       -0.102    -0.028
                             (0.24)     (0.13)     (0.09)      (0.04)       (0.08)    (0.04)
 Log(prev. target size)     0.937***   0.921***                            0.072**   0.062**
                             (0.07)     (0.04)                              (0.03)    (0.03)
 Log(cont. target size)                            0.968***   0.972***    0.916***   0.924***
                                                    (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.03)    (0.03)
 Offer premium              0.675***   0.744***    0.233***     0.027     0.272***     0.077
                             (0.23)     (0.21)      (0.07)     (0.05)       (0.08)    (0.06)
 Hostile                     -0.185      0.216      0.180*      0.061       0.140      0.054
                             (0.40)     (0.17)      (0.10)     (0.05)       (0.09)    (0.05)
 Tender offer                 0.015      0.194      -0.049      0.027       -0.035     0.038
                             (0.27)     (0.18)      (0.10)     (0.06)       (0.09)    (0.05)
 q of target                 -0.139     -0.029      -0.017     -0.013       -0.030    -0.019
                             (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.02)    (0.01)
 Years between              0.101***   0.058***     -0.008     -0.000       -0.004     0.001
                             (0.03)     (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.00)       (0.01)    (0.00)
 Industry & year FE             Y          Y           Y          Y           Y          Y
 Sample                      Main*      Large*      Main*      Large*       Main*     Large*
 N                              99        254         99         254          99        254
 R2                           0.850      0.818       0.988      0.984       0.988      0.984
 Adjusted R2                  0.766      0.785       0.981      0.981       0.981      0.982
                                               Table 7. Post-failure Operational Changes

Post-failure changes in operational policies are measured along five dimensions: the target’s sum of long-term and short-term debt
(D), number of employees (Emp), capital expenditure (CapEx), R&D expenses (R&D), and book value of assets (A). The respective
changes are measured from the calendar year-end before deal announcement to the calendar year-end after deal failure. We regress each
operational policy y on cash and the following control variables: offer premium, normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one
month prior to the announcement of the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2; indicator variables for whether the bid was hostile or a
tender offer; q of target, measured at the end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s announcement, and winsorized at the 1st and
99th percentiles; and industry and year fixed effects based on one-digit SIC codes (in rows 1 and 2, subsumed by matching in row 3). We
only display the coefficient on cash, which is expressed as a fraction of the total payment. In row 1, the dependent variable is the raw
difference in log values, ∆ log(y). In row 2, the dependent variable is the difference in log values scaled by assets, ∆ log (y/A). In row 3,
the dependent variable is the scaled difference in log values of the actual target minus the scaled difference in log values of its matched
control firm, ∆T,C ∆ log (y/A) = ∆ log (y/A) − ∆ log (yC /AC ). The sample Main* consists of all unsuccessful bids in the main sample
as defined in Section 2, conditional on data availability, until the calendar year-end after deal failure. The sample Large* adds bids by
non-public acquirers. Sample sizes vary depending on the availability of the dependent variable. They are, in order of the columns for the
samples Main* and Large*, respectively: 159 and 441; 163 and 438; 177 and 479; 102 and 239; 186 and 497. Sample sizes in the last row
further depend on the availability of the respective variables for the matched control firms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*/**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                        Debt                Employment             Capital expenditure           R&D expenses                 Assets
                     ∆ log (D)              ∆ log (Emp)               ∆ log (CapEx)               ∆ log (R&D)               ∆ log (A)
 Cash            -0.295     -0.113       0.058      -0.062        -0.219      -0.081          -0.036      -0.024         -0.094 -0.075
                 (0.28)     (0.15)       (0.09)     (0.07)        (0.21)      (0.14)          (0.16)      (0.12)         (0.12) (0.07)

                    ∆ log (D/A)            ∆ log (Emp/A)             ∆ log (CapEx/A)             ∆ log (R&D/A)
 Cash            -0.133    -0.009       0.245***    0.040         -0.091       0.009           0.140      -0.021
                 (0.29)     (0.14)       (0.09)     (0.06)        (0.22)       (0.12)          (0.16)     (0.11)

                 ∆T,C ∆ log (D/A)       ∆T,C ∆ log (Emp/A)        ∆T,C ∆ log (CapEx/A)        ∆T,C ∆ log (R&D/A)
 Cash            -0.181    -0.012        0.184       0.034        0.033        -0.152         -0.411      -0.158
                 (0.31)    (0.17)        (0.13)      (0.09)       (0.28)       (0.15)         (0.29)      (0.17)
 Sample          Main* Large*            Main*      Large*        Main*       Large*          Main*       Large*         Main*    Large*
                   Online Appendix
                          to
  Target Revaluation after Failed Takeover Attempts –
                   Cash versus Stock
by Ulrike Malmendier, Marcus M. Opp, and Farzad Saidi
Appendix B.        Long-run returns with forward-looking sample selection

    In this section, we explore what one can learn from the analysis of long-run abnormal
returns conditional on future takeover activities, i.e., when firms are sorted into groups
based on takeover bids they receive in the future. In particular, we ask whether condi-
tioning on not receiving any future takeover bid helps to better identify the effect of the
(initial) failed bid on the target’s stand-alone value. Such conditional long-run analysis
mirrors the approach in the seminal paper by Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983), who ana-
lyze targets of failed bids that do not receive a takeover offer in the five years after deal
failure.28
    First, we consider the biases involved in conditioning on the absence of future bids.
Long-run returns in such a sample capture the joint effect of the failed takeover attempt
and of the absence of future bids. As a result, the long-run returns (starting from before
the announcement of the failed bid) are downward-biased estimates of the effect of the
failed bid on the target’s stand-alone value. This is because the ex-ante market price
incorporates that the firm will be taken over with positive probability at some point
over the next years, but the sample construction implies zero – i.e., abnormally low –
successful takeover activity. This is the relevant bias affecting the analysis of Bradley,
Desai, and Kim (1983).
    Note that the nature of the bias depends on the goal of the conditional analysis. For
example, if the objective was to estimate the effect of the permanent disappearance of a
takeover bid – i.e., to estimate the loss of target value as the takeover probability goes
from almost 100% to 0% – then identifying a sample in which future takeover activity is
eliminated (to 0%) as in Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1983) is warranted.29 However, such
an analysis of long-run returns starting from the post-announcement target value would
be affected by a different bias, with the opposite sign, because the post-announcement
target value reflects that the probability of success is strictly less than 100%. This is
because a rational market will anticipate the possibility of deal failure (over 11% of all
deals fail, cf. Panel A of Table 1). As a result, long-run returns conditional on the
absence of a future takeover reflect a decrease in takeover probability of less than 100%,
implying that these long-run returns are an upward-biased measure of the “permanent”
disappearance of the bid.
    Returning to the objective of our analysis, i.e., to measure the effect of a failed bid
on target valuation, the approximate magnitude of the bias is easy to gauge. As we show
in the empirical analysis in the main paper, 20% of matched control firms are taken over
within 5 years. Assuming an average takeover premium of 46.2% (cf. Panel A of Table
1), conditioning on the absence of any future bid over the next five years, produces a
bias of roughly 46.2% · 0.2 ≈ 9%. This ballpark estimate overstates the bias somewhat
since it ignores discounting. In what follows, we propose two approaches to assess the

  28
    The content of this section heavily benefited from comments by an anonymous referee.
  29
    Here, absence of a takeover attempt over a five-year horizon proxies for the permanent absence of
future bids.
magnitude of the bias more precisely, including the effect of discounting.

Theoretical calculation of bias in constant-growth-model. First, we employ a constant-
growth model of stand-alone cash flows with a growth-adjusted discount rate of r̄. The
(admittedly strong) assumptions of constant growth and an all-equity firm allow us to
obtain intuitive expressions. Let λ denote the (exponential) arrival rate of takeover
attempts and π the takeover premium paid over the prevailing market price. Then, the
unconditional stock-market value of a firm, VU , is:
                                                  1
                                       VU =           .                                (B.1)
                                              r̄ − λπ
Here, the expected yearly premium λπ accounts for growth due to future takeover activity.
The value of a firm conditional on not being taken over for T years is:
                                                1              1
                           V (T ) = 1 − e−r̄T       + e−r̄T         .                  (B.2)
                                                 r̄         r̄ − λπ
Intuitively, this conditional value is a weighted average of the stand-alone value, 1r̄ , and
the unconditional value, VU . The larger T the greater the weight on the stand-alone
value. Combining the two equations, the look-ahead bias of conditioning on the absence
of takeover activity for T years, ∆ = V (TV)−V
                                            U
                                              U
                                                , is given by:

                                        λπ
                                            1 − e−r̄T < 0.
                                                     
                                ∆=−                                                    (B.3)
                                         r̄
To obtain an estimate for the magnitude of the bias if one conditions on the absence of
takeover activity for T = 5 years, we choose λ = 4.1% per year. This is the empirical
estimate for matched control firms, i.e., firms that look like actual targets just before
the latter receive a (failed) takeover attempt. We choose π = 46.2% and set r̄ = 6%.
The resulting bias is −8.2% of firm value, an economically significant look-ahead bias,
and similar in magnitude to the ballpark estimate above. We note that the bias is fairly
insensitive to the choice of the growth-adjusted discount rate. For r̄ = 4%, we obtain an
bias of −8.6%, whereas r̄ = 8% produces a bias of −7.8%. Subtracting the (negative)
bias allows us, under the modeling assumptions, to retrieve the unbiased estimate.
    We note that our actual sample construction in the main paper also implies a small
conditioning bias. We require that there be no announcement of another bid by the time
of failure. Hence, our sample is restricted to firms that are not taken over for, on average,
60 trading days (the average time from announcement to failure, see Panel B of Table
1). For the conditioning horizon of T = 60/250 years, the estimated bias is −0.45%.
Hence, this bias is orders of magnitude smaller. Most importantly, this bias should apply
equally to cash and stock targets and should, thus, not affect our differential results. We
note that restricting ourselves to deals failing in a short amount of time (less than 250
trading days) limits the magnitude of the bias.
Empirical estimation. In order to estimate the bias empirically, without relying on functional-
form assumptions, we consider two subsamples of firms. Subsample 1 consists of firms
receiving a takeover bid that ultimately fails, and that do not receive a bid in the sub-
sequent five years. Subsample 2 consists of matched control firms that do not receive a
bid over the same period. The estimates for the second subsample capture the empirical
bias inherent in estimating long-run returns for the first subsample. Subtracting the bias
from the estimated returns in Subsample 1, we would obtain the unbiased estimate of
the (stand-alone) value implications of a takeover bid.
    While this approach is conceptually superior to employing the constant-growth model
in that it does not rely on functional form assumptions, it is hard to implement in practice.
The “ballpark” estimate of an 8% bias over five years suggests that we would need to
statistically detect abnormal returns of −1.6% p.a., which is implausible given stock-
market noise. For completeness we implement the approach empirically nevertheless.
    For each failed bid in the large sample between January 1980 and December 2003, we
determine whether the respective target and its control firm are not taken over within
five years. (The sample of failed bids ends in December 2003 due to the forward-looking
selection criterion.) For example, Oneida Limited received a takeover bid from Libbey,
which failed in July 1999. Since Oneida did not receive a subsequent successful takeover
bid until June 2004, it would be considered “not taken over.” To calculate the perfor-
mance of targets that have not been taken over, we rely on the calendar-time-portfolio
methods (see Appendix A.2), now applied to this subset of targets. Thus, continuing with
our example from above, Oneida is included in the 60-month portfolio between August
1999 and December 2003, its last month as a listed company.
   We obtain the following results for abnormal returns:
  1. Long-run returns for actual targets post failure conditional on not being taken
     over for 5 years. All alpha estimates are insignificant.
      (a) Cash targets: 0.14% p.a.
      (b) Stock targets: 0.69% p.a.
  2. Long-run returns for matched control firms conditional on not being taken over
     for 5 years. All alpha estimates insignificant.
      (a) Matched firms of cash targets: -1.87% p.a.
      (b) Matched firms of stock targets: 2.8% p.a.
      (c) All matched firms (cash + stock + hybrid): -0.57% p.a.

Hence, the analysis of the post-failure returns does not reject the hypothesis that these
portfolios have normal returns. We also see that the return estimates are rather noisy.
For example, the 95% confidence interval for the yearly alpha of the matched control
firms ranges from −6.67% to 5.54%. We can neither reject the hypothesis that the bias
estimate of -0.57% p.a. is equal to the conceptual bias of −1.6% per year, nor that
it is zero. In short, while the sample-selection bias (over 5 years) can be economically
meaningful, i.e., around 8% of the equity value, the noise in long-run-returns analyses is
orders of magnitude larger.
                                            Table B.1. Summary Statistics – Successful Bids

The sample consists of all unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids from the main sample, as described in Section 2. Time to completion
is in trading days. Dollar values are based on historical transaction values, converted to 2010 $bn using Consumer Price Index (CPI)
Conversion Factors. Target size is the target’s market value of equity in 2010 $bn. Relative deal size is the transaction value over
the acquirer’s market value of equity. Offer premium is normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the
announcement of the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. Hostile and Tender offer are dummy variables indicating hostile bids and
tender offers, respectively. The q ratio is the market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity all over assets. Experienced
acquirers (dummy variable) have attempted (successfully or not) at least ten acquisitions in the five years up to the year of the takeover
bid in question. All non-deal-related variables are measured at the end of the year prior to the deal’s announcement, and all q variables
are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The p-values in the last column are for a two-sided difference-in-means test.

                                                  Cash Bids                                       Stock Bids
 Variable                        Mean    Median    Std. dev.    Min     Max      Mean    Median     Std. dev.    Min    Max      p-value
 Time to completion              55.72    46.00      34.62       7       230     84.29    74.00       38.67       25     239      0.000
 Transaction value in 2010 $bn    0.72     0.22       1.52     0.00     17.40     1.65     0.25        5.80      0.00   70.51     0.000
 Target size in 2010 $bn          0.48     0.14       1.04     0.00     11.40     1.10     0.17        4.20      0.00   65.16     0.000
 Relative deal size              0.70      0.08      6.03      0.00    137.03     0.60     0.24        3.25     0.00    79.38     0.709
 Offer premium in %              47.41    40.50      35.71       0       200     48.46    38.75       42.88       0      200      0.634
 Hostile                         0.02      0.00      0.15        0        1      0.01     0.00        0.08        0       1       0.019
 Tender offer                    0.49      0.00      0.50        0        1      0.03     0.00        0.17        0       1       0.000
 q of acquirer                    2.15     1.63       1.76     0.51     15.20     3.38     2.14        3.27     0.51    15.20     0.000
 q of target                      1.88     1.44       1.42     0.50      9.91     2.63     1.73        2.29      0.50    9.91     0.000
 q of acquirer > q of target      0.60     1.00       0.49       0        1       0.65     1.00        0.48       0       1       0.128
 Experienced acquirer            0.25     0.00       0.43        0        1      0.20     0.00        0.40        0       1       0.045
 % of target sought              98.39   100.00       6.87     50.20     100     99.05   100.00        5.65     52.00    100      0.064
 N                                                   639                                             629
                          Table B.2. Determinants of Cash Offers

OLS regressions with the medium of exchange as the dependent variable. The sample Main
consists of all unsuccessful bids in the main sample as defined in Section 2, the sample Main,
Pure of all unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids from the main sample. Cash is expressed
as a fraction of the total payment (and hence equal to a dummy for cash in the sample of pure
deals in the last three columns). Target size is the target’s market value of equity in 2010
$bn. Relative deal size is the transaction value over the acquirer’s market value of equity.
Offer premium is normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the
announcement of the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. We include indicator variables for
whether the bid was hostile or a tender offer. Experienced acquirers (dummy variable) have
attempted (successfully or not) at least ten acquisitions in the five years up to the year of the
takeover bid in question. All non-deal-related variables are measured at the end of the year
prior to the unsuccessful deal’s announcement, and all q variables are winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed effects are based on one-digit SIC codes. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                 Cash ∈ [0, 1]                        Cash ∈ {0, 1}
 Log(target size)                    0.005      -0.006                    0.009       -0.009
                                    (0.01)      (0.01)                   (0.01)       (0.01)
 Log(rel. deal size)    -0.056*** -0.065*** -0.051***        -0.070*** -0.079*** -0.061***
                          (0.01)    (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)       (0.01)
 Offer premium                                   0.009                                -0.025
                                                (0.02)                                (0.03)
 Hostile                                       0.141**                               0.183**
                                                (0.06)                                (0.07)
 Tender offer                                  0.474***                             0.529***
                                                (0.02)                                (0.02)
 q of acquirer                    -0.030*** -0.022***                  -0.030*** -0.022***
                                    (0.00)      (0.00)                   (0.00)       (0.00)
 q of target                      -0.033*** -0.022***                  -0.039*** -0.024***
                                    (0.01)      (0.00)                   (0.01)       (0.01)
 Exp. acquirer            0.000     -0.015      -0.006         -0.018    -0.036       -0.019
                          (0.02)    (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.03)
 % of target sought     -0.005*** -0.004*** -0.004**         -0.005*** -0.005**     -0.005**
                          (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)       (0.00)
 Industry & year FE         Y          Y           Y              Y         Y            Y
 Sample                   Main       Main        Main          Main,     Main,        Main,
                                                                Pure      Pure         Pure
                          2,082       2,082       2,082         1,451     1,451        1,451
Table B.3. Cash vs. Stock Revaluation Differences in a Controlled Regression Framework
– Large Sample

OLS regressions with target CAR from 25 days before announcement to 25 days after deal
failure as the dependent variable. The sample Large consists of all unsuccessful bids, including
those by non-public acquirers, in the large sample as defined in Section 2; the sample Large,
Pure of all unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids, including those by non-public acquirers,
from the large sample. Cash is expressed as a fraction of the total payment (and hence equal
to a dummy for cash in the sample of pure deals in the last two columns). Target size is the
target’s market value of equity in 2010 $bn. Offer premium is normalized by the target’s market
capitalization at one month prior to the announcement of the bid, and truncated between 0
and 2. We include indicator variables for whether the bid was hostile or a tender offer. All
non-deal-related variables are measured at the end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s
announcement, and all q variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed
effects are based on one-digit SIC codes. A constant term is always included in the absence of
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the
10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                              Target CAR (B-25, F+25)
 Cash                         0.108**          0.077*        0.144***             0.114**
                               (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.05)               (0.05)
 Log(target size)                             -0.030**                           -0.037**
                                               (0.01)                              (0.01)
 Offer premium                                0.299***                           0.306***
                                               (0.06)                              (0.07)
 Hostile                                      0.123***                           0.121***
                                               (0.04)                              (0.04)
 Tender offer                                 0.146***                           0.188***
                                               (0.05)                              (0.06)
 q of target                                   -0.010                              0.013
                                               (0.02)                              (0.02)
 Industry & year FE             N                 Y              N                   Y
 Sample                        Large            Large         Large,               Large,
                                                               Pure                 Pure
 N                              675              675            518                 518
                         Table B.4. Returning Bidders – Summary

This table summarizes facts about returning bidders after initial failed bids for the same target
(but before the end of the data set in 2008). We consider the main sample in the first two
columns, and extend to the large sample, including bids by non-public acquirers, in the last two
columns. Time to next bid is in calendar days.

                                                       Main sample             Large sample
 Number of observations                                     236                     675
 Received subsequent bid                                    134                     409
                                                     Successful Failed       Successful Failed
                                                        101      33             262      147
 Subsequent bids by returning bidders                    15       4              40       28
 Average time to next bid by returning bidder          539.7    604.5          581.7    688.1
                   Table B.5. Value of Future Takeover Bid – Pure Deals

OLS regressions of the value of next takeover bid (log in 2010 $bn) following a failed takeover
bid for the same target as the dependent variable. The sample Main*, Pure consists of all
unsuccessful pure-cash and pure-stock bids from the main sample (as defined in Section 2) that
were followed by a successful takeover bid for the same target, conditional on the availability of
the dollar value of the next offer. The sample Large*, Pure also includes non-public acquirers.
Cash is equal to a dummy indicating 100% cash, rather than 100% stock, as the method of
payment. Previous (contemporaneous) target size is the target’s market value of equity in 2010
$bn one month prior to the previous unsuccessful (next) bid’s announcement. Offer premium
is normalized by the target’s market capitalization at one month prior to the announcement
of the bid, and truncated between 0 and 2. We include an indicator variable for whether the
bid was hostile and for tender offers, and control for the years passed between the two deal
announcements under consideration (Years between). The target’s q ratio is measured at the
end of the year prior to the unsuccessful deal’s announcement, and is winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles. Industry fixed effects are based on one-digit SIC codes. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. */**/*** denote significance at the 10%/5%/1% level, respectively.

                                                   Log(next offer value)
 Cash ∈ [0, 1]                 0.077      0.134     -0.039      -0.041      -0.019       -0.028
                              (0.27)     (0.15)     (0.10)      (0.06)      (0.08)       (0.05)
 Log(prev. target size)      1.059***   0.929***                           0.197***    0.111***
                              (0.10)     (0.05)                             (0.04)       (0.03)
 Log(cont. target size)                             0.968***   0.977***    0.842***    0.890***
                                                     (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.04)       (0.03)
 Offer premium               0.869**    0.734***    0.271**      -0.000    0.388***       0.094
                              (0.35)      (0.19)     (0.12)      (0.07)     (0.10)       (0.08)
 Hostile                      -0.874    0.378**       0.109       0.071     -0.154        0.076
                              (0.57)      (0.18)     (0.15)      (0.06)     (0.12)       (0.05)
 Tender offer                 0.018       0.073      -0.096       0.036     -0.058        0.039
                              (0.32)      (0.19)     (0.12)      (0.07)     (0.08)       (0.06)
 q of target                 -0.240*      -0.041     -0.009      -0.021     -0.069      -0.035*
                              (0.12)      (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.02)     (0.04)       (0.02)
 Years between               0.060*      0.033*      -0.017      -0.000     -0.007        0.000
                              (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)
 Industry & year FE             Y            Y          Y           Y          Y            Y
 Sample                      Main*,      Large*,     Main*,     Large*,     Main*,      Large*,
                               Pure        Pure       Pure        Pure       Pure         Pure
 N                              73          185         73         185         73          185
 R2                           0.867        0.852      0.984       0.981      0.988        0.983
 Adjusted R2                  0.749        0.816      0.969       0.977      0.976        0.979
