NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIVIDUAL PRICE ADJUSTMENT ALONG THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN
Etienne Gagnon
David López-Salido
Nicolas Vincent
Working Paper 18213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

This research was conducted with restricted access to Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data. The views
in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with
the Federal Reserve System, or the BLS. We thank Ben Malin and Randal Verbrugge for their support
with BLS micro data, as well as Mike Woodford, Jeff Campbell, Gita Gopinath, Anil Kashyap, and
Ed Nelson for their insightful comments. Christine Garnier and Andrew Giffin provided superb research
assistance. Nicolas Vincent acknowledges financial support from the Fonds québécois de la recherche
sur la société et la culture. We are grateful to the SymphonyIRI Group for the scanner data. As a condition
of use, SymphonyIRI reviews all papers using their data to check that the data are not described in
a misleading fashion. However, all analyses in this paper based on SymphonyIRI Group, Inc. data
reflect the work and conclusions of the authors, not SymphonyIRI Group, Inc.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Etienne Gagnon, David López-Salido, and Nicolas Vincent. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Individual Price Adjustment along the Extensive Margin
Etienne Gagnon, David López-Salido, and Nicolas Vincent
NBER Working Paper No. 18213
July 2012
JEL No. E31,E32
ABSTRACT
Firms employ a rich variety of pricing strategies whose implications for aggregate price dynamics
often diverge. This situation poses a challenge for macroeconomists interested in bridging micro and
macro price stickiness. In responding to this challenge, we note that differences in macro price stickiness
across pricing mechanisms can often be traced back to price changes that are either triggered or cancelled
by shocks. We exploit observed micro price behavior to quantify the importance of this margin of
adjustment for the response of inflation to shocks. Across a range of empirical exercises, we find strong
evidence that changes in the timing of price adjustments contribute significantly to the flexibility of
the aggregate price level.
Etienne Gagnon
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
etienne.gagnon@frb.gov
David López-Salido
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
david.lopez-salido@frb.gov

Nicolas Vincent
HEC Montreal
Montreal, Quebec
Canada
nicolas.vincent@hec.ca

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, economists have devoted substantial eﬀorts to documenting basic facts
about consumer micro price behavior, an endeavor made possible by the increased availability
of large datasets.1 A salient finding is that firms employ a rich variety of pricing strategies.
In some sectors, such as energy, air travel, or fresh produce, firms adjust prices frequently,
whereas in others, such as newspapers, health services, or maintenance activities, firms adjust
prices infrequently. Even at the level of universal product codes (UPC), researchers have
found variation across firms in the magnitude and frequency of price adjustments. And while
sales and promotions are a defining feature of the way items are marketed to consumers in
retail trade, temporary price discounts are uncommon in several other sectors.
Many macroeconomists had hoped that the new micro evidence would shorten the list
of pricing mechanisms used in macroeconomic applications by revealing which mechanisms
have empirical support and which ones do not. The variety of new micro facts has instead
stimulated researchers to introduce several new mechanisms and to refine existing ones.2
In retrospect, this outcome was probably unavoidable. As has long been recognized in the
field of industrial organization (e.g., Carlton [1989]), product markets diﬀer along several
dimensions that influence pricing strategies. These dimensions include the number of buyers
and sellers, the degree of product homogeneity, the durability of items, the presence of longterm relationships between buyers and sellers, the role of advertisement and information, the
firm’s price discrimination motives, and the ability to hold inventories. This heterogeneity
would be immaterial to macroeconomists if all pricing mechanisms implied similar eﬀects of
aggregate shocks on inflation and output. Unfortunately, the choice of a particular mechanism is often consequential in macroeconomic applications. For instance, models matching
the same average frequency and size of price changes can vary greatly in the speed of aggregate shock pass-through (see Golosov and Lucas [2007] for an illustration). The variety of
facts and pricing mechanisms thus underscores the importance of identifying key features of
micro price behavior that are important for aggregate adjustment and that macro models
1

Initial empirical work using sectoral data by Carlton (1986), Cecchetti (1986), Lach and Tsiddon (1992),
and Kashyap (1995) has been followed by the work on consumer prices of Bils and Klenow (2004), Baharad
and Eden (2004) for Israel, and several euro-area national studies summarized in Dhyne et al. (2005). For
recent literature surveys, see Mackowiak and Smets (2008) and Klenow and Malin (2011).
2
The list of pricing strategies and relevant frictions includes menu-cost models (e.g., Barro [1972] and
Sheshinski and Weiss [1977]), the Calvo (1983) model, fixed-duration contracts (Taylor [1980]), infrequent
information (e.g., Mankiw and Reis [2002]), rational inattention (e.g., Sims [2003]), uncertain and sequential
trade (e.g., Eden [1994]), fair pricing (Rotemberg [2011]), price points (e.g., Levy et al. [2011]), search
models (e.g., Head et al. [forthcoming]), price plans (Burstein [2006] and Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello
[2011]), reference prices (Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo [2011]), and price discrimination (e.g., Varian
[1980]).

2

should aim to reproduce.
In this paper, we seek to connect micro and macro price stickiness by distinguishing
between price adjustments that are determined ahead of shocks and those that are either
triggered or cancelled by shocks. This distinction oﬀers a natural way of contrasting popular
time-dependent models, for which the timing of all price changes is predetermined, and statedependent models, for which the timing of price changes can respond to shocks. In practice,
asserting whether a price adjustment is predetermined or not, or should have occurred when
it did not, is a challenging task. However, we argue that one can go a long way in deriving
the aggregate implications of micro price stickiness by focusing on the initial response to
aggregate shocks and by studying the determinants of individual price adjustments. The key
finding of our empirical implementation is that some shocks alter the timing of individual
price changes in ways that contribute significantly to the flexibility of the aggregate price
level. One immediate implication is that pricing models abstracting from variation in the
timing of price changes are missing an important channel of macroeconomic adjustment.
We formalize the distinction between predetermined price adjustments and those triggered or cancelled by shocks using the generalized  model developed by Caballero and
Engel (1993a, 1993b, and 1999). The model is consistent with lumpy and infrequent price
adjustments, a key empirical feature that we seek to reproduce, and has the added benefit
of encompassing several pricing mechanisms commonly used in macroeconomic applications.
Following Caballero and Engel (2007, henceforth “CE”), we then decompose the initial inflation response to an aggregate shock as the sum of an intensive margin and an extensive
margin. The intensive margin captures the contribution of predetermined price adjustments
and is connected to the observed frequency of price changes. The extensive margin captures
the contribution of price adjustments that are triggered or cancelled by the shock. It is at
the heart of many debates about how item-level price stickiness translates into aggregate
price stickiness, and is the key statistic that our paper aims to quantify.
The extensive margin depends on what we call the individual reset price; that is, the
posted price that a firm would set if granted a one-time opportunity to adjust it for free,
with all constraints otherwise remaining in place (including the possibility that the posted
price will not change for some time). If individual reset prices were observed, one could assess
the role of the extensive margin by studying how deviations of posted prices from individual
reset prices are distributed and how these deviations influence price adjustment decisions.
However, partial identification is possible by noting that, in a broad class of models, firms
reveal their individual reset price whenever they adjust their posted price. The history of
price adjustments can therefore provide a benchmark for the path of individual reset prices.
Individual price changes can also reveal the amount of price pressure having accumulated
3

between adjustment periods, making the distribution of price changes an informative object
about underlying inflation.
We next show how one can use variation in the shape of the distribution of nonzero
price changes to derive lower bounds on the importance of adjustment along the extensive
margin. If the timing of all price changes was predetermined, then an inflationary shock
would simply create additional price pressure on items. As a result, the distribution of
individual price changes would shift laterally by an amount equivalent to the extra pressure.
Our procedure compares the observed distribution to an estimate of the distribution that
would have prevailed in the absence of the shock. Any evidence that the two distributions
diﬀer by more than a translation is attributed to the extensive margin. We apply our
procedure to the study of three macroeconomic shocks whose timing and size are rather
well identified: the sudden devaluation of the Mexican peso in late 1994 and the hikes in
the Mexican value-added tax (VAT) in April 1995 and January 2010. Our results point to
substantial price level flexibility that was due primarily to changes in the timing of price
adjustments.
The extensive margin can be especially important in the presence of a selection eﬀect by
which items having accumulated much price pressure are especially likely to have the timing
of their adjustment altered by shocks. Such a selection eﬀect was highlighted in the work
of Caplin and Spulber (1987) and Golosov and Lucas (2007), and later clarified in CE, as
the root of the lack of intrinsic persistence in standard menu-cost models. In the absence of
a selection eﬀect, the accumulation of aggregate price pressure should lead to a rise in the
average size of individual price changes. To check whether this is the case empirically, we use
the massive repricing of items created by the Mexican VAT hike in April 1995 to compute the
distribution of consumer price changes in an environment dominated by aggregate reset price
inflation. We find no drift in the average price change even as large amounts of aggregate
reset price inflation accumulate, consistent with strong selectivity.
We find more direct support for a selection eﬀect by studying how price adjustment
decisions relate to deviations from the price of local competitors, which we use as a proxy
for the individual reset price. We undertake this task using the IRI Marketing database, a
very large (and relatively new to macroeconomists) dataset of weekly scanner prices from
grocery stores and drugstores across the United States. The exceptional sample coverage
makes it possible to track prices of identical items across multiple competing outlets. We
follow Campbell and Eden (2010) in calculating the deviation from the average price of local
competitors at the UPC-market level. After accounting for permanent diﬀerences across
stores, we find somewhat limited dispersion in the level of prices within local markets. Some
of that dispersion is due to firms choosing prices away from those of their local competitors,
4

which cautions against interpreting all forms of price dispersion as evidence of resource
misallocations. We also find support for an adjustment probability that increases in our
proxy of the (absolute) deviation. Like the limited price dispersion, this finding is consistent
with a selection eﬀect. Finally, we use our estimates of the distribution of deviations and
of the probability of a price change conditional on the deviation to compute the extensive
margin directly from the micro data. This exercise again points to an economically important
role of changes in the timing of price adjustments for price level flexibility.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our conceptual framework, highlights
the importance of price adjustments triggered or cancelled by shocks in connecting micro
and macro price stickiness, and discusses their identification. Section 3 proposes a method
for bounding the importance of the extensive margin and applies it to the study of three
macroeconomic shocks. Section 4 uncovers evidence of a selection eﬀect in micro price
adjustment by first analyzing the distribution of price changes as price pressure builds up,
and then by estimating the adjustment hazard. Section 5 oﬀers some concluding remarks.

2

Conceptual Framework

We use a variant of the generalized  model developed in a series of papers by Caballero
and Engel (1993a, 1993b, and 1999) to formalize the link between changes in the timing of
individual price adjustments and macro price flexibility. The main appeal of this sticky-price
framework is that it encompasses several pricing mechanisms commonly used in macroeconomic applications and can incorporate real rigidities.

2.1

Economic Environment

We assume that time is discrete and that the length of the time intervals match that of price
collection. The economy is populated by a continuum of firms indexed by  ∈ [0 1]. Each firm
produces a single item sold directly to consumers. Due to the presence of nominal rigidities,
the posted price,  , may deviate from the target price, ∗ , between price adjustment periods
(all prices are in natural logs). The object ∗ corresponds to the posted price chosen by
a firm granted a one-time opportunity to adjust it freely, with all constraints otherwise
remaining in place, including the possibility that the new price may be sticky in subsequent
periods. In choosing ∗ , the firm takes into account how today’s posted price impacts
profitability in the current and future periods; therefore, it generally diﬀers from the price
that maximizes current-period profits.3 We will refer to ∗ as the firm’s individual reset
3

The concept of a price that maximizes current-period profits –either in a partial equilibrium or in
a frictionless general equilibrium environment– and the concept of a price that maximizes the present

5

price. Our terminology highlights the connection between ∗ and the posted price chosen
by the firm when resetting it. It also ties in with the idea of aggregate reset price inflation
studied by Bils, Klenow, and Malin (forthcoming), who recover the component of innovations
to individual reset prices that is common across items under specific pricing assumptions.
Because the individual reset price is a forward-looking object, it can be a complicated
function of how the economy is expected to evolve over time, and how that evolution impacts future price adjustment decisions. In our benchmark specification, we assume that
innovations to ∗ are described by
∆∗ =  ∗ +   

(1)

where  ∗ is aggregate reset price inflation and   is a mean-zero idiosyncratic component
that is  across firms and over time. Our specification of   introduces a random-walk
element in individual reset prices. We make no particular assumption regarding the process
describing the aggregate component of individual reset prices, except that its innovations,  ∗ ,
are common across items. For consistency, we also impose that firms share the same pricesetting mechanism, to be described shortly. These simplifying assumptions are unlikely to
hold in reality. For instance, diﬀerences in price stickiness, real rigidities, or item durability
can lead to heterogenous responses to aggregate shocks.4 We partially address this concern
in our empirical implementation by considering relatively homogenous groups of products.
The decision to change the posted price is made after observing the shocks and aggregate
variables in the period. We define the deviation from the individual reset price as  =
−1 −∗ , where −1 is the firm’s posted price inherited from the previous period. Following
CE, we postulate that the probability of observing a price change is a time-invariant smooth
function of the deviation from the individual reset price, Λ ( ), called the “adjustment
hazard function.” The model gives rise to infrequent and lumpy price adjustments, which is
a central feature of consumer price data that we seek to reproduce.5
One appealing aspect of postulating a smooth adjustment hazard function is that forecasting individual price adjustments is typically a diﬃcult task, as periods marked by frequent
price changes are sometimes followed by long spells of inaction (and vice-versa) with no apparent change in economic conditions. The adjustment hazard captures this randomness by
discounted stream of profits at times overlap in the work of Caballero and Engel. In a menu-cost model,
these concepts coincide when innovations to the frictionless optimal price follows a random walk with no
drift and firms set prices under certainty equivalence. Departure from either of these assumptions breaks
the equivalence between the two concepts.
4
Barsky, House, and Kimball (2007) and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) highlight this heterogeneity in
the presence of diﬀerences in durability and the degree of real rigidities, respectively.
5
Woodford (2008 and 2009) provides micro-foundations for a smooth adjustment hazard increasing in the
absolute size of the deviation.

6

leaving some uncertainty regarding the timing of adjustments. Its dependence on  allows
for the possibility that large deviations, which are suboptimal from the point of view of profit
maximization, are more likely than small ones to trigger price adjustments. The function
can also embed asymmetries in the response to positive and negative deviations that some
authors argue could play a role in explaining apparent diﬀerences in the response of aggregate inflation to positive and negative shocks (e.g., Caballero and Engel [1993b]). In what
follows, we treat the adjustment hazard as a function of  alone. All results carry through
if we instead consider Λ (   ), where  is a vector of idiosyncratic states that influence
the adjustment probability but otherwise have no impact on how a firm’s individual reset
price responds to an aggregate shock (e.g., month-specific and duration-specific dummies
capturing seasonal patterns and duration dependence, respectively).6

2.2

Price Adjustment along the Intensive and the Extensive Margins

Given the above assumptions, consumer price inflation can be expressed as
 = −

Z

Λ ()  () 

(2)

where  () is the density of deviations from individual reset prices prevailing at the beginning of period . Consider the impact on inflation of an aggregate shock to ∗ taking place
immediately before price adjustment decisions. For now, we assume that the shock, ∆, is
fully passed through to individual reset prices, thus ruling out real rigidities. We shall return
to the implications of real rigidities shortly. The shock shifts the distribution of deviations
from individual reset prices by −∆, resulting in observed inflation
  (∆) = −

Z

( − ∆) Λ ( − ∆)  () 

6

(3)

In theory, the adjustment hazard could depend on aggregate conditions beyond their influence on  .
Most notably, Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) prove that the width of the  band increases with steadystate inflation in a menu-cost model without idiosyncratic shocks. This eﬀect is much weaker in models
with idiosyncratic shocks, however, consistent with the empirical evidence. Gagnon (2009) reports that the
average absolute size of price adjustments was little impacted by the burst in inflation that accompanied the
Mexican Peso crisis. Similarly, Wulfsberg (2009) uncovers no apparent change in the absolute size of price
adjustments in Norway as trend inflation fell from around 10 percent in the mid-1970s to 2 percent in the
mid-1990s. Both studies note a rise in the average absolute size since the late 1990s but it is diﬃcult to
attribute this rise to changing aggregate conditions.

7

Taking a first-order Taylor series expansion of   (∆) around ∆ = 0, rearranging terms,
and taking the limit as ∆ → 0, one obtains


∆ 
=
= lim
∆→0 ∆

Z

Z

Λ ()  ()  + Λ0 ()  () 
{z
} |
{z
}
|
intensive margin (A )

(4)

extensive margin (E )

The above statistic captures the share of an (infinitesimal) aggregate shock to individual reset
prices passed-through to posted prices upon impact. CE refer to this object as the index of
macroeconomic flexibility, which they denote  . This index has two components. The
intensive margin, A , captures the contribution of items whose posted price would have been
adjusted absent the shock. These items respond to the shock by altering the size of their price
adjustment. The extensive margin, E , captures the inflation contribution of items whose
price adjustment is either triggered or cancelled by the occurrence of the shock, as hinted by
the presence of Λ0 ().7
We note several aspects of equation (4) that are useful in understanding the nature
of the two margins and in assessing their empirical importance. First, the intensive and
the extensive margins are functions of deviations from individual reset prices, which are
typically unobserved. Under the assumptions made thus far, however, firms reveal their
individual reset price whenever they adjust their posted price. Moreover, the size of price
changes corresponds to the amount of price pressure that has cumulated since the last price
adjustment. We call these two implications of our framework the revelation principle. This
principle will play a central role in our empirical strategy, which is laid out in section 3.
Second, the intensive margin has a strong connection to observables. To see this, notice
that integrating the adjustment hazard over the distribution of deviations gives the observed
frequency of price changes. In low-inflation environments, the fraction of adjusting prices
typically does not vary much due to oﬀsetting movements in the number of price increases
and price decreases (see Klenow and Kryvtsov [2008] and Gagnon [2009]). For these environments, the average frequency of price changes,  , oﬀers a reasonable approximation of
7
It should be noted that CE’s usage of the terms “intensive” and “extensive” margins diﬀers from that
popularized by Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). The latter define the extensive margin as the frequency of
price changes and the intensive margin as the average size of (nonzero) price changes. These definitions
are motivated by Klenow and Kryvtsov’s investigation of how variation in the number of prices changes
contributes to inflation dynamics. In contrast with these authors, who seek to explain the level of inflation,
CE are only interested in the boost to inflation due to the aggregate shock. And while the extensive margin
in Klenow and Kryvtsov’s decomposition is a function of all price changes, the extensive margin in equation
(4) depends only on the subset whose timing is altered by the shock. For example, a shock resulting in the
simultaneous cancelling of a price decrease and triggering of a price increase would impact inflation solely
through the intensive margin under Klenow and Kryvtsov’s decomposition because it leaves the number of
price adjustments unchanged. The same shock would instead operate entirely through the extensive margin
under CE’s decomposition. To avoid any confusion, our terminology follows exclusively that of CE.

8

the intensive margin, A . Appendix B provides estimates of the average frequency of price
changes for the U.S. CPI and IRI Marketing scanner database. The extensive margin is more
diﬃcult to relate to observables because disentangling items whose price adjustment is either
triggered or cancelled by the shock from items whose price adjustment is predetermined is a
challenging task. That said, in section 3, we will show how one can use changes in the shape
of the distribution of price changes to bound its macroeconomic importance.
Third, the decomposition oﬀers an intuitive way of distinguishing between popular timedependent models, for which the timing of all price changes is predetermined, and statedependent models, for which the timing of price changes can be impacted by shocks. In
time-dependent models such as the popular Calvo (1983) model and fixed-duration contracts
(Taylor 1980), by construction  =  . More generally, the frequency of price changes
is a lower bound on the index of macroeconomic flexibility because the extensive margin is
typically positive.
Fourth, there need not be many price changes triggered or cancelled by a shock for the
extensive margin to be a major contributor to the inflation response. In the presence of a
selection eﬀect by which items with much price pressure are especially likely to have their
adjustment either triggered or cancelled by the shock, a small number of items revising the
timing of their price adjustment can have a large impact on inflation. For example, if a
1-percent shock to ∗ induces a firm to raise its price by 10 percent rather than keep it
constant (thus releasing pressure accumulated from a variety of sources since its last price
adjustment), then the impact of that single price change on inflation will be as large as that
of 10 predetermined price changes increasing their size by an extra percentage point. Caplin
and Spulber (1987) and Golosov and Lucas (2007) trace the lack of intrinsic persistence in
standard menu-cost models to this selection eﬀect.
Fifth, the shape of the distribution of deviations,  (), also aﬀects the magnitude of the
selection eﬀect. If  () is large in regions where || is large and the adjustment hazard is
steep, then the extensive margin will be important. That said, identifying the distribution
of deviations over time can be challenging due to its dependence on the history of shocks,
especially in periods of elevated macroeconomic instability. To circumvent this diﬃculty, our
analysis refrains from characterizing the full dynamic process of inflation, focusing instead
on the initial response to shocks for which a reasonable estimate of  () can be computed.
Finally, equation (4) was derived for an infinitesimal shock ∆. In the data, large
shocks are not only the easiest to identify but also the most likely to alter the timing of price
changes. Inference about the relative importance for shock pass-through of price changes
that are predetermined versus those that are triggered or cancelled may thus depend on the
magnitude of the shock. One can decompose the initial pass-through to a shock of arbitrary
9

size as

∆ 
= A + E + O (k∆k) 
(5)
∆
where O (k∆k) is the sum, scaled by ∆, of all terms of order two or higher in the
Taylor-series expansion of  (∆) around ∆ = 0. The terms A and E are as defined in
equation (4). In particular, the intensive margin is the frequency of price changes that would
have been observed in the absence of the shock. The term O (k∆k) converges to zero as
∆ → 0. Importantly, it equals zero whenever all price adjustments are predetermined.
For this reason, our empirical implementation of equation (5) using observed shocks, which
is presented in section 3.1, lumps together E and O (k∆k). We will refer to any price
movement that contributes to E or O (k∆k) as an adjustment along the extensive margin.

2.3

The Revelation Principle and the Distribution of Price Changes

Under the revelation principle, individual reset prices are observed whenever posted prices
are adjusted. For example, Bils and Klenow (2004) report an average frequency of price
changes of 26 percent in the U.S. CPI in the mid-1990s. Applying the principle to these
data implies that ∗ is observed about a quarter of the time. The revelation principle also
leads to new interpretations of the distribution of price changes. For items experiencing a
price adjustment, we have ∆ = − . The distribution of price changes thus maps into
the distribution of deviations from individual reset prices that prevailed for price adjusters.
Alternatively, ∆ equals the cumulative change in the individual reset price since the
last nominal adjustment. Hence, for a firm changing its posted price after keeping it constant
for  periods, ∆ = ∗ − ∗− . As such, the distribution of price changes can be used to
extract information on how price pressure builds over time at the item level. For instance,
one can condition this distribution on the number of periods since the last price adjustment
(we use this approach in section 4). These observations suggest that the distribution of price
changes is a richly informative object and that replicating it in macro models is a key step
towards ensuring consistency with microeconomic facts.8
These interpretations come with some qualifications. First, Chevalier and Kashyap (2011)
present empirical evidence that the price of competing brands may be jointly determined by
retailers, so that it may be diﬃcult to analyze individual price decisions separately from those
of their close substitutes. Second, there could be environments in which both the timing
8

See Eden (2001) for an early investigation of how the shape of the distribution of consumer price changes
diﬀers between low and high inflation. For U.S. evidence on consumer prices, see Klenow and Kryvtsov
(2008), Klenow and Malin (2011), and Berger and Vavra (2011). Calibrations to the distribution of price
changes have appeared recently in the literature (e.g., Midrigan [2011] and Costain and Nakov [2011])

10

and size of price adjustments are predetermined; for example, if firms followed price plans or
pre-announced price changes. Price adjustments that do not coincide with a reoptimization
obscure the inference about the set of firms adjusting their posted prices in response to
shocks. That said, there is limited support for widespread use of pre-announcements, at
least at the retail level, and of price plans by firms. Fabiani et al. (2006) report that
price reviews are more common than price changes among European firms. Alvarez, Lippi,
and Paciello (2011) argue that adjusting prices without reoptimizing them is a suboptimal
strategy in low-inflation environments. Finally, the individual reset price may not be unique;
for instance, when firms follow mixed pricing strategies.9 For all situations described above,
the revelation principle does not hold with the consequence that individual price changes
need not equal the amount of price pressure having accrued since the last adjustment.

2.4

Real Rigidities

We have so far abstracted from real rigidities, which dampen the response of individual
reset prices to nominal shocks. Several authors have argued that real rigidities are essential
for sticky-price models to generate the observed inertia in aggregate inflation and output.10
Attempts to infer their importance from micro price data have yielded mixed results.11 We
will not seek to reconcile the micro and macro evidence on real rigidities, but simply stress
that key properties of equation (4) extend to environments where they are present. To this
end, we follow CE in assuming that aggregate reset price inflation is described as
 ∗ = (1 − ) ∆ +   

(6)

The parameter  controls the extent to which firms trade-oﬀ raising their price in line with
the price of their competitors versus matching the rate of money growth, ∆ . This money
growth term should be interpreted as standing for a host of nominal shocks impacting  ∗ ,
such as nominal wages or the nominal exchange rate. The elasticity  is an index of real
rigidities; the smaller is , the faster the response of individual reset prices to the aggregate
shock. The process described by equation (6) should not be seen as a general description of
9

A multiplicity of optimal prices can arise when the profit function is very flat because firms trade-oﬀ the
unit markup and the number of consumer purchases. See Eden’s (1994) model of uncertain and sequential
trade and the search model of Head et al. (forthcoming).
10
See Blanchard and Fisher (1989) and Ball and Romer (1990) for early expositions. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), and Smets and Wouters (2007) argue, as do many others, that the inclusion of real
rigidities in DSGE models improves their ability to account for observed aggregate economic dynamics.
11
Bils, Klenow, and Malin (forthcoming) note that CPI inflation since the turn of the 1990s is too volatile
and transient to be explained by standard sticky-price models, even absent real rigidities. Burstein and
Hellwig (2007) and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011) find moderate amount of real rigidities in retail prices and
trade prices respectively, but the accompanying macroeconomic eﬀects are limited.

11

 ∗ but as a local approximation taken at a particular point in time.12
As stated in CE, the presence of real rigidities makes the index of macroeconomic flexibility a nonlinear function of the intensive and extensive margins,
(1 − ) (A + E )
∆ 
=

∆→0 ∆
1 −  (A + E )

 = lim

(7)

This function is strictly increasing in A + E , is bounded between 0 and 1 whenever A +
 ∆ 
 0).13 Hence, the
E ∈ (0 1), and is decreasing in the extent of real rigidities (i.e., 
∆
main implication of real rigidities is that they dampen the transmission of the shock to
individual reset prices. The initial shift in the distribution of deviations from individual
reset prices that accompanies a shock ∆ is now
∆ ∗

=

µ

¶
1−
∆
1 −  (A + E )

which is less than ∆ whenever A +E is less than 1. Importantly for our empirical analysis,
the revelation principle continues to hold: Individual reset prices are revealed through price
adjustments and the size of price changes corresponds to the price pressure accumulated
since the previous adjustment. Moreover, as was the case in our baseline framework without
real rigidities, the extensive margin may add substantially to the flexibility of the price level.

3

Extensive Margin Adjustment to Large Shocks

Our first strategy to assess the importance of adjustment along the extensive margin stems
from the following observation: If the timing of all price changes was predetermined, then the
initial impact of a shock to  ∗ would be to shift the distribution of individual price changes
laterally by the size of the shock. Aside from this translation, the shape of the distribution
would be preserved. One can thus measure the importance of adjustment along the extensive margin by comparing the observed distribution of price changes to an estimate of the
distribution that would have been observed in the absence of the shock (the “counterfactual
distribution”). Although this counterfactual distribution is not observed, one can often infer
12

Burstein and Hellwig (2007) provide microfoundations for the reduced-form parameter . In their environment, firms have a CES demand function with elasticity , use production functions with decreasing

1−

( ) . Their
returns in labor of the form  =  ( ) , and face nominal wages determined by  = ( )
1−
linearlized solution around the frictionless steady-state has  = 1 − +− .
13
While intuitive, this latter property does not hold in all environments. Dotsey and King (2005) present
an example in which an increase in real rigidities raises the flexibility of the price level. In their menu-cost
model, the negative impact on  of an increase in  is more than oﬀset by the positive impact of a rise
in A + E as more firms find it profitable to incur the fixed cost of adjusting prices.

12

its shape by considering the distribution that prevailed prior to the shock. This section
formalizes these ideas and then applies them to the study of the Mexican peso collapse in
late 1994 and to the Mexican VAT hikes of April 1995 and January 2010.

3.1

Inference from the Distribution of Price Changes

Let  (·) and ̃ (·) be measures representing the observed and counterfactual distributions
of price changes, respectively. These measures have a mass point at 0 corresponding to
the fraction of items whose price is unchanged. They are otherwise equal to the density of
individual price changes. Suppose that an observable shock ∆ raises all individual reset
prices by ∆ ∗ upon impact. We can rewrite observed inflation from equation (3) as
 = −

Z

( −

∆ ∗ )

Λ ( −

∆ ∗ )

 ()  =

Z

∆  (∆ ) 

The above equality uses the revelation principle to connect deviations from individual reset
prices to observed price adjustments. Absent the shock, inflation would have been
̃  =

Z

∆ ̃ (∆ ) 

The diﬀerence between   and ̃  is the initial boost to inflation attributable to the shock,
∆ . Adding and subtracting the inflation contribution of predetermined price changes,
R
f ∆ ∗ , performing a change of variable, and reorganizing terms, we
∆∗ ̃ (∆ ) = 

get
Z
1
∆  f ∆ ∗
= 
+
∆ ( (∆ ) − ̃ (∆ − ∆ ∗ )) 
(8)
∆
∆ ∆

The first and second terms on the right-hand side capture the contribution to the index
of macroeconomic flexibility of adjustment along the intensive and the extensive margin,
respectively. The shock initially shifts the distribution of predetermined price changes by
∆∗ , resulting in a boost to inflation of f ∆ ∗ . The shock may also trigger or cancel
price adjustments, in which case the observed distribution of price changes will diﬀer from
the counterfactual distribution shifted by ∆ ∗ . Our decomposition attributes any such
diﬀerence to an adjustment along the extensive margin.
If we knew ∆ ∗ , then computing the contribution of adjustment along each margin would
be straightforward given an estimate of the counterfactual distribution. Absent knowledge of
 ∗ , we can nevertheless compute bounds on the importance of adjustment along the extensive
margin. We pursue two strategies to achieve this objective.
First, in our “full-pass-through” approach, we assume full immediate pass-through of
13

the shock to individual reset prices (∆ ∗ ∆ = 1), thus ruling out real rigidities. With
f in hand, we then compute the contribution of adjustment
estimates of ∆  ∆ and 
along the extensive margin in equation (8) as a residual. To see how this approach provides
f , the larger is ∆ ∗ ∆, the larger will be
a lower bound, note that given ∆  ∆ and 

the importance of adjustment along the intensive margin. Assuming full immediate passthrough to  ∗ of the shock thus minimizes the importance of adjustment along the extensive
margin.
In our second approach, we assume that price adjustments triggered or cancelled by
the shock are not subject to a selection eﬀect. In such a case, the initial impact of the
shock is to shift the counterfactual distribution of price changes by ∆∗ and to scale it by
f . This situation is similar to what would happen in a Calvo model in which
a factor  
the probability of price adjustment, while exogenous to the firm, varies with the state of
the economy. For this reason, and to highlight the model-dependence of this computation,
we refer to this approach as “Calvo+.” In the absence of the shock, inflation would be
f f
f is the average size of nonzero price changes. Following
 , where 
given by ̃  = 
a shock ∆, and absent real rigidities, the average nonzero price change would increase
by ∆ and
of price changes would rise to  , so that inflation would equal
³ the frequency
´
  =  f
 + ∆ . The boost to inflation due to the shock can be written as
f ∆ +
∆  = 

´³
³
´
f f
  − 
 + ∆ 

(9)

Given the observed and the counterfactual distribution of price changes (i.e., with knowledge
 , and ∆ ), one can recover ∆ and the respective contributions to ∆  ∆
of   , f , f
of adjustment along the intensive and the extensive margins.
The approaches described above to recover the importance of adjustment along the extensive margin are applicable to the study of the initial response to well-identified aggregate
shocks. More generally, one may wonder whether observed price behavior can be used to
recover a time series of aggregate reset price inflation and of the importance of adjustment
along the extensive margin. In appendix C, we illustrate the challenges of doing so using a
related method proposed by Bils, Klenow, and Malin (forthcoming).

3.2

The Late-1994 Peso Devaluation

Prior to the collapse of the peso in late 1994, Mexico was operating under a crawling peg
system in which the exchange rate acted as the economy’s de facto nominal anchor. Facing
escalating pressure on its foreign exchange reserves, the government announced a 15-percent
devaluation of the currency on December 19, 1994. The measure proved insuﬃcient and
14

was abandoned three days later in favor of a free-floating system. A week after the initial
devaluation, the exchange rate had lost about 40 percent of its value vis-à-vis the U.S.
dollar. Annualized inflation, which had hovered around 7 percent in 1994, jumped to more
than 40 percent in early 1995. The devaluation is a particularly interesting shock because it
was broadly unexpected and its timing is clear. Moreover, its occurrence late in December
means that the price of most items in the CPI had already been collected for that month.
The upper panel of figure 1 shows the distribution of monthly price changes observed in
January 1995 along with the distribution that prevailed 12 months earlier, which we use as
our counterfactual distribution.14 We do not depict the mass points at zero because they do
not contribute to inflation. The fraction of nonzero price changes doubled from 249 percent
in January 1994 to 507 percent in January 1995, pointing to a major role of the extensive
margin in the adjustment to the macro shock. The actual distribution lost some of its
mass of negative price changes relative to the counterfactual, especially in the −10 percent
to 0 percent range, while gaining significantly more mass on the positive side. The jump
in the frequency of price changes was observed across all major groups of products and is
perhaps clearest among product categories whose frequencies were initially low to moderate.
Processed food and nonenergy industrial goods witnessed increases in the frequency of price
changes of 30 percentage points or more. The distribution for unprocessed food, with its
pre-shock frequency of price changes around 40 percent, already featured an important role
for the intensive margin as a large number of price changes were predetermined. The arrival
of the shock pushed the frequency up to about 55 percent.
We compute our two sets of lower bounds to gauge the importance of adjustment along
the extensive margin. The first bound posits full immediate pass-through of the nominal exchange rate devaluation, ∆, to the price of imported final consumption items and imported
intermediate inputs going into the production of final consumption items. If there are no
real rigidities, the change in the optimal reset prices is ∆ ∗ =  · ∆, where  measures the
importance of imports in the consumption basket. Based on input-output tables, Burstein,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005) estimate the total import content of Mexican consumption
expenditures around that period to be 109 percent (and a direct import content only half as
large), a figure reflecting Mexico’s low openness at the time. Setting  = 0109 and ∆ = 05
(roughly the peso depreciation in the month that followed its collapse), we get that individual reset prices should have jumped 5 percentage points under full pass through. The second
bound is based on equation (9).
14
We use the distribution of price changes 12 months earlier as our counterfactual to account for seasonal
repricing, which is especially noticeable for services in January. The results are broadly similar when we
perform the analysis using the distribution observed in the fourth quarter of 1994 as the counterfactual.

15

As seen in table 2, both approaches suggest that adjustment along the extensive margin was the dominant channel. Under the full-pass-through method, the extensive margin
accounts for over two thirds of the initial price level response. The Calvo+ method provides a similar lower bound (63 percent). Table 2 also provides estimates by special groups
of product using the same value of . With the exception of unprocessed food, all special
groups of items suggest contributions of the extensive margin in excess of 75 percent. The
relatively small share for unprocessed food likely reflects the initially high frequency of price
changes (384 percent) which, all else equal, tends to boost the role of the intensive margin.
In addition, the import content of unprocessed food items may have been higher than 109
percent, which would tend to raise the lower bound on the extensive margin. Finally, we
note that the shape of the actual distributions of price changes displayed in figure 1 appears
inconsistent with the random selection of items whose price change is triggered by the shock.
In particular, the positive skewness increased following the shock, which is suggestive of a
role for the selection eﬀect in the extensive margin, contrary to the assumption behind the
Calvo+ method.
Our full-pass-through method assumed that the devaluation was the only shock to individual reset prices in late 1994. However, the rise in the price level in 1995 was much larger
than implied by the devaluation alone, hinting that other factors also pushed up individual
reset prices. Some of these factors arguably had limited impact initially. Notably, monetary
policy was tight in early 1995 as the central bank pushed up overnight rates to contain the
outflow of capital. In addition, labor costs did not accelerate until late 1995. Also consistent
with a somewhat moderate initial response of individual reset prices is the change in inflation
expectations. According to a survey of private forecasters conducted by the Bank of Mexico (reported by Capistrán and López-Moctezuma [2010]), respondents surveyed in January
and February 1995 expected consumer prices to rise 25 percent over the course of the year,
roughly half the observed increase that year but significantly more than the 7 percent rise
experienced in the twelve months to December 1994. As an alternative gauge of the amount
of price pressure, we recomputed our bounds assuming that the initial shock to reset prices
was 18 percentage points. This alternative scenario, also reported in table 2, implies that
almost a third of the shock was passed-through to prices upon impact, with the extensive
margin making a significant contribution in most groups of products.
To put our bound estimates into perspective, recall that the extensive margin is zero
whenever the timing of all price adjustments is predetermined. The working paper version
of CE further shows that, as a rule of thumb, the extensive margin approximately accounts for
two-third of the index of macroeconomic flexibility in models featuring a smooth adjustment
hazard that is increasing in the (absolute) size of deviations and is zero if no price pressure
16

is present. Our bound estimates derived from the revision to inflation forecasts are an
intermediate case between these two benchmarks, whereas our bounds obtained under full
exchange rate pass-through are aligned with CE’s rule of thumb.
On a related note, micro price studies have documented the presence of seasonal patterns
in the timing of consumer price adjustments for many product categories. Several authors
(e.g., Dhyne et al. [2005]) have associated such patterns to features of time-dependent
pricing models and to fixed-duration contracts in particular. However, a preference for
implementing price changes at particular times of the year needs not imply that the timing
of price changes is exogenous to the firm. The behavior of services prices in the wake of
the peso crisis illustrates this point. From 1995 to 2000, a quarter of these prices were
adjusted every January, a figure almost twice as large as in other months of the year (13
percent). As the inflationary consequences of the peso crisis drew to an end, the January
frequency of price changes stepped down to below 15 percent in 2001 and stayed near that
level thereafter. This step down oﬀers further evidence that the number of firms adjusting
their price is responsive to aggregate conditions, consistent with an economically important
role of adjustment along the extensive margin.

3.3

Hikes in the Mexican Value-Added Tax

Changes in VAT are relatively simple to study because their timing and size are observed by
economic agents. Mexican firms must include the VAT and mandated duties in their posted
prices. Changes in VAT aﬀect eﬀective mark-ups over costs, creating an incentive for price
adjustments. About a third of items in the Mexican CPI excluding housing rents are subject
to either the VAT or special duties. Exempt items include most education services, food
at home excluding beverages, patented drugs, and books and periodicals. Items subject to
special duties include gasoline, phone lines, tobacco products, and alcoholic beverages. The
most recent VAT hike occurred on January 1, 2010, when the rate rose by one percentage
point throughout Mexico. This shock was much smaller than the devaluation and thus less
likely to present strong nonlinear eﬀects (i.e., O (k∆k) in equation (5) is likely small).
Firms had a few price collection periods to prepare for its implementation. The VAT hike
also coincided with a rise in special duties on a few products. A more substantial 5-percentage
point hike took place amid the peso crisis on April 1, 1995, when the Mexican government,
faced with an urgent need for revenues, increased the rate from 10 to 15 percent. Its large
size aside, two features make the 1995 hike particularly interesting. First, it was decreed
on March 18, giving retailers little notice before its enactment. Second, firms located in the
touristic regions of Baja California and Quintana Roo, and within a narrow corridor along

17

the country’s southern and northern international borders, were exempt from the hike. We
will use these regions as a control group to analyze the impact of the hike.
Figures 2 and 3 show the observed distributions of price changes associated with the
January 2010 and April 1995 VAT hikes, respectively. For the 2010 hike, our counterfactual
distribution is the average density of price changes in the month of January during the years
2003 to 2007. For the 1995 hike, our counterfactual distribution is the one that prevailed
that month in regions not subject to the increase. This regional diﬀerence approach helps
control for macroeconomic shocks other than the VAT hike that likely influenced pricing
decisions at the time, notably the sharp contraction in economic activity.
For both hikes, we find strong responses of the frequency of price changes. Price changes
among taxable items were twice as frequent in January 2010 (385 percent) than in January
of 2003 to 2007 (average of 179 percent). In April 1995, 756 percent of taxable items in
regions subject to the hike experienced a price adjustment, compared to 480 percent in
regions exempt from the hike. As is apparent from figures 2 and 3, a large proportion of
price changes clustered around 1 percent in 2010 and 5 percent in 1995. Many firms also
seized the opportunity to raise prices by more than the hike, providing evidence that price
pressure from other sources was being released in the process. Note that these relatively
large price adjustments triggered by the shock are especially important contributors to the
initial pass-through. For items exempted from the VAT hikes, such as food products, the
observed and counterfactual distributions of price changes had similar shape during both
VAT hike episodes.
Under the assumption of full immediate pass-through of the VAT hike, the price of
taxable items should have risen 090 percent in 2010 and 445 percent in 1995. As reported
in table 3, the observed rate of inflation for taxable items in 2010 was 065 percentage point
higher than the counterfactual rate, consistent with an index of macroeconomic flexibility of
about 75 percent. The initial pass-through rate was especially high for taxable nonenergy
industrial goods (836 percent) but only about a third for taxable services. The diﬀerence
in inflation for taxable items in April 1995 between regions subject to and exempt from
the hike is consistent with a somewhat lower index of 628 percent. However, this estimate
likely understates the initial pass-through rate in April 1995. Inflation was running higher
in exempt regions in early 1995, consistent with border regions experiencing greater price
pressure from the devaluation. If we add the inflation diﬀerential for non-taxable items
observed in April 1995 to the inflation response of taxable items, then we obtain an initial
pass-through rate closer to 80 percent.
Table 3 also reports lower bounds on the relative importance of adjustment along the
extensive margin. For the 2010 hike, the full-pass-through method suggests that at least
18

three quarters of the observed jump in ∆ was attributable to adjustment along the extensive
margin, a finding that holds for both goods and services. The corresponding lower bounds for
1995 are noticeably smaller at about a quarter or less. This result is unsurprising in light of
the high frequency of price changes under the counterfactual scenario, which implies that the
timing of a large number of price adjustments was determined ahead of the tax hike. These
results oﬀer an interesting contrast between the sources of adjustment to the two VAT hikes.
While both episodes shared similar degrees of initial pass-through, price adjustment in the
low-inflation environment of 2010 operated to a greater extent via the extensive margin–
despite a smaller shock–than in the high-inflation environment of 1995.15
We also note that several implications of the Calvo+ lower bound method are counterintuitive. Absent a selection eﬀect, ∆ is revealed by the diﬀerence between the observed
and counterfactual average (nonzero) price change. This diﬀerence was negative for some
groups of products, notably services, following the VAT hikes, leading to the unappealing
implication that the shock was deflationary. And for categories with positive estimates of
∆, we sometimes find that the index of macroeconomic flexibility is greater than one. Such
an overshooting is at odds with the data because we find no evidence of inflation payback
(or, for that matter, continued pass-through) in the months that followed the hikes. We
interpret these counterintuitive implications as the data rejecting the absence of selection
eﬀects in the response to the VAT hike, as posited by the Calvo+ approach.

4

Some Evidence of a Selection Eﬀect

Adjustment along the extensive margin could be especially relevant for macro price stickiness
if items with large deviations from their individual reset price are more likely than others
to have the timing of their price adjustment altered by shocks. This section first documents
indirect manifestations of such a selection eﬀect on the observed distribution of price changes,
and then attempts a more direct assessment by studying how a firm’s pricing decisions relate
to those of its local competitors.

4.1

Price Pressure and the Distribution of Price Changes

One consequence of the presence of a selection eﬀect is that the distribution of deviations
should remain relatively compact. This observation has testable implications for the shape
of the distribution of nonzero price changes. Absent a selection eﬀect, the size of (nonzero)
15

Our Mexican sample does not allow us to explore asymetries in price adjustments to VAT increases
and decreases. Karadi and Reiﬀ (2010) report greater pass-through for VAT hikes than for VAT cuts in
Hungarian data.

19

individual price changes should equal, on average, the amount of aggregate reset price inflation having accrued since the last adjustment. Also, absent a selection eﬀect, the dispersion
of individual price changes should rise as idiosyncratic shocks pile up. The data provide
little empirical support for either phenomenon.
We use the massive repricing of items associated with the April 1995 Mexican VAT hike
to look for a drift in the mean price change conditional on the number of periods since the
last adjustment (a statistic called the “duration” or the “age of the price” in the literature).
Although we do not observe aggregate reset price inflation directly, we know that it was
substantial at the time because price adjustments were frequent and the CPI rose 40 percent
in the 12 months that followed the hike. We consider only items that experienced a price
change in April 1995, so that any pressure on individual reset prices stemming from the VAT
hike and other sources should have been released that month. We then look at the first price
adjustment that followed the hike conditional on the duration of the price. For example,
the 3-month-duration distribution uses only items that experienced a price change in April
1995 and had their next price change in July 1995. Such a conditioning ensures that items
have similar degrees of cumulated aggregate reset price inflation given the timing of their
first price adjustment following the VAT hike.
As figure 4 shows, the distributions of price changes are remarkably similar across durations. For all special groups of products considered, we find no apparent rise in the mean
nonzero price change in the first six months following the hike. For instance, the average price
change among nonenergy industrial goods was roughly 10 percent whether items had their
first adjustment one month, three months, or six months after the VAT hike. The rise in the
price index of nonenergy industrial goods diﬀered much over these horizons, however, at 7
percent after one month and at almost 20 percent after six months. Our findings are similar
for other groups of products. A related observation is that the average price change taking
place shortly after the VAT hike is larger than the amount of cumulated inflation, whereas
the average price change taking place several periods after the VAT hike is smaller than the
amount of cumulated inflation. This behavior is consistent with early price changers having
initially more price pressure to release than others in the sample due to idiosyncratic factors,
and late price changers initially benefiting from an oﬀsetting of aggregate reset price inflation
by idiosyncratic shocks, thus limiting the extent of the deviation from their individual reset
price.
To gauge the degree of similarity across the distributions at various durations, we compute
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics to test the hypothesis that the samples of nonzero price
changes used to compute the distributions at various durations are drawn from the same
population. In the vast majority of cases, we cannot reject at the 5-percent significance
20

level that pairs of the distributions shown in figure 4 are statistically diﬀerent.16 One may
suspect that the absence of rejection is due to the low power of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
especially given that the number of usable observations declines rapidly with the duration
considered. However, the test would have easily rejected the null of no diﬀerence in nearly
all cases if the mean of the distributions had drifted by the amount of cumulated inflation.
Low-inflation environments arguably provide better conditions to identify any drift in the
dispersion of nonzero price changes as idiosyncratic shocks accumulate. Figure 5 presents
the distributions in the U.S. consumer prices for four special groups of products. We find no
obvious increase in the dispersion of price changes as a function of duration, consistent with
a selection eﬀect limiting the size of price adjustments as idiosyncratic shocks accumulate. If
anything, some groups of products display a small decrease in the dispersion of price changes
conditional on the duration. Arguably, our distributions do not control for heterogeneity in
price-setting practices, which could imply, for example, that items with relatively elevated
idiosyncratic noise choose to reprice more often than those facing less volatility. Nevertheless,
the findings are consistent with that reported by Campbell and Eden (2010) and Klenow
and Kryvtsov (2008), who control for such heterogeneity.

4.2

Local Competition and the Adjustment Hazard

We next investigate how an item’s price adjustment probability relates to the deviation from
its individual reset price. An immediate diﬃculty in pursuing this objective is that the deviation is typically not observed unless there is a price adjustment. There are two approaches
in the literature for dealing with this hurdle. The first approach is to parametrize the shape
of the adjustment hazard to target moments of some aggregate variables of interest (e.g.,
Caballero and Engel [1993a and 1993b]). It has the benefit of not requiring the identification of individual reset prices but comes at the cost of ignoring rich micro data information.
The second approach, which we follow below, is to proxy the deviation using information
from observables. This approach has notably been employed to study car purchase decisions by Eberly (1994) and Attanasio (2000), and hiring decisions by Caballero, Engel, and
Haltiwanger (1997).
Applications of this latter approach to the study of pricing decisions have been constrained by the lack of micro data that can be used to proxy individual reset prices. We
note two exceptions. Using weekly scanner data from a large U.S. retailer, Eichenbaum,
16
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test assumes equal weights on the observations used to construct the distributions, whereas our distributions weigh observations according to their relative spending share in the sample.
Given that our objective is largely illustrative, we calculate the test statistics as if all observations had the
same weight.

21

Jaimovich, and Rebelo (2011) show that the probability of observing a change in an item’s
“reference” price (defined as the modal price in the quarter) is increasing in the deviation
from the average mark-up over the vendor cost (measured at the UPC-store level). Their
estimates imply a potent selection eﬀect: a 5-percentage-point increase in the deviation from
the average markup raises the probability of adjusting the reference price during a given week
by over 10 percentage points. A related finding is that deviations from the average markup
are small, with 90 percent of items having an absolute deviation of 10 percentage points or
less.
The other notable exception, which we follow below, is Campbell and Eden (2010), who
use weekly scanner data from two small Midwestern cities. They report that the probability
of observing a price change is increasing in the deviation between an item’s price and the
average price of local competitors selling the same UPC. A rationale for their approach is that
individual reset prices, when measured at the UPC-market level, may comove strongly due
to similarities in costs and the degree of local competition. Indeed, we will provide evidence
of limited dispersion in the level of prices across stores. There are also limitations to this
approach. Deviations from the average price of local competitors abstract from idiosyncratic
factors influencing individual reset prices. And even if firms shared the same individual reset
price, the deviation may imperfectly proxy for the actual amount of price pressure because
the average price of local competitors only gradually reflects common shocks due to nominal
rigidities.
4.2.1

Proxying for the Deviation

We use the SymphonyIRI Marketing dataset to investigate pricing decisions and local competition. As appendix A details, this dataset contains UPC-level information on weekly sales
and prices of U.S. grocery stores and drug stores. It allows us to control for the geographic location and to identify stores belonging to the same retail chain. The sample size is unusually
large at about 300 billion individual price observations per year. The dataset covers staple
food (e.g., carbonated beverages, condiments, and cereals) and personal care products (e.g.,
toilet paper and laundry detergent). We converted the price series to a monthly frequency,
as explained in appendix A.
To construct an estimate of the deviation, we follow Campbell and Eden (2010) in defining
the average price of store ’s local competitors in month ,
̄− =

X
6=

−  

The weight  − is the share of total UPC sales by item ’s local competitors that is
22

accounted for by store  on a yearly basis. We then compute the deviation from ̄−
prevailing at the beginning of the period, ̂ = −1 − ̄− . There could be factors leading
to permanent diﬀerences in the level of prices across stores, even conditioning on the UPC
and market. For example, the Chicago-area grocery chain Dominick’s Finer Foods uses a
four-tier system to set the level of prices across its stores in order to account for diﬀerences
in consumer price sensitivity and the degree of local competition. For this reason, we use
demeaned time series of the deviation unless otherwise indicated.
As section 2.3 mentions, only price adjustments coinciding with a reoptimization should
be comprised in the intensive and the extensive margins. Accordingly, in addition to using
posted prices, we consider a “regular” price series excluding one-month temporary price
drops and a “reference” price series computed as the modal posted price observed during
a 13-week period centered around the 15th day of the month. Our objective is not to
dismiss sales and nonreference prices as channels for the transmission of shocks. On the
contrary, there is mounting evidence that these prices are responsive to aggregate conditions,
although the extent of this response remains the subject of ongoing debate.17 Instead, we
use these alternative price series to provide statistics under a wider range of assumptions
regarding the set of price adjustments coinciding with a reoptimization. Appendix A details
the construction of these series.
4.2.2

Local Price Dispersion and the Nonparametric Adjustment Hazard

We first use our estimates ̂ to document the importance of dispersion in the level of
prices across stores at the UPC-market level.18 We sort ̂ from all UPCs and markets
with suﬃcient observations into 1-percentage-point bins, pooling together observations from
all months. The distributions weigh equally all UPC-market combinations. As a first step,
observations for a UPC-market combination are also weighted uniformly to highlight price
dispersion across stores. The upper panel of figure 6 shows the resulting distributions of
deviations for posted, regular, and reference prices before demeaning ̂ . The distributions
are clearly skewed to the right of zero: About 10 percent of observations for posted prices
and regular prices have ̂  0, a proportion that doubles to 20 percent for reference prices.
The explanation for this skewness is that total UPC sales within local markets tend to be
dominated by a small number of stores with relatively low prices. The distributions also have
17

See Klenow and Malin (2011) for a recent survey and several new facts, and Chevalier and Kashyap
(2011) for evidence that multi-product retailers may adjust the frequency and intensity of sales in response
to aggregate shocks.
18
Consistent with the CE decomposition, ̃ measures the deviation before an item’s price adjustment
decision, whereas previous studies of price dispersion (e.g., Reinsdorf 1994) focus on the deviation after
price adjustments take place. The shape of the distributions is little changed when we adopt this alternative
timing.

23

a relatively high density at or near zero due to some UPC-market combinations displaying
little if any dispersion in the level of prices.19 The lower panel of figure 6 reports the
distributions after demeaning ̂ by its average over time. These distributions are relatively
tight, which suggests that fluctuations in the level of prices are somewhat limited once one
accounts for permanent diﬀerences across stores.
We note at the outset that some of the observed price dispersion is not due to nominal
rigidities hampering price adjustment in response to shocks, but is rather traced back to
firms’ own pricing decisions. The upper panel of figure 7 illustrates this fact by showing how
prices at the edges of the distribution tend to be relatively young. The average age of posted,
regular, and reference prices peaks near 5 months, 6 months, and 10 months, respectively, for
̂ near zero. The average age then falls steadily as we consider increasingly large absolute
deviations from the average price of local competitors. In the case of posted and regular
prices, the average age of items with an absolute deviation around 20 percent is roughly 40
percent smaller than that of items with a deviation near zero. The relative age diﬀerence is
even larger for reference prices. These findings are consistent with those of Campbell and
Eden (2010), though obtained with a much larger sample, and caution against associating
all forms of price dispersion with resource misallocation. Consequently, we will take this
feature of the data into account in our subsequent analysis.
The middle panel of figure 7 plots the nonparametric adjustment hazard, Λ̂ (̂ ), obtained
by computing the price change frequency for each 1-percentage point bin. Unsurprisingly,
Λ̂ (̂ ) is highest for posted prices, which are relatively flexible, and lowest for reference
prices, which are relatively sticky. More importantly and consistent with the presence of
a selection eﬀect, Λ̂ (̂ ) is increasing in the absolute deviation from the average price of
local competitors. One may suspect that this phenomenon is driven by temporary sales
and promotions, which can cause posted prices to be temporarily located on the edges of
the distribution of deviations. However, the V shape is preserved when we exclude sales
and nonreference price changes. For instance, the probability of observing a reference price
change leaps from 7 percent when the item’s price equals the average reference price of its
local competitors, to between 20 percent and 30 percent when its (absolute) deviation reaches
20 percent.
The bottom panel of figure 7 shows that the median firm adjusts its reference price by the
full size of its price gap vis-à-vis local competitors (i.e., ∆ ≈ −̂ ). A similar conclusion
holds for posted prices and regular prices (not shown). That said, there is some heterogeneity
19
The spike near zero diminishes when we increase the minimum number of stores required for a UPCmarket combination to be included in the sample or when exclude stores belonging to the same chain as
store  from the calculation of ̄− . Our central finding of limited price dispersion remains, however.

24

in the size of price changes conditional on ̂ , as evidenced by the 10th and 90th percentile
lines reported in the panel. This variation suggests that, while ̂ is a roughly unbiased
estimate of the actual deviation,  , it misses other factors influencing individual reset
prices.
Figures 8 and 9 provide some evidence that the shape of Λ̂ (̂ ) is robust to alterations
to our baseline methodology. First, it retains its V shape when we compute it for narrower
product categories, as illustrated in figure 8 for salty snacks, carbonated beverages, cold
cereal, and frozen dinners. Second, we allow for the possibility that pricing decisions are
made at the chain level rather than at the store level by excluding stores belonging to the
same chain as retailer  from the computation of ̄− . The upper panel of figure 9 shows that
the resulting adjustment hazard is only a bit flatter than our benchmark case for reference
prices. The findings are qualitatively similar for posted prices and regular prices when we
control for chains (not shown). Third, figure 9 also presents the nonparametric adjustment
hazard obtained when the deviation is constructed using only the average price of the local
competitors that have reset their price over the previous six months. In this case, Λ̂ (̂ )
is a bit steeper than in our benchmark case. Finally, the lower panel of figure 9 reports
Λ̂ (̂ ) conditional on the age of the price. While the V shape is preserved at all durations
considered, the level of the estimated adjustment hazard declines with the age of the price,
consistent with negative duration dependence in the data.
4.2.3

Parametric Estimation of the Adjustment Hazard

The nonparametric nature of our analysis so far has precluded us from controlling for various
factors that could aﬀect the shape of the adjustment hazard function, such as seasonal repricing and a selection bias by which items with large deviations are drawn from UPC-market
combinations with relatively flexible prices. To assess whether these elements impact our
findings, in particular the V shape of the adjustment hazard, we estimate linear probability
models with item fixed eﬀects in the spirit of Campbell and Eden (2010). We focus on
reference prices to further limit the risk that sales, promotions, and other transitory price
movements bias our estimate of Λ (), and UPC-store fixed eﬀects are also included. Our
specification is
pos pos
̂neg
̂ + Γ0  +  
(∆ 6=0) =  0 +  neg
1
 +  1

where (∆ 6=0) is an indicator variable that item ’s price has changed, ̂neg
 is ̂ whenever
̂  0 and zero otherwise, ̂pos
 is similarly defined for positive deviations, and  is a
vector of control variables that include period dummies, the age of the price, and a measure
25

pos
of store size (total yearly revenues). ̂neg
 and ̂ allow the adjustment hazard to have
diﬀerent slopes for negative and positive deviations. We also considered higher-order terms
but their economic significance was minimal. We cluster the standard errors at the store level
and, given the expansive size of the IRI Marketing dataset, run the regressions at the product
category-market level. We only include in our sample items from UPC-market combinations
that have at least 10 observations.
The first three columns of table 4 display the estimated coeﬃcients for three product
category-market combinations: salty snacks in New York City, carbonated beverages in Los
Angeles, and frozen dinners in Boston. All slope coeﬃcients are statistically significant and
increasing in the (absolute) size of positive and negative deviations. In addition, the slopes
are comparable in magnitude to those obtained in our nonparametric exercise. As was the
case earlier, the results point to a steeper adjustment hazard for negative deviations than
positive ones, suggesting that relatively low prices are especially unlikely to persist for long.20
We also ran regressions with duration-specific dummies to determine whether the shape
of the adjustment hazard is driven by young prices. The results reported in table 5 show that
this is not the case. The coeﬃcients on the duration-specific dummies are economically small
and often not statistically significant, indicating that the age of prices is not an important
determinant of the slope of the adjustment hazard function. The lack of any improvement
in the goodness of fit relative to the benchmark regressions in table 4 is consistent with this
conclusion.

4.2.4

Local Competition and the Index of Macroeconomic Flexibility

Our benchmark nonparametric hazard has proven robust to controlling for several elements
unrelated to the selection eﬀect that could influence its slope. Consistent with the limited
amount of price dispersion across stores shown in figure 6, we see our regression results as
evidence that the timing of pricing decisions is sensitive to deviations from individual reset
prices, and that adjustment along the extensive margin may play a role at the macroeconomic
level. If we believe that the deviation from the price of local competitors (̂ ) and our
estimate Λ̂ (̂ ) are good proxies for the deviation from the actual individual reset price
( ) and adjustment hazard function (Λ ( )), respectively, then we have all the elements
needed to estimate the intensive and the extensive margins in equation 4 directly on the
micro data. Specifically, the intensive margin can be obtained by integrating Λ̂ (̂ ) over
the distribution of ̂ , and the extensive margin can be recovered by integrating the product
20

We also ran separate regressions for price increases and price decreases (not reported). We found that
the magnitude of the negative deviation (̂  0) has a large impact on the probability of a price increase,
but almost no impact on the likelihood of price decreases. The reverse is true for positive deviations.

26

of ̂ and the derivative of Λ̂ (̂ ) over the distribution of ̂ .
Table 6 shows our estimates of A and E when we perform such an exercise. We recover
the slope of Λ̂ (̂ ) separately for positive and negative deviations with linear regressions
using the point estimates for each 1-percentage point bin in figure 7 as observations. Absent
real rigidities, the index of macroeconomic flexibility ranges from 013 for reference prices to
037 for posted prices. About 30 percent of these index values is due to the extensive margin,
making this margin an economically important channel of price adjustment irrespective
of whether one uses posted, regular, or reference prices. If we instead assume moderate
real rigidities ( = 06) similar to those estimated on retail data by Burstein and Hellwig
(2007), then the estimated indexes of macroeconomic flexibility roughly halve. Although
these results imply greater macro price stickiness, it does not alter our view about the
importance of the extensive margin to   .
There is admittedly much uncertainty surrounding these estimates. Importantly, they
rely on an imperfect measure of the true deviation from individual reset prices. Whether
this measure leads us to underestimate or overestimate the slope of the adjustment hazard
is unclear. On the one hand, by omitting idiosyncratic factors, we add noise to the deviation
that could bias downward the slope of the adjustment hazard. The importance of the
extensive margin in table 6 is also near or below the lower bounds derived in section 3 in
the case of adjustment to large shocks. On the other hand, sluggish adjustment of the price
of local competitors to shocks could bias upward the slope of the nonparametric adjustment
hazard function. For these reasons, we see these estimates as suggestive that the extensive
margin is an important channel for macro price adjustment, but more work remains to be
done to refine these estimates and broaden the set of products to which they apply.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we have sought to connect micro price stickiness and macro price stickiness by
distinguishing between price changes whose timing is determined ahead of shocks and price
changes whose timing is altered by shocks. We have discussed the assumptions under which
observed price behavior can be used to infer the importance of each type of price changes for
aggregate inflation. We have found compelling evidence that some shocks alter the timing
of price changes, contributing significantly to the flexibility of the price level. Using the
terminology of Caballero and Engel (2007), this evidence of state-dependent behavior points
to an important role for the extensive margin in the initial response of inflation to shocks.
Our findings have several implications for macroeconomic modelling. First, researchers
primarily interested in fitting macro facts should be careful when claiming that their models
27

are consistent with micro facts. The current generation of macro models is still a long way
from capturing the richness of pricing strategies employed by firms; some simplification is
unavoidable. But, as our findings make clear, models featuring no extensive margin abstract
from an economically important channel of adjustment and their calibration should take that
aspect into account. Our results also suggest that micro-level price stickiness is at most a
moderate contributor to the transmission mechanism. Moreover, rapid initial pass-through
of the shocks covered in our study seems mostly incompatible with the presence of strong real
rigidities, a conclusion echoing that of Bils and Klenow (2004) and Bils et al. (forthcoming)
based on the dynamics of sectoral U.S. CPI inflation series.
Obviously, our work leaves several questions unanswered. We have considered only a
subset of sectoral and aggregate shocks that share the characteristic of being relatively easy
to identify. Micro price adjustment to other types of aggregate shocks –notably monetary
shocks– could be more sluggish. Also, there continues to be a lack of microeconomic data on
both costs and local competition, which could help refine estimates of individual reset prices
between price adjustment periods. Moreover, micro-level price evidence on the importance
of real rigidities, which is important for refining estimates of adjustment along the extensive
margin, remains constrained by limited data availability.

References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. 2011. “Optimal Price Setting
with Observation and Menu Costs.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no.4:19091960.
[2] Álvarez, Luis J. and Ignacio Hernando. 2004. “Price Setting Behaviour in Spain: Stylised
Facts using Consumer Price Micro Data.” Working Paper Series 416, European Central
Bank.
[3] Attanasio, Orazio P. 2000. “Consumer Durables and Inertial Behaviour: Estimation
and Aggregation of (S,s) Rules for Automobile Purchases.” Review of Economic Studies
67, no.4:667-96.
[4] Baharad, Eyal and Benjamin Eden. 2004. “Price Rigidity and Price Dispersion: Evidence from Micro Data.” Review of Economic Dynamics 7, no.3:613-641.
[5] Ball, Laurence M., and David Romer. 1990. “Real Rigidities and the Non-neutrality of
Money.” Review of Economic Studies 57, no.2:183—203.

28

[6] Barsky, Robert B., Christopher L. House, and Miles S. Kimball. 2007. “Sticky-Price
Models and Durable Goods.” American Economic Review 97, no. 3:984-998.
[7] Barro, Robert J. 1972. “A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment.” Review of Economic Studies 39, no.1:17-26.
[8] Berger, David and Joseph Vavra. 2011. “Dynamics of the U.S. Price Distribution.” Yale
University.
[9] Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
Prices.” Journal of Political Economy 112, no.5:947-985.
[10] Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin. (forthcoming). “Reset Price Inflation and the Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks,” American Economic Review.
[11] Blanchard, Oliver J. and S. Fisher. 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
[12] Bronnenberg, Bart J., Michael W. Kruger, and Carl F. Mela. 2008. “Database paper:
The IRI Marketing Data Set.” Marketing Science 27, no.4:745—748.
[13] Burstein, Ariel T. 2006. “Inflation and Output Dynamics with State-Dependent Pricing
Decisions.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, no.7:1235-1257.
[14] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2005. “Large Devaluations and
the Real Exchange Rate.” Journal of Political Economy 113, no.4:742-784.
[15] Burstein, Ariel and Christian Hellwig. 2007. “Prices and Market Shares in a Menu Cost
Model.” NBER Working Papers 13455, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[16] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. 1993a. “Microeconomic Adjustment
Hazards and Aggregate Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, no.2:359-383.
[17] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. 1993b. “Microeconomic Rigidities
and Aggregate Price Dynamics.” European Economic Review 37, no.4:697-711.
[18] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. 1999. “Explaining Investment
Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach.” Econometrica 67,
no.4:783-826.
[19] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. 2007. “Price Stickiness in Ss
Models: New Interpretations of Old Results.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54,
(Supplement):100-121.
29

[20] Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, and John Haltiwanger. 1997. “Aggregate
Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence.” American Economic
Review 87, no.1:115-137.
[21] Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of Monetary Economics 12, no.3:383-398.
[22] Campbell, Jeﬀrey R. and Benjamin Eden. 2010. “Rigid Prices: Evidence from U.S.
Scanner Data.” Working Paper Series WP-05-08, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
[23] Caplin, Andrew S. and Daniel F. Spulber. 1987. “Menu Costs and the Neutrality of
Money.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, no.4:703-25.
[24] Capistrán, Carlos and Gabriel López-Moctezuma. 2010. “Forecast Revisions of Mexican
Inflation and GDP Growth.” Working Paper 2010-11, Banco de México.
[25] Carlton, Dennis W. 1986. “The Rigidity of Prices.” American Economic Review 76,
no.4:637-58.
[26] Carlton, Dennis W. 1989. “The Theory and the Facts of How Markets Clear: Is Industrial Organization Valuable for Understanding Macroeconomics?” Handbook of Industrial Organization, ed. by R. Schmalensee & R. Willig, 1 ch.15:909-946.
[27] Cecchetti, Stephen G. 1986. “The Frequency of Price Adjustment: A Study of the
Newsstand Prices of Magazines.” Journal of Econometrics 31, no. 3:255-274.
[28] Chevalier, Judith A. and Anil K. Kashyap. 2011. “Best prices.” NBER Working Paper
16680.
[29] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal
Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
Economy 113, no.1:1—45.
[30] Costain, James and Anton Nakov. 2011. “Distributional Dynamics under Smoothly
State-Dependent Pricing.” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, no.6—8:646-665.
[31] Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Álvarez, Hervé Le Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias,
Johannes Hoﬀmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lünnemann, Fabio Rumler, and Jouko Vilmunen, 2005. “Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylized Facts from Individual
Consumer Price Data,” Working Paper 524, European Central Bank.

30

[32] Dotsey, Michael and Robert G. King. 2005. “Implications of State-dependent Pricing for
Dynamic Macroeconomic Models.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, no.1:213-242.
[33] Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “Reference Prices and
Nominal Rigidities.” American Economic Review 101, no.1:234-262.
[34] Eberly, Janice C. 1994. “Adjustment of Consumers’ Durables Stocks: Evidence from
Automobile Purchases.” Journal of Political Economy 102, no.1:403-36.
[35] Eden, Benjamin. 1994. “The Adjustment of Prices to Monetary Shocks When Trade Is
Uncertain and Sequential.” Journal of Political Economy 102, no.3:493-509.
[36] Eden, Benjamin. 2001. “Inflation and Price Adjustment: An Analysis of Microdata.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 4, no.3:607-636.
[37] Fabiani, Silvia, Martine Druant, Ignacio Hernando, Claudia Kwapil, Bettina Landau,
Claire Loupias, Fernando Martins, Thomas Mathä, Roberto Sabbatini, Harald Stahl,
and Ad Stokman. 2006. “What Firms’ Surveys Tell Us about Price-Setting Behavior in
the Euro Area.” International Journal of Central Banking, September:3-48.
[38] Gagnon, Etienne. 2009. “Price Setting during Low and High Inflation: Evidence from
Mexico.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no.4:1221-1263.
[39] Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Lucas Jr. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.”
Journal of Political Economy, 115:171-199.
[40] Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki. 2010. “Frequency of Price Adjustment and PassThrough.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no.2:675-727.
[41] Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki. 2011. “In Search of Real Rigidities.” NBER Chapters,
NBER Macroconomics Annual 2010 25:261-309.
[42] Head, Allen, Lucy Qian Liu, Guido Menzio, and Randall Wright. (forthcoming). “Sticky
Prices: a New Monetarist Approach.” Journal of the European Economic Association.
[43] Kara, Engin. 2011. “Understand and Modelling Reset Price Inflation.” Discussion Paper
11.623. University of Bristol.
[44] Karadi, Peter and Adam Reiﬀ. 2010. “Inflation Asymmetry, Menu Costs and Aggregation Bias — A Further Case for State Dependent Pricing.” Working Papers 20103,
Magyar Nemzeti Bank.

31

[45] Kashyap, Anil K. 1995. “Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogs.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110, no.1:245-74.
[46] Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov. 2008. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
Pricing: Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
123, no.3:863-904.
[47] Klenow, Peter J. and Benjamin A. Malin. 2011. “Microeconomic Evidence on PriceSetting.” Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Chapter 6, in B. M. Friedman
and M. Woodford (editors), pages 231-284.
[48] Lach, Saul and Daniel Tsiddon. 1992. “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data.” Journal of Political Economy 100, no.2:34989.
[49] Levy, Daniel, Dongwon Lee, Haipeng Chen, Robert J. Kauﬀman, and Mark Bergen.
2011. “Price Points and Price Rigidity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93,
no.4:1417-1431.
[50] Mackowiak, Bartosz and Frank Smets. 2008. “On Implications of Micro Price Data for
Macro Models.” Working Paper 960, European Central Bank.
[51] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices:
A Proposal To Replace The New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no.4:1295-1328.
[52] Midrigan, Virgiliu. 2011. “Menu-Costs, Multi-Product Firms and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica 79, no.4:1139-1180.
[53] Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of
Menu Cost Models.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, no.4:1415-1464.
[54] Reinsdorf, Marshall. 1994. “New Evidence on the Relation between Inflation and Price
Dispersion.” American Economic Review 84, no.3:720-731.
[55] Rotemberg, Julio J. 2011. “Fair Pricing.” Journal of the European Economic Association
9, no.5:952-981.
[56] Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 50, no.3:665-690.

32

[57] Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss. 1977. “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment.”
Review of Economic Studies 44, no.2:287-303.
[58] Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97, no.3:586-606.
[59] Taylor, John B. 1980. “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy 88, no.1:1-23.
[60] Varian, Hal R. 1980. “A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review 70, no.4:651-659.
[61] Woodford, Michael. 2008. “Inattention as a Source of Randomized Discrete Adjustment.” mimeo, Columbia University.
[62] Woodford, Michael. 2009. “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 56, (Supplement):S100-S124.
[63] Wulfsberg, Fredrik. 2009. “Price Adjustments and Inflation - Evidence from Norwegian
Consumer Price Data 1975-2004.” Working Paper 2009/11, Norges Bank.

33

Appendix A. Data Description
The datasets used in this paper have been described in earlier work, so we shall concentrate
on the features that are most relevant for our analysis.
Mexican CPI Database
Gagnon (2009) constructed the Mexican micro CPI dataset for the period January 1994
to December 2004 using monthly price and item substitution lists published by the Bank
of Mexico. We extended his sample period back to July 1993 and forward to December
2010. Price lists were not available electronically for 1993; the observations were manually
coded by a data entry firm using scans of the original documents made by Mexico’s Archivo
General de la Nación.
The dataset excludes product categories whose prices are regulated (e.g., taxi fares, phone
services, gasoline, and tuition fees) or reported as a sectoral index (e.g., housing, utilities,
and insurance). The sample covers 54 percent of Mexican consumer price expenditures prior
to the basket update of July 2002, and about 61 percent thereafter. The number of usable
monthly observations ranges from 21,000 in 1993 to 57,000 in 2010. Prices are inclusive of
sales as long as these sales are conditional on the purchase of a single item. There is no
flag in the dataset indicating that an item is on sale but the application of filters to remove
V-shaped price patterns suggests that sales are less prominent than in the U.S. CPI.
U.S. CPI Database
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) makes available most of the micro data behind
the oﬃcial U.S. CPI on a restricted-access basis through its CPI-Research Database. This
database excludes housing rents, whose index is computed separately due to diﬀerences in
sampling and treatment. With the exceptions of food, energy, and a few additional product
categories, item prices are collected every other month in all metropolitan areas but the
largest three (New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago), where price collection takes place
monthly for all items. The database starts in January 1988 and we extracted data through
December 2009. We restrict the sample to the largest three metropolitan areas, leaving us
with between 12,000 and 19,000 observations per month. The individual observations are
weighted using the same procedure and product category weights as BKM.21 We classified the
product categories according to the United Nations Classification of Individual Consumption
According to Purpose (COICOP) in order to compute statistics for special groups of products.
For additional details on this dataset, see the BLS Handbook of Methods, Bils and Klenow
(2004), Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
SymphonyIRI Group Scanner Database
21

We thank them for sharing these weights with us.

34

The IRI Marketing dataset includes scanner data from U.S. grocery stores and drugstores.
Its content is detailed in Bronnenberg, Kruger, and Mela (2008). An observation corresponds
to a specific item sold by a given store in a particular week. Available information includes
total revenue from the sale of the item and the number of units sold. As is customary with
scanner data, the unit price is obtained by dividing total revenue by the quantity sold. The
number of usable observations in the dataset is enormous at about 300 billion per year.
The dataset has several appealing features. First, observations are collected frequently.
Second, the sample covers a relatively long time span, January 2001 to December 2007, that
allows us to look at price dynamics. Third, information is available for 31 food and personal
care product categories, such as beer, household cleaners, and milk. Fourth, the geographical
coverage –50 U.S. markets– is more extensive than that of other scanner datasets used in
the literature, and includes several retailers within each market. To study pricing decisions in
competitive environments, we restrict the sample to Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles,
New York, Philadelphia, San Diego, and Washington D.C.. These markets have between 30
and 97 stores. One limitation of the dataset is that it does not contain information about
costs.
We applied a number of filters to the data to make them suitable for our analysis. First,
we censored fractional price observations. For various reasons (use of membership cards,
price changes during the week, etc.), dividing total revenue by the number of units sold
occasionally yields a price with fractional cents (e.g., $37485). For New York City, fractional
prices represent less than 02 percent of posted prices, and a negligible proportion of reference
prices; censoring fractional prices is thus mostly inconsequential for our results. Second, in
some applications, we filtered out temporary sales, which we define as a price drop that
is oﬀset within two weeks by a price increase of equal magnitude. Third, we considered
a slight variant of the reference price filter of Eichenbaum et al. (2011). Specifically, the
reference price of a given item in week  corresponds to the mode of the posted price over a
13-week centered window. Fourth, we converted weekly statistics to a monthly frequency by
selecting weekly observations encompassing the 15th day of every month. Fifth, we require a
minimum of 10 observations (stores) in constructing the average price of local competitors,
̄− . Finally, an item must be present in the sample at least 24 months to be included in
the analysis.

35

Appendix B. Adjustment along the Intensive Margin
The frequency of price change is approximately equal to the intensive margin and, provided
real rigidities are not too strong, oﬀers a lower bound on the index of macroeconomic flexibility. For the revelation principle to apply, only price adjustments coinciding with a reoptimization should be comprised in the intensive margin. For this reason, we report alternative
measures of the average frequency that exclude sales and nonreference prices changes. These
alternative measures provide a range of estimates for the intensive margin under widely used
assumptions regarding the set of price adjustments coinciding with a reoptimization.
The top of table 1 reports the average frequency of price changes in the CPI excluding
shelter in the three largest U.S. metropolitan areas. According to Klenow and Kryvtsov
(2008), items representing 362 percent of consumer expenditures experience a price adjustment every month. This statistic suggests that, absent strong real rigidities, nominal shocks
are initially passed through rapidly to individual reset prices even if no adjustment along the
extensive margin were to take place. The average frequency of price changes slides to a stillelevated 299 percent when one excludes price changes flagged by the BLS as related to sales
and promotions. Filtering out nonreference price changes is more consequential. Klenow and
Malin (2011) find an average frequency of 146 percent when they define the reference price
as the modal price over a 13-month window centered on the current month, implying that
reference prices are considerably stickier than regular prices. Whether one should ignore all
nonreference price changes is debatable, however. Klenow and Malin (2011) show that price
changes exhibit considerable novelty: Every month, the price of a quarter of items in the
U.S. CPI is adjusted to a level not seen over the previous 12 months. Also, some frequently
occurring prices could be chosen because consumers find them more attractive than others
(e.g., $9.99 versus $10.47), in which case some of the stickiness in references prices could
be due to features of consumer demand rather than rigidity in pricing strategy.22 Finally,
Eichenbaum et al. (2011) show that replacement costs also exhibit reference behavior. It
is thus plausible that reference price behavior reflects to some degree a similar feature of
individual reset prices.
In the bottom of table 1, we present related statistics for the IRI Marketing database.
Although its product coverage is restricted to food and personal care product, the frequency
statistics are similar to the U.S. CPI. The monthly average frequency is 372 percent for
posted prices and 256 percent after filtering out V-shaped price drops. Monthly reference
prices changes, at 135 percent, are less frequent but, as was the case with CPI prices, scanner
prices exhibit considerable novelty.
22

See Levy et al. (2011) for evidence that some digits are overrepresented in posted prices.

36

Appendix C. The Extensive Margin and Bils-KlenowMalin Reset Price Inflation
Imputing individual reset prices between adjustment periods is a delicate task. With only
price information at hand, one does not know if an item’s price change is releasing pressure
generated by a single large shock or accumulated gradually from various sources. In a recent
paper, Bils, Klenow, and Malin (forthcoming, henceforth “BKM”) propose a method that
uses the behavior of items changing their price to infer the amount of price pressure building
up for other items in the sample. The method works under specific assumptions about the
data-generating process that commonly hold in models in which the timing of price changes is
exogenous. It is employed to recover a time series for the common component of individual
reset price inflation whose behavior is then used to assess the empirical relevance of the
initial assumptions. This appendix briefly reviews this method, shows how the identification
is informed by the CE decomposition, and then discusses the challenges of applying it to
assess the importance of adjustment along the extensive margin.
BKM’s Identification Method
BKM estimate item ’s individual reset price in period  as follows
=
∗


(

∗−1

if  =
6 −1


∗
+ 
if  = −1

(10)

The individual reset prices of an item whose posted price is unchanged is obtained by incrementing the previous-period imputed value by an estimate of aggregate reset price inflation,
. This estimate corresponds to the average change in ∗
of items whose posted
 ∗


∗
is constructed by initializing individual
price is adjusted in period . A time series for 
∗
. The dependence of  ∗
on the inireset prices and then recursively computing  

tial conditions quickly fades as price adjustments occur. Equation (10) can be alternatively
written as
(
if  6= −1

=

∗
P −1 ∗

− + =0  −
if  = −1

where  is the number of periods since item ’s last price adjustment. This data-generating
process diﬀers from that assumed in equation (1), which implies that item’s  individual reset

37

price evolves according to
∗ =

(

− +

if  =
6 −1


P

−1
∗

+

if

=

−

−1
−
=0
=0

P −1

(11)

P −1
− captures the accumulation of idiosyncratic shocks since the last price
The term =0
adjustment. Comparing the above two equations, it is apparent that BKM’s method abstracts from the presence of idiosyncratic shocks. These shocks play no role in aggregate
price dynamics for models in which the timing of adjustments is exogenous to the firms, such
as the popular Calvo (1983) and Taylor (1980) models. As we now illustrate, abstracting
and  ∗ when these shocks are
from idiosyncratic shocks can create a wedge between  ∗

present and firms adjust along the extensive margin.
BKM’s Identification and the CE Decomposition: an Approximation
=  ∗ =
For ease of exposition, consider an economy that starts in a steady state with  ∗

̄ and in which actual individual reset prices evolve according to equation (11). Suppose
that all individual reset prices are perturbed by a small one-time impulse ∆ prior to price
adjustment decisions in period . Let  and  denote the initial response of the average
frequency and size of (nonzero) price changes, respectively. As in section 3.1, we denote the
variables under the counterfactual scenario of no shock using a “˜”. The inflation innovation
attributable to the shock in the initial period can be written as
f f
 
∆  =   − 

Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) show that nearly all the variation in U.S. CPI inflation over the
past two decades is attributable to movements in  while movements in  are relatively
small and only weakly correlated with inflation. Using this observation, we approximate  
and f by the average frequency,   , to get
³
´
f
∆  ≈   −  =  ∆∗



The last equality uses the fact that BKM’s procedure imputes any movement in the average
size of nonzero price changes to a movement in aggregate reset price inflation. Finally, using
equation (4) and A ≈ , we obtain
∆ ∗


¶
µ
E
∆ 
≈ 1+
A
38

(12)

In short, BKM’s method overestimates the innovation to reset price inflation by a factor that
depends on the importance of the extensive margin relative to the intensive margin. In the
would be an unbiased
absence of adjustment along the extensive margin (E = 0),  ∗

is overly volatile relative to  ∗ whenever
estimator of  ∗ . One implication is that ∗

E A  0. Another implication is that the extra (E A ) ∆ wrongly imputed to the
individual reset price of nonadjusters in period  needs to be oﬀset in subsequent periods
summing up to negative (E A ) ∆ . A rapid oﬀsetting can help
by increments to ∗
+
generate uncorrelated or negatively persistent measured aggregate reset price inflation, as
found by BKM and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011). Figure 10 illustrates these eﬀects in a
baseline menu-cost model à la Golosov and Lucas (2007) in which E A is about 2.23 Upon
impact of a 1-percent shock to individual reset prices, the BKM procedure imputes a change
in individual reset prices of nonadjusters of about 3 percent. The procedure quickly corrects
this overestimation in subsequent periods as firms responding to the shock with a delay
release less price pressure than initially imputed.
We stress that the bias in BKM’s method is not due to the extensive margin in itself but
rather to the joint presence of idiosyncratic shocks and the asymmetric eﬀect of the shock on
the probability of price change of items with positive and negative deviations.24 A positive
aggregate shock triggers the release of price pressure due to idiosyncratic factors through the
selection eﬀect, but BKM’s procedure is not designed to disentangle that pressure from that
accruing to the common component of individual reset prices.
BKM are well aware that their identifying assumptions do not hold for general datagenerating processes. Indeed, their objective is precisely to test the empirical relevance
of their assumptions by studying the behavior of reset price inflation series calculated on
the micro data. In their 2009 NBER working paper, they pursue this objective notably
by applying their method to series generated from baseline Calvo and menu-cost models
calibrated to match CPI inflation dynamics. They then compare the predicted reset price
23

The model assumes a symmetric  band, a process for individual reset prices as in equation (11), and
normally distributed idiosyncratic shocks. Aggregate reset price inflation is set to the average monthly U.S.
CPI inflation excluding shelter from 1988 to 2007. The width of the  band and the variance of idiosyncratic
innovations are calibrated to match an average frequency and average absolute magnitude of nonzero price
changes of 25 percent and 10 percent, respectively.
24
In particular, BKM’s procedure is consistent when the data are generated from the Caplin and Spulber
(1987) model for which all price adjustments occur along the extensive margin through the selection eﬀect.
That model has no idiosyncratic shocks, so there is no confusion that price adjustments reflect solely price
pressure attributable to aggregate shocks. The method is also consistent when the data are generated from a
Calvo model with idiosyncratic shocks for which the exogenous probability of price changes varies in response
to aggregate conditions. Although this model has no selection eﬀect, it still has an extensive margin due
to variation in the frequency of price changes. In both of these examples, the frequency of price changes is
sensitive to the size of the shock. The approximation of the frequency of price changes by a constant used
to derive equation (12) would not be appealing in these environments.

39

inflation series to that estimated on CPI micro data. The estimated series is highly volatile
and exhibits either no or negative persistence. These features are most closely replicated by
their baseline menu-cost model with no strategic complementarities. This model entails a
major role for adjustment along the extensive margin in explaining U.S. inflation dynamics,
a conclusion that echoes the findings obtained using the alternative approaches in our paper.
However, at least three factors other than the extensive margin could create spurious
. As with E  0 discussed above, these factors
volatility and negative persistence in  ∗

imply that the behavior of price adjusters is not representative of that of nonadjusters. First,
the method is sensitive to sample size because it leverages the behavior of a minority of price
adjusters to infer the price pressure accruing to all items. Any sampling uncertainty or coding
mistakes in the subset of adjusters will thus be imputed to nonadjusters. Second, sectoral
shocks may be confused with aggregate shocks. BKM deal with this issue by estimating
separate reset price inflation series for 64 groups of products, but we see a risk of accentuating
biases due to sample size. Third, the response of individual reset prices to aggregate shocks
may be asymmetric across items in ways that correlate with the frequency of price changes.
For instance, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) show that frequent adjusters pass-through a
larger share of exchange rate movements than infrequent adjusters in a sample of U.S. trade
prices. Kara (2011) provides a theoretical example in which frequent adjusters are more
responsive to transitory shocks than infrequent adjusters. We believe that further work
on these aspects could help shed further light on the importance of adjustment along the
extensive margin for U.S. inflation dynamics.

40

Table 1: Standard measures of the intensive margin in the U.S. CPI and the IRI Marketing
database

U.S. CPI
Database

Weekly frequency Monthly frequency
(percent)
(percent)

Sample period

  

n.a.

36.2

1/1988 − 1/2005

 

n.a.

29.9

1/1988 − 1/2005

  
13- 

n.a.

14.6

1/1988 − 10/2009

 

n.a.

25.0

1/1988 − 10/2009

IRI Marketing
Database

Weekly frequency Monthly frequency
(percent)
(percent)

Sample period

  

22.6

37.2

1/2001 − 12/2007

 

18.1

25.6

1/2001 − 12/2007

  
13- 

4.0

13.5

1/2001 − 12/2007

 

n.a.

23.8

1/2001 − 12/2007

Notes: (a) Source: Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). Regular prices correspond to posted prices
excluding sales and promotions as flagged by the BLS. (b) Source: Klenow and Malin (2011).
Novel prices are defined as prices that have not been observed for at least 12 months. An
item’s reference price is defined as the modal price over a centered 13-month window. (c)
Regular prices exclude price drops returning to their original level within 2 weeks. The
reference price is defined as the modal price over a centered window.
41

Table 2: Lower bounds on the share of initial pass-through attributed to adjustment along
the extensive margin during the late-1994 Mexican peso devaluation

Initial
pass-through
(∆∆, percent)

Share attributed to
extensive margin
(percent)

Full pass-through (∆ = 50%)
posted prices
unprocessed food
processed food
nonenergy industrial goods
services

84.7
72.9
85.4
95.9
57.8

70.5
47.4
75.2
84.8
84.5

Full pass-through (forecast revision)
posted prices
unprocessed food
processed food
nonenergy industrial goods
services

30.8
26.5
31.0
34.9
21.0

18.9
-44.9
31.7
58.1
57.4

Calvo +
posted prices
unprocessed food
processed food
nonenergy industrial goods
services

67.5
60.1
83.9
64.2
46.2

63.0
36.2
74.7
77.3
80.6

Bound method

Notes: The “full pass-through” method first assumes full immediate pass-through of a 50%
devaluation to individual reset price based on a total import content of consumption equal
to 109%, as estimated by Burstein et al. (2005). It then assumes that individual reset
prices rose as much as the revision to the mean inflation forecast for the calendar year 1995
observed in a Bank of Mexico survey at the turn of 1995. The “Calvo+” method assumes
no real rigidities and the random selection of items whose price adjustment is triggered by
the shock.
42

Table 3: Lower bounds on the share of initial pass-through attributed to adjustment along
the extensive margin during the January 2001 and April 1995 VAT hikes
Initial
pass-through
(∆∆, percent)

Share attributed to
extensive margin
(percent)

72.3
83.6
34.8

75.2
75.3
66.2

266.9
104.0
−38.8

93.3
80.1
130.3

62.8
67.8
41.3

23.5
15.0
24.7

−249.1
134.4
−356.1

119.3
57.1
108.7

January 2010 hike
   − 
posted prices
nonenergy industrial goods
services
 +
posted prices
nonenergy industrial goods
services
April 1995 hike
   − 
posted prices
nonenergy industrial goods
services
+
posted prices
nonenergy industrial goods
services

Notes: The “full pass-through” method full immediate pass-through of the VAT hike to
individual reset prices of taxable items. The “Calvo+” method assumes no real rigidities
and the random selection of items whose price adjustment is triggered by the shock. Only
taxable items were used in the computation of the statistics.

43

Table 4: Probability of Price Adjustment

New York City Los Angeles
Boston
Salty
Carbonated Frozen dinner
snacks
beverages
entrees
(1)
(2)
(3)
Regressor Coef.
 neg
̂neg
1

̂pos


2


 pos
1

−1.220
(0.029)

−0.979
(0.018)

−0.891

0.665

0.574

0.495

0.11
1,056,906

0.06
938,349

0.07
396,471

(0.035)

(0.015)

(0.053)

(0.042)

Notes: Fixed eﬀect (store-UPC) linear probability regression model for the monthly change
in reference prices across diﬀerent categories and markets:
pos pos
0
(∆ 6=0) =  0 +  neg
̂neg
̂ + 
Γ +  
1
 +  1

where (∆ 6=0) is an indicator variable that a reference price change has occurred, ̂neg
 equals
pos
̂ if ̂  0 and zero otherwise (with ̂ similarly defined for positive deviations), and
 is a vector of control variables that includes monthly dummies, the age of the price,
and a measure of store size (total yearly revenues). Standard errors (in parentheses) are
corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the store level.  is the number of monthly
observations from January 2001 to December 2007.

44

Table 5: Probability of a Price Adjustment by Spell Duration

New York City Los Angeles
Boston
Salty
Carbonated Frozen dinner
snacks
beverages
entrees
(4)
(5)
(6)
Regressor
̂neg


Coef.
 neg
1

̂pos


−1.263
(0.030)

−1.084
(0.021)

−0.928

 pos
1

0.698

0.586

0.576

(4≤8) ̂neg


 neg
2

0.217

0.180

0.154

(4≤8) ̂pos


 pos
2

−0.008
(0.018)

−0.031
(0.023)

−0.020

(8≤12) ̂neg


 neg
3

0.049

0.220

0.112

(8≤12) ̂pos


 pos
3

-0.014

0.068

−0.155

(12) ̂neg


 neg
4

0.160

0.337
(0.023)

−0.003

(12) ̂pos


 pos
4

-0.160
(0.024)

−0.061
(0.024)

−0.203

0.12
1,056,906

0.06
938,349

0.06
396,471

(0.038)
(0.025)

(0.047)
(0.023)
(0.024)

2


(0.019)
(0.023)

(0.022)
(0.035)

(0.062)
(0.050)
(0.092)
(0.045)
(0.116)
(0.067)
(0.088)
(0.048)

Notes: Fixed eﬀect (store-UPC) linear probability regression model for the monthly change
in reference prices across diﬀerent categories and markets:
(∆ 6=0) =

 0 + neg
1

pos
̂neg
 + 1

4
X

̂pos
 +

=2

 neg
 ( ∈Υ )

4
X

̂neg
 +

=2

pos
0
 pos
 ( ∈Υ ) ̂ + Γ+ 

pos
where (∆ 6=0) , ̂neg
 , and ̂ have been defined in Table 4. ( ∈Υ ) is an indicator variable
that the duration of the price spell  belongs to age group Υ , where the age groups
considered are 4 to 8 months, 9 to 12 months and more than 12 months.  is a vector of
control variables that includes monthly dummies and a measure of store size (total yearly
revenues). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered
at the store level.  is the number of monthly observations from January 2001 to December
2007.
45

Table 6: Index of Macroeconomic Flexibility


 = 0  = 06

A

E

   

027

010

037

019

  

018

008

025

012

  

009

004

013

006

Notes: This table reports estimates of the intensive and the extensive margins based on
equation 7 for the IRI Marketing dataset. We use deviations from the average price of local
competitors to proxy for deviations from individual reset prices and to estimate a nonparametric adjustment hazard function. The index of macroeconomic flexibility is computed
given no real rigidities ( = 0) and moderate real rigidities ( = 06)

46

Figure 1: Initial impact of the Mexican peso devaluation on the distribution of price changes
All items
0.07
0.06

density

0.05

Actual
Counterfactual

Frequency
−actual 50.7%
−count. 24.9%

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
−50

−40

−30

−20

−10

0
percent

10

Unprocessed food

40

50

0.08
Frequency
−actual 58.7%
−count. 38.4%

0.06
density

density

0.05

30

Processed food

0.07
0.06

20

0.04
0.03
0.02

Frequency
−actual 46.9%
−count. 21.2%

0.04

0.02

0.01
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Nonenergy industrial goods

Services

0.1
Frequency
−actual 45.9%
−count. 14.6%

0.06
0.04

0.03
0.025
density

density

0.08

0.035
Frequency
−actual 25.6%
−count. 8.9%

0.02
0.015
0.01

0.02
0.005
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of nonzero price changes in the Mexican CPI
observed in January 1995 (the “actual” distribution) and in January 1994 (the “counterfactual” distribution) for special groups of products. Observations are grouped into bins of 2.5
percentage points and weighted by their relative importance in the CPI. The inserts in the
panels report the monthly frequency of price changes.

47

Figure 2: Initial impact of the January 2010 1-percent hike in the Mexican VAT on the
distribution of price changes
All items (not taxed)

All items (taxed)

0.1
0.08

Frequency
−actual 49.2%
−count. 46.7%

Actual
Counterfactual

Frequency
−actual 38.5%
−count. 17.9%

density

density

0.1
0.06
0.04

0.05
0.02
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Unprocessed food (not taxed)
0.08

Processed food (not taxed)
0.08

Frequency
−actual 59.5%
−count. 61.1%

0.06

density

density

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.04

0.02

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Nonenergy industrial goods (taxed)

Services (taxed)

0.2

0.15

Frequency
−actual 41.4%
−count. 33.4%

0.06
Frequency
−actual 47.5%
−count. 20.7%

0.05

Frequency
−actual 25.3%
−count. 11.8%

0.1

density

density

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.01
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of nonzero price changes in the Mexican CPI observed in January 2010 (the “actual” distribution) and an average of distributions observed
in January from 2003 to 2007 (the “counterfactual” distribution) for special groups of products. Observations are grouped into bins of 2.5 percentage points and weighted by their
relative importance in the CPI. Inserts in the panels report the monthly frequency of price
changes.
48

Figure 3: Initial impact of the April 1995 5-percent hike in the Mexican VAT on the distribution of price changes
All items (not taxed)

All items (taxed)

0.12
0.1

0.2
Frequency
−actual 55.8%
−count. 58.5%

Actual
Counterfactual
0.15

Frequency
−actual 75.6%
−count. 48.0%

density

density

0.08
0.06

0.1

0.04
0.05
0.02
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Unprocessed food (not taxed)

Processed food (not taxed)

0.1
0.08

Frequency
−actual 55.4%
−count. 64.0%

Frequency
−actual 62.2%
−count. 68.3%
density

density

0.1
0.06
0.04

0.05
0.02
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Nonenergy industrial goods (taxed)

Services (taxed)

0.25
Frequency
−actual 84.0%
−count. 57.7%

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

0.15
density

density

0.2

0.2
Frequency
−actual 61.7%
−count. 31.1%

0.1

0.05

0
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
percent

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of nonzero price changes in the Mexican CPI
observed in April 1995 in regions subject to the VAT hike (the “actual” distribution) and
in regions not subject to the VAT hike (the “counterfactual” distribution) for special groups
of products. Observations are grouped into bins of 2.5 percentage points and weighted by
their relative importance in the CPI. Inserts in the panels report the monthly frequency of
price changes.
49

Figure 4: Distribution of nonzero price changes in the Mexican CPI conditional on a price
change in April 1995
Unprocessed food
duration=1
mean 7.4
stdev 10.0
0.15 cumπ 3.9
0.2

duration=3
mean
stdev
0.15 cumπ
0.2

6.2
9.5
8.6

duration=6
mean 5.8
stdev 7.4
0.15 cumπ 13.5
0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Processed food
duration=1
0.15 mean
stdev
cumπ

8.9
8.1
4.8

duration=3
0.15 mean 8.2
stdev 8.1
cumπ 10.2

duration=6
0.15 mean 7.2
stdev 8.2
cumπ 16.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Nonenergy industrial goods
duration=1
0.1

mean 10.3
stdev 10.3
cumπ 6.8

0.05

duration=3
0.1

mean 10.1
stdev 10.2
cumπ 12.4

0.05

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

duration=6
0.1

mean 10.1
stdev 10.6
cumπ 18.6

0.05

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Services
duration=1
0.15

mean 11.2
stdev 8.2
cumπ 2.5

duration=3
0.15

mean
stdev
cumπ

9.8
7.7
6.2

duration=6
0.15

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

mean 11.4
stdev 10.2
cumπ 10.0

0
−50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Notes: This figure shows the distributions of first nonzero price changes in the Mexican CPI
conditional on a nonzero price change in April 1995 and the duration (in months). The
upper-left corner of each panel reports the mean (in percent), its standard deviation (in
percentage points), and the cumulated inflation in the special group since April 1995 (in
percent).
50

Figure 5: Distribution of nonzero posted price changes in the U.S. CPI conditional on the
duration since the last price change

Unprocessed food
duration=1
0.08

mean: 4.3
stdev: 36.0

duration=3
0.08

duration=6
0.08

mean: -6.5
stdev: 32.5

mean: -9.5
stdev: 31.6

duration=12
0.08

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

mean: -5.7
stdev: 29.3

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Processed food
duration=1
0.2
0.15

mean: 6.2
stdev: 26.2

duration=3
0.2
0.15

duration=6
0.2

mean: -4.4
stdev: 22.8

0.15

mean: -5.6
stdev: 20.4

duration=12
0.2
0.15

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

mean: -3.6
stdev: 19.1

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Nonenergy industrial goods
duration=1
0.15

mean: 0.3
stdev: 22.1

duration=3
0.15

duration=6

mean: -3.3
stdev: 20.8

0.15

mean: 2.2
stdev: 27.0

duration=12
0.15

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

mean: -0.8
stdev: 25.8

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Services
duration=1
0.3
0.25

mean: 0.5
stdev: 22.4

duration=3
0.3
0.25

mean: 0.5
stdev: 16.1

duration=6
0.3
0.25

mean: 3.1
stdev: 14.1

duration=12
0.3
0.25

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

0
-50-40-30-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50

mean: 6.3
stdev: 11.5

0
-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40 50

Notes: This …gure shows the distribution of nonzero posted price changes in the U.S. CPI
conditional on the duration (in months) since the last price change. The sample period is
January 1988 to August 2010.
51

Figure 6: Deviation from the average posted price of competitors and individual price adjustments
Distribution of deviations from average price of local competitors (not de−meaned)
0.15
Posted
Regular
Reference

density

0.1

0.05

0

−30

−20

−10

0
percent

10

20

30

Distribution of deviations from average price of local competitors (de−meaned)

density

0.1

0.05

0

−30

−20

−10

0
percent

10

20

30

Notes: The upper and lower panels show the distribution of deviations from the average
price of local competitors, computed at the UPC-market level in the IRI Marketing dataset,
before and after removing item fixed eﬀects to account for permanent diﬀerences in the level
of prices across stores.

52

Figure 7: Deviation from the average reference price of competitors and individual price
adjustments
Average age of prices

Average age of prices

12
Posted
Regular
Reference

10
8
6
4
2
0

−30

−20

−10

0
deviation (percent)

10

20

30

20

30

Nonparametric adjustment hazard function

Price change frequency

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

−30

−20

−10

0
deviation (percent)

10

Difference between observed price change and imputed deviation (reference prices)
30
Median
10th and 90th percentiles

20

percent

10
0
−10
−20
−30

−30

−20

−10

0
deviation (percent)

10

20

30

Notes: The upper panel shows the average age of monthly posted, regular, and reference
prices in the IRI Marketing dataset conditional on the (demeaned) deviation from the corresponding average price of local competitors. The middle panel shows the fraction of items
experiencing a price change during the month conditional on the deviation. The lower panel
shows the median diﬀerence between the observed price change (∆ ) and the imputed price
pressure (−̃ ), along with the 10th and 90th percentiles diﬀerences.
53

Figure 8: Nonparametric adjustment hazard function for four product categories
Salty snacks
posted
regular
reference

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5
percent

percent

Carbonated beveverages

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

−20

0

0
20
deviation (percent)

−20

Frozen dinners

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5
percent

percent

Cold cereal

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

−20

0
20
deviation (percent)

0

0
20
deviation (percent)

−20

0
20
deviation (percent)

Notes: The figure shows the monthly probability of observing a change in the reference price
conditional on the (demeaned) deviation from the average reference price of local competitors
for four product categories in the IRI Marketing dataset.

54

Figure 9: Nonparametric adjustment hazard conditional on age and alternative measures of
local competitition

Alternative measures of local competition

Price change frequency

0.5
All stores
Competing chains
Recent adjusters

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

−30

−20

−10

0
deviation (percent)

10

20

30

Conditional on age

Price change frequency

0.5
2 months
6 months
12 months

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

−30

−20

−10

0
deviation (percent)

10

20

30

Notes: The upper panel shows the probability of a reference price change conditional on
alternative measures of the (demeaned) deviation from the prices of local competitors. The
measures use either all other stores (“All stores”), stores belonging to competing chains
(“Competing chains”), or retailers that have adjusted their price over the current or previous
six months (“Recent adjusters”). The lower panel shows the probability of a reference price
change as a function of the deviation from the average price of competitors, conditional on
the duration since the last price change. The data source is the IRI Marketing dataset .

55

Figure 10: Estimated aggregate reset price inflation using BKM’s methodology in response
to a 1-percent shock to actual aggregate reset price inflation (menu-cost model)
4
Actual
Estimated
3

percent

2

1

0

−1

−2

−2

0

2

4
6
months after shock

8

10

12

Notes: This figure applies BKM’s methodology for identifying aggregate reset price inflation
to the study of a 1-percent jump in the level of individual reset prices in a baseline menu-cost
model. The model assumes a symmetric  band, a process for individual reset prices as
in equation (11), and normally distributed idiosyncratic shocks. The model is calibrated
to match an average frequency of price changes of 25 percent and an average size of price
changes of 10 percent.

56

