                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MATCHING CONTRIBUTIONS AND SAVINGS OUTCOMES:
                    A BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVE

                                          Brigitte C. Madrian

                                         Working Paper 18220
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18220


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2012




This paper was prepared for the World Bank Conference “The Potential for Matching Defined Contribution
(MDC) Design Features in Pension Systems to Increase Coverage in Low and Middle Income Countries”
held June 6-7, 2011, in Washington, DC. I thank Gwen Reynolds and Jamie Georgia for their research
assistance, and Richard Hinz, Robert Holzmann, Dina Pomeranz and conference attendees for helpful
discussions. Financial support from The World Bank and the National Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021650
and P01-AG005842) is gratefully acknowledged. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely
those of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of The World Bank, the National Institute on Aging, Harvard University or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral Economics Perspective
Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 18220
July 2012
JEL No. D14,D91,G23,H31,J32

                                              ABSTRACT

Including a matching contribution increases savings plan participation and contributions, although
the impact is less significant than the impact of nonfinancial approaches. Conditional on participation,
a higher match rate has only a small effect on savings plan contributions. In contrast, the match threshold
has a substantial impact, probably because it serves as a natural reference point when individuals are
deciding how much to save and may be viewed as advice from the savings program sponsor on how
much to save. Other behavioral approaches to changing savings plan outcomes—including automatic
enrollment, simplification, planning aids, reminders, and commitment features—potentially have a
much greater impact on savings outcomes than do financial incentives, often at a much lower cost.


Brigitte C. Madrian
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
       A common feature of schemes designed to increase individual savings is providing a
matching contribution, to create an incentive for participation in the program and induce higher
levels of savings. The vast majority of employer-sponsored savings plans include an employer
match, as do many employer-sponsored health savings accounts. The saver’s credit, a feature of
the U.S. tax code designed to encourage savings by lower-income households, also provides a
government match to individual savings. Many field experiments aimed at encouraging savings
have also included a match in their experimental design. This rich set of experience informs the
understanding of behavioral responses to various matching contribution arrangements.
       Traditional economic models point to financial incentives, such as a matching
contribution, as the logical mechanism to increase savings plan participation. This first part of
the chapter summarizes the literature on the impact of providing a match on savings plan
outcomes, including participation, contributions, and net worth. The evidence comes from a
variety of sources, including observational data from surveys, natural experiments, and large-
scale field experiments. Although the empirical evidence largely supports the predictions of
traditional economic models, these models fail to incorporate the many psychological frictions
that impede savings, including present bias, complexity, inattention, and temptation, which in
many cases exert a much stronger impact on savings outcomes than do financial incentives.
Traditional economic models also fail to characterize some significant behavioral aspects of
savings outcomes, including inertia and the important role of focal points. The second part of the
chapter evaluates the literature on other, nonfinancial approaches to increasing individual
savings.
       The evidence suggests that matching contributions increase savings plan participation and
contributions, although the impact is less significant than the impact of nonfinancial approaches.
Conditional on participation, a higher match rate has only a small effect on savings plan
contributions. In contrast, the match threshold has a substantial impact, probably because it
serves as a natural reference point when individuals are deciding how much to save and may be
viewed as advice from the savings program sponsor on how much to save. Automatic
enrollment, simplification, planning aids, reminders, and various commitment devices potentially
have a much greater impact on savings plan participation and contributions, often at a much
lower cost.



                                                 3
The Impact of Matching Contributions on Savings Outcomes: Theory
       In traditional models, the impact of a match on savings outcomes depends in part on the
structure of the match. The simplest form is a flat match rate on all incremental savings (for
example, all new contributions are matched 100 percent). In practice, offering an unlimited
match is expensive for the party providing the match; as a consequence, savings schemes
typically limit the contributions that are matched (for example, all contributions up to $1,000 are
matched 100 percent, and contributions above that level are not matched).
       Savings schemes with more complicated match structures are common. For example, the
match might be tiered, with contributions up to $500 matched 100 percent, contributions of
$501–$1,000 matched 50 percent, and contributions above $1,000 not matched. Alternatively,
contributions might be matched only after a certain level of contributions is reached (for
example, contributions below $500 are not matched, contributions of $501–$1,000 are matched
100 percent, and contributions above $1,000 are not matched).
       In standard economic models of intertemporal decision making, adding a matching
contribution, or increasing the generosity of a match, whatever its form, should increase
participation in a savings scheme through a substitution effect. The match makes consuming
income more expensive than saving it, motivating individuals to substitute savings for
consumption in response to the match.
       The theoretical impact on individuals already contributing to the savings plan, however,
is ambiguous. Consider, for example, introducing a scheme in which contributions are matched
only up to a certain threshold. Such a scheme would increase contributions for individuals who
were not previously participating, as some of these nonparticipants may be induced to start
saving by the match. In contrast, individuals who were already contributing in excess of the
match threshold are predicted to respond to the new match by reducing their contributions,
through an income effect. The match on their existing contributions acts like an additional source
of income, some of which individuals use to increase their consumption and correspondingly
reduce their saving. Their combined own plus matching contributions, however, should still be
higher than before the match.
       The impact on individuals previously contributing at or below the match threshold is
ambiguous; they are affected by both the income and substitution effects described above.
Because they are saving below the match threshold, the match creates an incentive to substitute

                                                 4
additional savings, up to the match threshold, for consumption. But the match on contributions
already made acts like additional income, some of which will be used to increase consumption
and reduce contributions.
        The effects would be similar for increasing the match rate while maintaining the same
match threshold. The effects of increasing the match threshold while keeping the match rate
constant are more complicated. Such a change should have no effect on people contributing
below the old threshold. It should increase contributions by people at the old threshold (a
substitution effect), have an ambiguous effect on people above the old threshold but at or below
the new threshold (opposing income and substitution effects), and decrease contribution rates by
people above the new threshold (an income effect).

The Impact of Matching Contributions on Savings Outcomes: Evidence
        What is the evidence on how people actually respond? Estimating the impact of a
matching contribution on saving outcomes requires introducing some variation in the extent or
structure of the match. The research has used three sources of match variation: naturally
occurring cross-sectional variation (for example, differences in the match rate or match threshold
in employer-sponsored savings plans); natural experiments, or changes in the structure of the
match, within a savings scheme; and experimental variation generated by researchers, in which
some individuals are offered a match, or a more generous match, and others are not.
        The advantage of naturally occurring cross-sectional variation is that there can be
considerable heterogeneity in the types of matching incentives different individuals face. For
example, the match rates in employer-sponsored 401(k) savings plans in the United States range
from no match to match rates as high as 200 percent, and the match thresholds range 1 percent of
salary to $17,000 a year.1 This type of variation can be useful if, for example, one wants to
simulate what would happen under a match structure that is very different from what is currently
used. A severe limitation of using this type of variation, however, is that it may be difficult to
disentangle the impact of differences in the match structure on individual behavior from other
factors that might also affect outcomes. For example, individuals who have a strong saving
motive may seek employment in firms that offer a saving plan with a generous match, whereas
individuals with a weak saving motive may select into firms with a less generous or no match (or

1
 Individuals 50 and older may also be allowed to make additional “catch-up” contributions of up to
$5,000 a year.

                                                   5
no savings plan at all). If this type of sorting occurs, the estimated relationship between the
match and savings outcomes will be biased.
       The advantage of natural and field experiments is that there are generally fewer concerns
about the endogeneity between the generosity of the match and individual savings preferences. In
field experiments, individuals are usually randomly assigned to receive different match
structures. With natural experiments, concerns about endogeneity can be minimized by focusing
on the same group of individuals before and after a policy change, essentially holding savings
motives fixed. The limitation of field and natural experiments is that they typically examine a
much smaller range of variation in matching schemes, with only two, or perhaps three, different
types of match. The generalizability of the results from these studies is limited by the extent of
the variation that is actually analyzed. These studies also typically focus on a specific group of
individuals (for example, employees at a single firm, customers of a particular financial services
provider, or low-income workers), limiting the extent to which the results can be generalized.
       Most of the empirical studies on matching and saving outcomes have exploited the
naturally occurring variation in the match rates of employer-sponsored savings plans in the
United States to examine the impact of matching on savings outcomes. Most of these studies
find, consistent with theoretical predictions, that matching increases savings plan participation
rates (Andrews 1992; GAO 1997; Papke and Poterba 1995; Even and Macpherson 1997 and
2005; Clark and Schieber 1998; Bassett, Fleming and Rogrigues 1998; Clark, Goodfellow,
Schieber and Warwick 2000; Huberman, Iyengar and Jiang 2007; Mitchell, Utkus and Yang
2007; Dworak-Fisher 2008). Some studies, however, find no relationship between matching and
savings plan participation (Papke 1995; Kusko, Poterba, and Wilcox 1998).
       In evaluating how matching affects savings plan contributions, the empirical evidence is
less decisive (as noted above, the theoretical predictions are also not unambiguous). A few
studies find a positive relationship between matching and savings plan contributions (Andrews
1992; Papke and Poterba 1995; Even and Macpherson 1997; Kusko, Poterba and Wilcox 1998).
One, Basset, Fleming and Rodrigues (1998), finds no relationship between matching and savings
plan contributions. Several studies estimate that a higher match is associated with lower
contributions (Clark and others 2000; Munnell, Sundén, and Taylor 2001; Vanderhei and Holden
2001; Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang 2007). Some studies find heterogeneous effects. Huberman,
Iyengar, and Jiang (2007) find that a higher match increases contributions for low-income

                                                  6
individuals but decreases contributions for middle- and high-income individuals. Papke (1995)
and GAO (1997) find a positive effect of the match rate on contributions when the match rate is
low but a negative effect on contributions when the match rate is high.
       The most careful and convincing study using naturally occurring variation in match rates
is Engelhardt and Kumar (2007). This study has several attractive features:
       •   It is the only study that appropriately accounts for the nonlinear savings incentives
           generated by the employer match.
       •   It uses administrative data on savings plan contributions and earnings (from tax
           authority records on earnings and savings plan contributions) and on the structure of
           the employer match (from employer plan documents) to accurately model the
           incentives that individuals face and to get more accurate measures of their choices
           than is the case in self-reported survey data.
       •   It accounts for factors other than the employer match that might also influence
           savings outcomes, including taxes and alternative savings opportunities that may be
           equally or more attractive (specifically, individual retirement accounts [IRAs]).
The biggest limitation of this study is that the data comes from the Health and Retirement Study
and thus focuses on older individuals (average age is 55), whose behavior may differ from that of
younger groups.
       Engelhardt and Kumar estimate that increasing the match rate by 25 percentage points
(for example, from $0.25 per $1 to $0.50 per $1 contributed) raises savings plan participation by
5 percentage points and increases contributions by plan participants by $365 (in 1991 dollars).
They estimate that responsiveness to the employer match increases with the reported education
level of respondents. Their overall conclusion is that neither participation nor contributions are
very responsive to changes in the employer match and that “matching is a rather poor policy
instrument with which to raise retirement saving” (p. 1921).
       Duflo and others (2006) report the results of a field experiment on matching and savings
outcomes. This study offered clients of the U.S. tax preparation firm H&R Block the opportunity
to use their federal tax refund to open an IRA. Some individuals were offered the opportunity to
open such an account with no match; others were offered a match of either 20 percent or 50
percent on contributions up to $1,000. Figure 1 shows the fraction contributing to an IRA and the
amount contributed by those who chose to open an account. Only 3 percent of the study

                                                 7
participants in the no-match group elected to open an IRA. With a 20 percent match, 8 percent
opened and IRA, and with a 50 percent match, 14 percent opened an IRA.
          The magnitude of the effects estimated by Duflo and others (2006) is strikingly similar to
that estimated by Engelhardt and Kumar (2007), even though the two studies examined different
mechanisms (saving out of a tax refund versus enrolling in an employer-sponsored savings plan)
and different types of individuals (middle-income H&R Block clients versus older Health and
Retirement Study survey respondents). Engelhardt and Kumar estimate that increasing the match
rate by 25 percent of contributions increases savings plan participation by about 5 percentage
points; Duflo and others estimate that increasing the match rate from 0 to 20 percent of
contributions increases savings plan participation by 5 percentage points and increasing the
match rate from 20 percent to 50 percent of contributions increases participation by 6 percentage
points.

Figure 1. Evidence on the Effect of Matching and Savings from the H&R Block Experiment

          (a) Fraction Contributing to IRA                  (b) Amount Contributed to IRA
 20%                                                   $1,250              $1,102     $1,108
                                       14%             $1,000
 15%
                                                                 $765
                                                        $750
 10%                       8%
                                                        $500
  5%          3%                                        $250

  0%                                                      $0
           No Match    20% Match 50% Match                      No Match 20% Match 50% Match


Source: Duflo and others 2006.

          Mills and others (2008) report the results from a different multiyear field experiment on
saving in individual development accounts (IDAs) in the United States. Lower-income families
(income of less than 150 percent of the poverty level) were randomly assigned to either a
treatment or a control group. Members of the treatment group were allowed to open an IDA to
which contributions of up to $750 per year were potentially matched. Members of the control
group were not allowed to open an IDA. One difference between this program and other savings


                                                   8
schemes is that contributions were matched upon withdrawal, with the rate of the match
dependent on the purpose of the withdrawal. Contributions withdrawn to purchase a home were
matched 200 percent, whereas contributions withdrawn for other qualified purposes, such as
education, starting a business, home improvement, or retirement saving, were matched 100
percent. Contributions withdrawn for nonqualified purposes were not matched.
                                 Overall, the results indicate that there is no significant relationship between IDA
participation and net worth (figure 2). For most of the distribution, the effect is small but
negative; in the upper and lower quantiles, the point estimates are positive, and sometimes large,
but never statistically significant. These results challenge the effectiveness of match-based
savings schemes for increasing the net worth of very low-income families.

Figure 2. The Impact of Opening and Contributing to an Individual Development Account on
Net Worth after Three Years


                                $25,000
                                                           Quantile Treatment Effect
                                $20,000
                                                           Average Treatment Effect
  Treatment Effects at Wave 3




                                $15,000

                                $10,000

                                 $5,000

                                     $0

                                 -$5,000

                                -$10,000
                                           5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                                                                              Quantile

Source: Mills and others 2008.

                                 Choi and others (2002, 2004b, 2006) adopt the natural experiment approach to analyze
the impact of matching on savings outcomes. They examine two companies with employer-
sponsored savings plans that changed their employer match: one added a match to a plan that did
not previously have one, and one increased its match threshold while keeping its match rate
                                                                          9
constant. This approach uses individual behavior before the changes as a control for employee
behavior after the changes in the matching formulas as a way address concerns about the
endogeneity of individual savings preferences with respect to the generosity of the employer
match.
         The first company (Firm A) introduced a 25 percent match on employee contributions up
to 4 percent of income in October 2000; before that date, the plan offered no match. Using data
on employees hired up to 26 months before the plan change and up to 14 months after the plan
change, Choi and others estimate a hazard model of the time from hire to the date of initial
savings plan participation. They find that the introduction of the employer match increased the
rate at which employees enrolled in the savings plan by about 25 percent. However, because
participation rates at this company were low before the introduction of the match, the absolute
magnitude of the estimated participation increases was not large. For example, their model
predicts that the 25 percent match adopted by this firm leads to a 4.7 percentage point increase in
savings plan participation for 40-year-old men with 3 years of tenure. This effect is roughly in
line with the effect estimated by Engelhardt and Kumar (2007) and Duflo and others (2006).
         The second company (Firm B) increased the match threshold in its savings plan in
January 1997 while keeping its match rate constant. Before January 1997, unionized employees
received a 50 percent match on the first 5 percent of income contributed to the savings plan, and
non-union employees received a 50 percent match on the first 6 percent of income contributed.
In January 1997, the match threshold for both groups of employees was increased by 2 percent,
from 5 percent to 7 percent of pay for union employees and from 6 percent to 8 percent of pay
for non-union employees. Contributions up to the new threshold were still matched at 50 percent.
         Using data on employees hired up to one year before and one year after the plan change,
Choi and others estimate a hazard model of the time from hire to the date of initial savings plan
participation. They find no significant impact of the increase in the match threshold on savings
plan participation. This result is consistent with the theoretical arguments outlined earlier, which
posit that an increase in the match threshold does not affect the marginal incentives to participate
in the savings plan. As expected, Choi and others find no effect on participation of such a plan
change.
         The more interesting results in Choi and others (2002, 2004b, 2006) address the impact of
the match threshold on savings plan contributions. Figure 3 shows the distribution of

                                                 10
contribution rates in the savings plan at Firm A for participants who joined the plan when it had
no match and for participants who joined the plan after it introduced a 25 percent match on
employee contributions up to 4 percent of income. With no match, the most frequently chosen
contribution rates were 5 percent, 10 percent, and 15 percent of income—numbers that are
multiples of 5. After the employer match, many participants also chose contribution rates that
were multiples of 5. In addition, there was a large increase in the fraction of participants who
made a 4 percent contribution, the new match threshold. In the absence of an employer match,
very few employees chose to participate in the savings plan at a 4 percent contribution rate; with
the employer match, the 4 percent match threshold became the modal contribution rate.

Figure 3. The Distribution of Contribution Rates at a Firm that Added an Employer Match:
Firm A


                                  4

                                      Match: spike
          Fraction of employees




                                  3   at 4% match            No Match: Spikes at 5%, 10%, 15%
                                      threshold

                                  2


                                  1


                                  0
                                      1% 2% 3% 4% 5% 6% 7% 8% 9% 10%11%12%13%14%15%
                                                       Year-End Contribution Rate
                                            No match            Match (25% up to 4% of pay)

Source: Choi and others 2006.

       The distribution of contribution rates at Firm B, which increased its match threshold,
exhibits a similar pattern. Figure 4 shows the distribution of contribution rates to the savings plan
for two groups of participants: those who joined the plan in the nine months before the increase
in the match threshold, and those who joined the plan over a similar period of time after the
increase in the match threshold. As in figure 3, there are clear spikes in the distribution of
                                                                11
contribution rates both before and after the change in the match threshold at multiples of 5 (5
percent, 10 percent, 15 percent, 20 percent and 25 percent of pay). And, as in figure 3, the modal
contribution rate under both distributions is at the match threshold: 5 percent or 6 percent of pay
before the change in the match threshold and 7 percent or 8 percent of pay after the match
threshold.

Figure 4. The Distribution of Initial Contribution Rates at a Firm that Changed Its Match
Threshold: Company B


                              50
                                                                       Initial participants 04/1996 to 12/1996
                              40                                       (threshold 5% or 6%)
                                                                       Initial participants 04/1997 to 12/1997
   Fraction of Participants




                                                                       (threshold 7% or 8%)
                              30


                              20


                              10


                              0
                                   1 2 3 4 5-6 7-8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
                                                             Initial Contribution Rate

Source: Choi and others 2004b.

                              Figure 5 examines the impact of the increase in the match threshold of the Firm B savings
plan for individuals participating in the plan before the match threshold changed. It shows how
the contribution rates of these participants evolved over time after the plan change. The sample
in figure 5 is restricted to employees contributing to the Firm B savings plan nine months before
the increase in the match threshold. As in figure 4, a large proportion of participants (more than
45 percent) start with a contribution rate of 5 percent or 6 percent of pay. The switch from the
old threshold to the new threshold is clearly apparent: there is an immediate shift from the old
threshold (5 percent or 6 percent of pay) to the new threshold (7 percent or 8 percent of pay)
when the match threshold change occurred, in January 1997, and a slower adjustment over the

                                                                     12
next three years, as more and more participants shifted from the old to the new threshold. In
contrast, the fraction of participants at the other contribution rates remained fairly stable over the
entire time period.

Figure 5. The Evolution of Contribution Rates Over Time: Firm C

                               50%
                               45%
                               40%
    Fraction of Participants




                               35%
                               30%
                               25%
                               20%
                               15%
                               10%
                                5%
                                0%
                                  Jan-96    Jul-96    Jan-97   Jul-97    Jan-98   Jul-98   Jan-99    Jul-99   Jan-00
                                                                     Time
                                                  1-4%              5-6%              7-8%              9+%

Source: Choi and others 2002, 2006.

                               The patterns in figures 3, 4, and 5 reveal the behavioral nature of savings plan
participation. The fact that the contribution rates spike at multiples of 5 suggest an important role
for focal points in savings choices. When individuals face complicated decisions, such as
deciding how much to save, they adopt heuristics to simplify the decision-making process. This
pattern of contribution rate outcomes suggests that one such heuristic is to winnow the set of
potential contribution rates to a subset of the possible options—in this case, those that are
multiples of 5. The predominance of the match threshold in the distribution of contribution rates
suggests that it also serves as a focal point in participants’ considerations about how much to
save. The kink in the budget set generated by the match threshold would be expected to result in
bunching at the match threshold, absent any behavioral considerations. But it is likely that the
match threshold gets additional consideration as participants evaluate how much to save because
it serves as a natural focal point (precisely because it is where the financial incentives to save

                                                                        13
change); individuals may also view the match threshold as carrying an implicit recommendation
about how much they should save; this endorsement effect would further reinforce the focal
nature of the match threshold. Finally, the slow movement of existing participants away from the
old match threshold and toward the new match threshold in figure 5 suggests inertia on the part
of savings plan participants. Such inertia in savings plan outcomes has been well documented
(see Beshears and others 2008 for a review of this literature). It is also consistent with
participants’ anchoring on the original match threshold.
       Perhaps the most surprising finding in the literature on matching and savings plan
outcomes is that even with a match, participation rates are often surprisingly low (Choi, Laibson,
and Madrian 2011). Collectively, the research on matching and savings outcomes suggests that at
best, increasing the match rate on savings leads to small increases in participation and
contributions conditional on participation. The more important match-related tool is the match
threshold, which serves as a strong focal point as individuals decide how much to save. A lower
match rate with a higher match threshold may be a more effective way to increase individual
contributions than a higher match rate with a lower match threshold—that is, providing a match
of 25 percent on contributions up to 10 percent of pay will induce individuals to save more than a
match of 50 percent up to 5 percent of pay at a similar (or lower) cost to the organization
providing the match.

Complementary and Alternative Approaches to Increasing Savings
       The literature on behavioral economics and savings plan outcomes suggests several
alternative, and potentially more cost-effective, strategies to increase individual savings. This
section reviews some of these approaches.

Automatic Enrollment
       By far the most effective method to increase participation in defined contribution savings
schemes is automatic enrollment. The research on participation in employer-sponsored savings
plans in the United States shows that participation rates are substantially higher when the default
is enrollment in the savings plan (that is, individuals must opt out if they prefer not to save) than
it is when individuals must take action to participate in the savings plan. The impact of automatic
enrollment on participation rates can be sizable. In the first study of the impact of automatic
enrollment on savings outcomes, Madrian and Shea (2001) document a 50 percentage point

                                                 14
increase in savings plan participation for newly hired employees (less than 15 months of tenure)
at a large employer that switched from an opt-in to an opt-out automatic enrollment regime.
Other studies also document significant increases in participation as a result of automatic
enrollment (see Vanguard 2001; Choi and others 2002, 2004a, 2004b; Beshears and others
2008). The impact of automatic enrollment is greatest for groups with the lowest savings rates
initially: younger, lower-income workers.
       Matching is not completely irrelevant in plans that have automatic enrollment. A more
generous match is associated with higher participation rates, with effects that are roughly in line
with those discussed earlier in the context of savings schemes without automatic enrollment.
       Beshears and others (2010) take two different approaches to evaluating the importance of
the match in employer-sponsored savings plans that have automatic enrollment. First, they
examine a firm that replaced its employer match of 25 percent on the first 4 percent of pay
contributed to the plan with a noncontingent employer contribution (that is, the firm made a
savings plan contribution on behalf of all employees, regardless of whether employees made any
contributions of their own to the savings plan). They estimate that eliminating the employer
match reduced participation by at most 5–6 percentage points, an effect very similar to that
estimated by Engelhardt and Kumar (2007), Duflo and others (2006), and Choi and others (2002,
2004b, 2006) for similar changes in the match rate in savings plans without automatic
enrollment.
       The second approach taken by Beshears and others (2010) in evaluating the impact of
matching in savings plans with automatic enrollment is to exploit variation in the match structure
both within (for firms that changed their matching policy) and across a sample of nine firms with
employer-sponsored savings plans with automatic enrollment. This analysis is potentially
confounded by endogeneity between the generosity of the match and employee savings
preferences; in addition, the sample of firms included in the analysis is small. With these caveats
in mind, Beshears and others find that a 1 percentage point increase in the maximum potential
match as a fraction of salary is associated with a 2–4 percentage point increase in savings plan
participation (figure 6). Based on these estimates, decreasing the match rate from the modal
match in employer-sponsored savings plans in the United States of 50 percent on the first 6
percent of pay to a 25 percent on the first 6 percent of pay (a reduction in the match rate of 25
percentage points) is predicted to reduce savings plan participation under automatic enrollment

                                                 15
by 3–6 percentage points. This estimate aligns with that from the single firm case study
discussed in Beshears and others (2009); it also consistent with the studies of similar match
changes in savings plans without automatic enrollment discussed earlier.
                       These results confirm the earlier conclusion: increasing the match rate on savings leads to
small increases in savings plan participation. This conclusion holds for schemes with and without
automatic enrollment.

Figure 6. Matching Contributions and Savings Plan Participation in Firms with Automatic
Enrollment


                       100%




                       90%
  Participation Rate




                                                                                     Regression line

                       80%




                       70%
                              0%     1%       2%       3%       4%       5%       6%       7%      8%       9%
                                               Maximum Employer Match (percent of pay)



Source: Beshears and others 2010.

                       Although automatic enrollment leads to unambiguous increases in savings plan
participation, its effects on savings plan contributions conditional on participation depend very
much on the default contribution rate at which individuals are automatically enrolled. Just as the
match threshold for savings plan contributions attracts the largest share of savings plan
participants when there is a match, so too does the automatic enrollment default contribution rate
when there is automatic enrollment. Contributions are higher with a higher default contribution
rate under automatic enrollment than with a lower default contribution rate. The distribution of

                                                               16
contribution rates for employees at a U.S. company that increased the default contribution rate in
its savings plan from 3 percent of pay to 6 percent of pay is shown in figure 7. With a default
contribution rate of 3 percent, 28 percent of plan participants contribute 3 percent of pay to the
plan; another 24 percent contribute 6 percent to the plan, the match threshold; and 41 percent
contribute at a rate above 6 percent, primarily either 10 percent or 15 percent of pay (although
these two contribution rates are aggregated with other contribution rates in the figure). With a
default contribution rate of 6 percent of pay, which coincides with the match threshold, almost
half of employees contribute 6 percent of pay to the plan, twice the fraction observed with a
default contribution rate of 3 percent; the fraction of employees contributing 3 percent of pay to
the plan is an almost negligible 4 percent.



Figure 7. Automatic Enrollment for New Hires and the Distribution of Savings Plan
Contribution Rates


                           60
                                                                                 49
                           50
   Fraction of Employees




                           40

                           30                       28
                                                                            24                  23
                           20                                                           18 17
                                                                                                     13
                                    9
                           10                 6
                                4                        4        3 2
                                          1
                            0
                                0%        1-2%        3%        4-5%         6%         7-10%   11-15%
                                                        Contribution Rate
                                        Hired under automatic enrollment (3% default)
                                        Hired under automatic enrollment (6% default)

Source: Beshears and others 2008.




                                                             17
        A more extreme form of automatic enrollment is mandatory enrollment: individuals are
automatically enrolled without the option of subsequently opting out. Most of the literature on
defined contribution savings plans has focused on employer-sponsored 401(k)–type plans in the
United States, where voluntary participation is standard. In other contexts, participation in
defined contribution savings schemes is mandatory. For example, public sector entities in the
United States that have a defined contribution scheme as their primary retirement savings plan
(or one of their primary plans if participants have a choice of plans) tend to have mandatory
enrollment with no option to opt out (Beshears and others 2011). Countries with defined
contribution social security systems typically have automatic and mandatory participation, at
least for workers in the formal sector. Whether to make participation voluntary or mandatory is
an important policy question for defined contribution savings plans.

Simplification
        One limitation of automatic and mandatory savings plan enrollment schemes is that these
approaches work only in formal sector labor markets with developed financial institutions that
can facilitate payroll deduction. In informal labor markets, these approaches are more difficult to
implement. Lessons from the effect of automatic enrollment on increasing participation rates in
these contexts can inform the structuring of savings schemes in other contexts.
        The success of automatic enrollment in employer-sponsored savings plans in the United
States is predicated on two factors: (a) that most people recognize the need for retirement income
above and beyond what they will get from Social Security and therefore want to save and (b) that
automatic enrollment simplifies what individuals already want to do. Several pieces of evidence
support the notion that people generally want to save. First, when asked, individuals typically
state a desire to save.2
        Second, when asked to actively make a choice about whether and how much to save,
most people choose to save. Carroll and others (2009) compare the savings outcomes in an
employer-sponsored savings plan before and after employees were compelled to make an active
choice about whether or not to participate in the savings plan. They find that when not required
to make a choice, only 41 percent of newly hired employees enrolled in the savings plan. In
2
 For example, Choi and others (2002 and 2006) report the results of a survey on retirement savings
adequacy conducted by a large U.S. employer. Two-thirds of the responding employees stated a desire to
save more than they were currently saving; one-third reported that they were saving about the right
amount; and less than 1 percent responded that they were saving too much.

                                                  18
contrast, when required to make an active choice about savings plan participation (which could
include not participating in the savings plan), 69 percent enrolled. They conclude that most
employees want to save but that an opt-in enrollment regime does not accurately reflect these
preferences, because nonparticipation is consistent with both a preference not to save as well as
with a preference to save accompanied by a delay in execution.
        Third, very few people opt-out of savings plan participation when they are automatically
enrolled. Choi and others (2002, 2006) show that savings plan participation is very persistent
regardless of whether employees are automatically enrolled. In particular, only 2–3 percent of
automatically enrolled employees opt out of savings plan participation in a 12-month period.
That savings rates are high and persistent under automatic enrollment is further evidence that
most people generally want to save.
        An important caveat to these findings is that they yield evidence on savings preferences
for a specific set of individuals in a very specific context: employees in U.S. firms with access to
employer-sponsored savings plans. These findings say nothing about savings preferences outside
the United States (although one would surmise that many individuals throughout the world also
want to save; see for example, Soman and Cheema 2011) or about savings preferences in other
types of savings vehicles. Most employer-sponsored savings plans in the United States offer an
employer match, which may induce some otherwise reluctant individuals to save. The evidence
suggests that the effect of a match on savings plan participation is not large; nonetheless, a
financial inducement is one way to shape savings preferences.
        A potentially more important contextual factor is the level of trust individuals have that
their savings will be secure. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) show that differences in the
level of trust across countries explain a sizable share of the cross-country variation in individual
stock holding: in countries with higher levels of trust, citizens are more willing to invest in
equities. Adopting a regulatory framework that increases trust in financial institutions and the
financial system may be a prerequisite to successfully increasing saving with any savings
scheme.3


3
  There is no evidence on how financial incentives interact with the level of trust to affect savings. If
financial incentives substitute for trust, the small impact of financial incentives on savings in the United
States may reflect a high level of trust in the United States but might not rule out a larger effect of
financial incentives in countries with lower levels of trust. Alternatively, trust may be a precondition for
financial incentives to have any impact at all.

                                                     19
          The second factor accounting for the success of automatic enrollment is that it simplifies
the execution of what individuals already want to do—save. Indeed, automatic enrollment is an
extreme form of simplification; individuals who want to save need not do anything.
Psychologists have long recognized that choice complexity can affect decision-making
outcomes. One result is procrastination—individuals put off decision making as choices become
more complicated (Tversky and Shafir 1992; Shafir, Simonson, and Tversky 1993; Dhar and
Nowlis 1999; Iyengar and Lepper 2000).
          Iyengar, Huberman, and Jiang (2004) show that in the United States, enrollment in
employer-sponsored savings plan is negatively correlated with the number of investment options
in the savings plans: having 10 additional options in the investment menu lead to a 1.5–2.0
percentage point decline in participation.4 They hypothesize that having more investment options
increases the complexity of choosing an asset allocation. Automatic enrollment decouples the
choice about whether to save from the choice about how much to save or which asset allocation
to select. The initial participation decision is simplified from one that involves evaluating a
myriad of options to a simple comparison of two alternatives: nonparticipation (consumption or
saving outside of the savings plan) versus participating at a prespecified contribution rate with a
prespecified asset allocation. Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi and others (2004a) find that
automatic enrollment has its largest impact on participation for workers who are least financially
sophisticated—the young and people with lower levels of income. These are the individuals for
whom the complexity of the participation decision under an opt-in savings regime poses the
greatest deterrent to participation (Beshears and others 2008).
          If complexity is a deterrent to participation in a savings plan, then simplifying the task of
savings plan enrollment, even if less extreme than automatic enrollment, should increase
participation. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2009) and Beshears and others (2012) study the
impact of a simplified enrollment process on outcomes in employer-sponsored savings plans.
The intervention they evaluate, Quick Enrollment, gives employees a way to enroll in their
employer-sponsored savings plan at a contribution rate and with an asset allocation preselected
by their employer. Like automatic enrollment, this approach allows individuals to evaluate
savings plan participation (at the preselected contribution rate and asset allocation), a simple
binary choice, without having to confront the multidimensional challenge of choosing a

4
    This correlation is documented only among plans that do not have automatic enrollment.

                                                    20
contribution rate or an asset allocation. At the two firms studied, Quick Enrollment increased
savings plan participation by 10–20 percentage points relative to a standard opt-in enrollment
regime (figure 8). This finding suggests that complexity can be a significant deterrent to savings
plan participation and that other measures to simplify the process of saving in this or other
contexts could materially affect savings outcomes.5 Although the participation increases from
this simplified approach to savings plan enrollment are not nearly as large as the estimated
effects of automatic enrollment, they are sizable and much larger than the estimated effects of
matching contributions. Simplifying and streamlining the savings process can have a sizable
impact on outcomes and may be a much more cost-effective approach to changing behavior than
financial incentives.

Figure 8. Quick Enrollment and Savings Plan Participation: Firms C and D


                                             50%

                                                                      After Quick
    Fraction Participating in Savings Plan




                                             40%                      Enrollment
                                                                         34%

                                             30%

                                                                                                            After Quick
                                                                                                            Enrollment
                                             20%
                                                       Before Quick                                            16%
                                                        Enrollment                           Before Quick
                                                            9%                                Enrollment
                                             10%
                                                                                                  6%


                                             0%
                                                   Company C: 4 months after baseline    Company D: 4 months after baseline

Source: Beshears and others 2012.



5
 Research has documented sizable impacts of simplification in contexts other than saving, including
school choice (Hastings and Weinstein 2008); health plan choice (Kling and others 2008); mutual fund
selection (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2010); and both college financial aid applications and college
attendance (Bettinger and others 2009).


                                                                                    21
        Merely providing access to a simple and straightforward way to save may increase
savings. Dupas and Robinson (2009) in rural Kenya and Aportela (1999) in rural Mexico find
that increasing access to the formal savings sector leads to higher levels of savings. In the case of
the field experiment evaluated in Dupas and Robinson (2009), the newly available savings
account offered no interest and charged withdrawal fees, yet demand for the account was still
high.

Execution Aids
        Even if individuals want to save, forgetfulness and procrastination may prevent execution
of even the best laid plans. Many strategies have been adopted to help individuals follow through
on their savings goals. Research has identified a lack of planning as a primary reason why
individuals fail to achieve their goals (Gollwitzer 1999; Gollwitzer and Sheeran 2006).
        Lusardi, Keller, and Keller (2009) study the impact of helping individuals form and
implement a savings plan on savings outcomes. The intervention they study—a planning aid for
savings plan enrollment at a U.S. employer—encourages individuals to set aside a specific time
for enrolling in their savings plan; outlines the steps involved in enrolling in a savings plan (for
example, choosing a contribution rate and an asset allocation); gives an approximation of the
time each step will take; and provides tips on what to do if individuals get stuck. Provision of
this planning aid increased enrollment in an employer-sponsored savings plan by 12–21
percentage points for newly hired employees (figure 9). This effect is two to three times the
estimated impact of matching contributions on savings plan participation. Like simplifying the
savings process, providing execution aids is extremely cost-effective.
        In a series of field experiments conducted in cooperation with banks in Bolivia, Peru, and
the Philippines, Karlan and others (2010) evaluate the impact of providing savings reminders
(text messages or letters) on savings outcomes in bank savings accounts. They find that people
who received reminders were 3 percent more likely to achieve a prespecified savings goal and
saved 6 percent more in the bank sending the reminders than did people who did not receive
reminders. They also find that reminders that highlighted individuals’ savings goals were twice
as effective as generic reminders.
        Kast, Meier and Pomeranz (2012) evaluate the impact of providing text message
reminders on bank savings outcomes in Chile. They also find that individuals who received text
message reminders saved substantially more than individuals who did not.

                                                 22
                        For the populations in the developing countries targeted in the field experiments of these
two studies, ongoing savings requires ongoing action—automatic enrollment and direct deposit
are not relevant alternatives. These results suggest that limited attention can be an important
impediment to savings in such contexts. Text messages are a cost-effective and scalable way to
create attention shocks that motivate people to take action and follow through on prespecified
savings goals.

Figure 9. The Impact of Planning Aids on Savings Plan Participation

                                   50%
                                                                                           45%
                                         No help                                                         41%
                                   40%   8-step Planning Aid
   Participating in Savings Plan




                                         7-step Planning Aid
      Fraction of Employees




                                                           28%                    29%
                                   30%

                                                   22%
                                   20%


                                   10%    7%


                                   0%
                                            30 days after hire                      60 days after hire

Source: Lusardi, Keller, and Keller 2009.

                        The field experiments discussed in Karlan and others (2010) and Kast, Meier, and
Pomeranz (2012) included treatment arms that offered individuals higher than market interest
rates as an inducement to save. Neither study finds any statistically significant impact of a higher
interest rate on savings outcomes. The higher interest rates were admittedly much lower than the
match rates that typically characterize matched savings schemes (in Kast, Meier, and Pomeranz
(2012), for example, the high interest rate treatment group was offered an interest rate of 5
percent as compared to a then-prevailing interest rate of 0.3 percent). Although these studies are
not directly comparable to the studies discussed earlier on the impact of matching contributions
                                                                 23
on savings outcomes, the results support the general qualitative conclusion that financial
incentives have at best modest effects on outcomes.
       A growing body of literature examines a broad class of execution aids known as
commitment savings products. In the most influential paper in this literature, Ashraf, Karlan, and
Yin (2006) evaluate a field experiment in the Philippines that offered one such product to current
or former clients of a local bank. In this field experiment, participating bank clients who opted
for the commitment savings product voluntarily restricted the right to withdraw their savings
until reaching either an individually chosen goal date or an individually chosen goal amount.
They show that there is a demand for commitment: among people who were offered the option to
open a commitment savings account, 28 percent did so, even though it offered reduced flexibility
and no higher interest than a standard bank account. Commitment products can have a sizable
impact on savings. Relative to a control group not offered the commitment savings product,
people offered a commitment account had bank balances that were 82 percent higher 12 months
later. Corroborating work on commitment savings products in other countries includes Gugerty
(2007), Ashraf and others (2011), Brune, and others (2011), and Dupas and Robinson (2011).
The reasons why commitment savings products are so effective at increasing saving are both
internal (reducing the temptation to spend) and external (credibly telling others, primarily friends
and family, that one’s savings are inaccesible).
       Soman and Cheema (2011) evaluate one interesting variant of a commitment savings
technology in a field experiment targeted at unbanked construction laborers in rural India who
are paid cash wages. In this experiment, individuals earmarked a certain amount of their weekly
wages as savings. A social worker visited participating households every pay day to set aside the
earmarked savings amount into either one (nonpartitioned) or two (partitioned) sealed envelopes.
The challenge in this field experiment was not to motivate individuals to set aside money for
savings but to prevent them from raiding their savings. The authors show that partitioning
earmarked savings into multiple “accounts” increased realized savings by 39–216 percent. They
hypothesize that opening a savings envelope, or violating the partition, induces guilt. Having
multiple accounts, or partitions, increases the psychological cost of spending money that has
been set aside for a specific purpose. This simple, low-cost execution aid has obvious extensions
to other contexts. For example, having multiple retirement savings accounts may be more
effective than relying on one type of savings account (for example, having both a retirement

                                                   24
income account and a retirement health account may induce higher savings than a single generic
retirement account).
        Collectively, the research on execution aids suggests that many psychological
impediments stand in the way of carrying out even the best-laid plans to save. Financial
incentives do little in the face of such barriers. A more effective strategy is to directly address the
barriers themselves.

Conclusions
        A large body of literature has examined a wide variety of approaches to encouraging
individuals to increase their savings. Traditional economic models point to financial incentives,
such as a matching contribution, as the logical mechanism for increasing savings plan
participation. The research on matching contributions and savings plan participation is largely
consistent with traditional economic models: a matching contribution does increase participation.
But the quantitative impact matching contributions on savings plan participations is small. The
studies using the most credible empirical methods find strikingly similar results in a variety of
different contexts using a variety of different data sources: a matching contribution of 25 percent
increases savings plan participation by roughly 5 percentage points.
        The theoretical impact of matching contributions on the level of savings in traditional
models depends on how much an individual would save in the absence of a match. The empirical
results on this question finds results are inconsistent, although the most credible empirical work
corroborates the predictions of traditional economic models.
        Traditional economic models fail to characterize the most interesting features of the
savings choices that individual make. Savings rates cluster heavily around focal points, including
the match threshold (as traditional economic theory would predict) and numbers that are
multiples of five (something traditional economic theory would not predict). This finding
suggests that the match threshold may be a much more important parameter in a matching
scheme than the match rate.
        Traditional economic models also fail to incorporate the many psychological frictions
that impede savings, including present bias, complexity, inattention, and temptation. In many
cases, countering these frictions leads to increases in saving plan participation and asset
accumulation that surpass the effects of a typical matching contribution, potentially at a lower
cost.
                                                  25
References

Andrews, Emily S. 1992. “The Growth and Distribution of 401(k) Plans.” In Trends in Pensions
      1992, edited by John Turner and Daniel Beller, 149-76. Washington, DC: U.S.
      Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.

Aportela, Fernando. 1999. “Effects of Financial Access on Savings by Low-Income People.”
       Banco de México Working Paper.

Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martínez, and Dean Yang. 2011. “Remittances and the
       Problem of Control: A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador.”
       Universidad de Chile Working Paper SDT 341.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from
       a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       121(2): 635-72.

Bassett, William F., Michael J. Fleming, and Anthony P. Rodrigues. 1998. “How Workers Use
       401(k) Plans: The Participation, Contribution, and Withdrawal Decisions.” National Tax
       Journal 51(2): 263-89.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2008. “The Importance
      of Default Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States.”
      In Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, edited by Stephen J. Kay and Tapen
      Sinha, 59-87. New York: Oxford University Press.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2010. “The Impact of
      Employer Matching on Savings Plan Participation under Automatic Enrollment.” In
      Research Findings in the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise, 311-27.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2011. “Behavioral
      Economics Perspectives on Public Sector Pension Plans.” Journal of Pension Economics
      and Finance 10(2): 315-36.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2012 (forthcoming).
      “Simplification and Saving.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizations.

Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2011. “Commitments to Save: A
       Field Experiment in Rural Malawi.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5748.

Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian and Andrew Metrick.
        2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions: Theory and Evidence from 401(k)
        Saving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639-74

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009. “Reducing the Complexity Costs
       of 401(k) Participation through Quick EnrollmentTM.” In Developments in the Economics
       of Aging, edited by David A. Wise, 57-82. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                              26
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2011. “$100 Bills on the Sidewalk:
       Violations of No-Arbitrage in 401(k) Accounts.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
       113(3):748-63.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2002. “Defined
       Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least
       Resistance.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 16, edited by James M. Poterba, 67-
       113. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004a. “For Better or
       For Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In Perspectives on the
       Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise, 81-121. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004b. “Plan Design
       and 401(k) Savings Outcomes.” National Tax Journal 57(2): 275-98.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006. “Saving for
       Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance.” In Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a
       New Agenda, edited by Edward J. McCaffrey and Joel Slemrod, 304-51. New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation.

Clark, Robert L., and Sylvester Schieber. 1998. “Factors Affecting Participation Levels in
       401(k) Plans.” In Living with Defined Contribution Plans: Remaking Responsibility
       for Retirement, edited by Olivia Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber, 69-97.
       Philadelphia PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Clark, Robert L., Gordon Goodfellow, Sylvester Schieber, and Drew Warwick. 2000.
       "Making the Most of 401(k) Plans: Who's Choosing What and Why." In Forecasting
       Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth, edited by Olivia Mitchell, Brett
       Hammond, and Anna Rappaport, 95-138. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
       Press.

Dhar, Ravi, and Stephen M. Nowlis. 1999. “The Effect of Time Pressure on Consumer Choice
       Deferral.” Journal of Consumer Research 25(4): 369-84.

Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez. 2005. “Saving
       Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment
       with H&R Block.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 1311-46.

Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2010. “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise
       Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” International Policy Center
       Working Paper 111.

Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence
       from Health Savings Experiments.” NBER Working Paper 17255.



                                              27
Dworak-Fisher, Keenan. 2008. “Encouraging Participation in 401(k) Plans: Reconsidering
     the Employer Match.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper 420.

Engelhardt, Gary V., and Anil Kumar. 2007. “Employer Matching and 401(k) Saving:
      Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Journal of Public Economics
      91(10): 1920-43.

Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson. 1997. “Factors Influencing Participation and
      Contribution Levels in 401 (k) Plans.” Florida State University Working Paper.

Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson. 2005. “The Effects of Employer Matching in
      401(k) Plans.” Industrial Relations 44(3): 525-549.

General Accounting Office. 1997. “401(k) Pension Plans: Loan Provisions Enhance
      Participation but May Affect Income Security for Some.” Report to the Chairman,
      Special Committee on Aging, and the Honorable Judd Gregg, U.S. Senate.

Gollwitzer, Peter M. 1999. “Implementation Intentions: Strong Effects of Simple Plans.”
       American Psychologist 54(7): 493–503.

Gollwitzer, Peter M., and Paschal Sheeran. 2006. “Implementation Intentions and Goal
       Achievement: A Meta-analysis of Effects and Processes.” Advances in Experimental
       Social Psychology 38: 69–119.

Gugerty, Mary Kay. 2007. “You Can’t Save Alone: Commitment in Rotating Savings and Credit
      Associations in Kenya.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 55(2): 251-82.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Trusting the Stock Market.” Journal of
       Finance 63(6): 2557-2600.

Huberman, Gur, Sheena S. Iyengar, and Wei Jiang. 2007. “Defined Contribution Pension
     Plans: Determinants of Participation and Contribution Rates.” Journal of Financial
     Services Research 31(1): 1-32.

Iyengar, Sheena S., and Lepper, Mark R. 2000. “When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire
       Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79(6): 995-
       1006.

Iyengar, Sheena S., Gur Huberman, and Wei Jiang. 2004. “How Much Choice is Too Much?
Contributions to 401 (k) Retirement Plans.” In Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons
from Behavioral Finance, edited by Olivia Mitchell and Stephen Utkus, 83-95. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joanathan Zinman. 2010.
       “Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” NBER Working Paper
       16205.



                                              28
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz. 2012. “Under-Savers Anonymous: Evidence
       on Self-Help Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment Device.” IZA
       Discussion Paper 6311.

Kusko, Andrea, James Poterba, and David Wilcox. 1998. “Employee Decisions with Respect to
       401(k) Plans.” In Living with Defined Contribution Pensions: Remaking Responsibility
       for Retirement, edited by Olivia Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber, 98-112. Philadelphia:
       University of Pennsylvania Press.

Lusari, Annamaria, Punam Anand Keller, and Adam M. Keller. 2008. “New Ways to Make
        People Save: A Social Marketing Approach.” In Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to
        Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, edited by
        Annamaria Lusardi, 209-236. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
      Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1149-
      1187.

Mills, Gregory, William G. Gale, Rhiannon Patterson, Gary V. Engelhardt, Michael D. Eriksen,
        and Emil Apolstolov. 2008. “Effects of Individual Development Accounts on Asset
        Purchases and Saving Behavior: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment.” Journal of
        Public Economics 92(5–6): 1509–30.

Mitchell, Olivia S., Stephen P. Utkus, and Tongxuan Yang. 2007. “Turning Workers into
       Savers? Incentives, Liquidity, and Choice in 401(k) Plan Design.” National Tax Journal
       60(3): 469-89.

Munnell, Alicia H., Annika Sunden, and Catherine Taylor. 2001-2002. “What Determines 401(k)
      Participation and Contributions?” Social Security Bulletin 64(3): 64-75.

Papke, Leslie E. 1995. “Participation in and Contributions to 401(k) Pension Plans.” The Journal
       of Human Resources 30(2): 311-25.

Papke, Leslie E., and James M. Poterba. 1995. “Survey Evidence on Employer Match Rates and
       Employee Saving Behavior in 401(k) Plans.” Economics Letters 49(3): 313-17.

Shafir, Eldar, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky. 1993. “Reason-Based Choice.” Cognition
        49(1–2): 11–36.

Soman, Dilip, and Amar Cheema. 2011. “Earmarking and Partitioning: Increasing Saving by
      Low-Income Households.” Journal of Marketing Research 48(S1): S14–S22.

Tversky, Amos, and Eldar Shafir. 1992. “Choice under Conflict: The Dynamics of Deferred
      Decision.” Psychological Science 3(6): 358-61.

Vanderhei, Jack, and Sarah Holden. 2001. “Contribution Behavior of 401(k) Plan
      Participants.” Investment Company Institute Perspective 7(4):1-19.


                                               29
Vanguard Center for Retirement Research. 2001. “Automatic Enrollment: Vanguard Client
     Experience.”
     http://institutional.vanguard.com/pdf/automatic_enrollment_clientexp.pdf




                                          30
