NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRE-COLONIAL ETHNIC INSTITUTIONS AND CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN
DEVELOPMENT
Stelios Michalopoulos
Elias Papaioannou
Working Paper 18224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18224

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

We thank 4 anonymous referees and the Editor for many insightful comments and useful suggestions.
We thank seminar participants at Dartmouth, Tufts, Oxford, Vienna, Brown, Harvard, Stanford, UC-Berkeley,
UC-Davis, NYU, AUEB, the CEPR Development Economics Workshop, the World Bank, the IMF,
the NBER Political Economy Meetings, the NBER Summer Institute Meetings in Economic Growth
and Income Distribution and the Macroeconomy for valuable comments. We also benefited from discussions
with Yannis Ioannides, Rafael La Porta, Antonio Ciccone, Rob Johnson, Raphael Frank, Jim Feyrer,
Ross Levine, Avner Greif, Jeremiah Dittmar, David Weil, Sandip Sukhtankar, Quamrul Ashraf, Oded
Galor, Ed Kutsoati, Pauline Grosjean, Enrico Perotti, Pedro Dal Bó, Nathan Nunn, Raquel Fernandez,
Jim Robinson, and Enrico Spolaore. We are particularly thankful to Andy Zeitlin, Melissa Dell, Andei
Shleifer, Nico Voigtländer, and Daron Acemoglu for detailed comments and useful suggestions. We
also thank Nathan Nunn for providing the digitized version of Murdock’s Tribal Map of Africa. This
paper draws on material from our previous paper titled "Divide and Rule or the Rule of the Divided?
Evidence from Africa". All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African Development
Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 18224
July 2012
JEL No. N17,O4,O43,Z1
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of deeply-rooted pre-colonial ethnic institutions in shaping comparative regional
development within African countries. We combine information on the spatial distribution of ethnicities
before colonization with regional variation in contemporary economic performance, as proxied by
satellite images of light density at night. We document a strong association between pre-colonial ethnic
political centralization and regional development. This pattern is not driven by differences in local
geographic features or by other observable ethnic-specific cultural and economic variables. The strong
positive association between pre-colonial political complexity and contemporary development obtains
also within pairs of adjacent ethnic homelands with different legacies of pre-colonial political institutions.

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
Elias Papaioannou
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com

1

Introduction

There has been ample research on the institutional origins of African (under)development
both in economics and the broader literature in social sciences; yet the two strands have
followed somewhat different paths. On the one hand, influenced by the studies of Acemoglu
et al. (2001, 2002) and La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), the empirical literature in economics
has mainly focused on the impact of colonization in comparative development primarily via
its effect on contractual institutions and property rights protection at the national level (see
Acemoglu and Johnson (2005)). On the other hand, the African historiography has invariably
stressed the role of deeply-rooted, ethnic institutional characteristics (see Herbst (2000) for a
summary). Motivated by the richness of anecdotal evidence and case studies documenting the
importance of ethnic-specific institutional traits, in this study we explore in a systematic way
the relationship between pre-colonial ethnic institutions, political centralization in particular,
and regional development.
We utilize data from the pioneering work of Murdock (1959, 1967), who has mapped the
spatial distribution of African ethnicities and compiled various quantitative indicators reflecting
political institutions, cultural, and economic traits of several ethnic groups around colonization.
To overcome the paucity of economic indicators across African ethnic homelands, we combine
the anthropological data with satellite images of light density at night.
Our analysis shows that the complexity and hierarchical structure of pre-colonial ethnic
institutions correlate significantly with contemporary regional development, as reflected in light
density at night. This correlation does not necessarily imply a causal relationship, because one
cannot rule out the possibility that other ethnic characteristics and hard-to-account-for factors drive the association. Nevertheless this correlation obtains across numerous permutations.
First, it is robust to an array of controls related to the disease environment, land endowments,
and natural resources at the local level. Accounting properly for geography is important as there
is a fierce debate in the literature on whether the correlation between institutional and economic development is driven by hard-to-account-for geographical features. Second, the strong
positive association between pre-colonial political centralization and regional development retains its economic and statistical significance, when we solely examine within-country variation.
Including country fixed effects is crucial since we are able to account for all country-specific,
time-invariant features. Third, regressing luminosity on a variety of alternative pre-colonial
ethnic characteristics, such as occupational specialization, economic organization, the presence
of polygyny, slavery, and proxies of early development, we find that political centralization
is the only robust correlate of contemporary economic performance. This reassures that the
uncovered positive association does not reflect differences in observable cultural and economic
1

attributes across African ethnicities. Fourth, the positive correlation between ethnic political complexity and regional development prevails when we limit our analysis within pairs of
neighboring homelands falling in the same country where ethnicities with different pre-colonial
institutions reside.
These patterns obtain both when the unit of analysis is the ethnic homeland and when
we exploit the finer structure of the luminosity data to obtain multiple observations (pixels) for
each homeland. Hence, although we do not have random assignment in ethnic institutions, the
results clearly point out that traits manifested in differences in the pre-colonial institutional
legacy matter crucially for contemporary African development.
Ethnic Institutions: Past and Present There was significant heterogeneity in political centralization across African ethnicities before colonization (Murdock (1967)). At the one
extreme, there were states with centralized administration and hierarchical organization such
as the Shongai Empire in Western Africa, the Luba kingdom in Central Africa, and the kingdoms of Buganda and Ankole in Eastern Africa. At the other extreme, there were acephalous
societies without political organization beyond the village level, such as the Nuer in Sudan or
the Konkomba in Ghana and Togo. The middle of the spectrum occupied societies organized
in large chiefdoms and loose alliances, such as the Ewe and the Wolof in Western Africa. While
these societies lacked statehood, they tended to have conflict resolution mechanisms and a
somewhat centralized decision making process (Diamond (1997)).
The advent of the Europeans in Africa had limited impact on these pre-existing local
political structures. This was because colonization was (with some exceptions) quite limited
both regarding timing and location (Herbst (2000)). Mamdani (1996) argues that, in fact, the
European colonizers in several occasions strengthened tribal chiefs and kings via their doctrine
of indirect rule. In the eve of African independence some countries attempted to limit the
role of ethnic institutions; however, the inability of African states to provide public goods and
broadcast power beyond the capitals, led African citizens to continue relying on the local ethnicspecific structures rather than the national government (Englebert (2009)). Herbst (2000), for
example, notes that in Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria and Chad while new states
initially marginalized local chiefs, when they realized the extraordinary difficulties in governing
rural areas, they quickly invited them back.
There is ample evidence pointing to the ongoing importance of ethnic-specific institutions. First, ethnic leaders and chiefs enjoy considerable support and popularity across local
communities (e.g. Baldwin (2010)). Second, both survey data and case studies show that local
chiefs have significant power in allocating land rights. Analyzing data from the Afrobarometer

2

Surveys, Logan (2011) documents that ethnic institutions are instrumental in assigning property rights and resolving disputes.1 Along the same lines, Goldstein and Udry (2008) show that
informal ethnic institutions and local chiefs today exert significant de facto power in assigning
land in rural Ghana (see also Bubb (2012)). Third, in many countries local leaders collect taxes
and provide some basic public goods (e.g. Glennerster, Miguel, and Rothenberg (2010) and
Acemoglu, Reed, and Robinson (2012)). Fourth, since the early 1990s many countries (15 out
of 39 according to Herbst (2000)) have passed legislation or even constitutional amendments (in
the case of Uganda and Ghana) formally recognizing the role of ethnic institutional structures
in settling property rights disputes and enforcing customary law (see Baldwin (2011)).
The African historiography has proposed various channels via which ethnic institutions
shape contemporary economic activity. First, Herbst (2000) and Boone (2003) argue that in
centralized societies there is a high degree of accountability of local chiefs. For example, in
ethnic groups that had a state structure, poorly-performing local rulers could be replaced by
the king or superior administrators. Even nowadays some ethnic groups have assemblies and
supreme officials that make local chiefs accountable. Second, Diamond (1997) and Acemoglu
and Robinson (2012) describe how ethnic groups that formed large states, had organized bureaucracies providing policing and other public goods. Third, in centralized ethnicities there
was access to some formal legal resolution mechanism and some form or property rights steadily
emerged (Herbst (2000). Fourth, others have argued that centralized societies were quicker in
adopting Western technologies, because the colonizers collaborated more strongly with politically complex ethnicities (Schapera (1967, 1970)). Fifth, tribal societies with strong political
institutions have been more successful in getting concessions both from colonial powers and
from national governments after independence. For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2012)
describe how the Tswana leaders travelled from Bechuanaland (current Botswana) to England
and convinced the British government to allow for a greater degree of autonomy.2
Related Literature Our study contributes to the literature on the role of pre-colonial,
institutional and cultural features in African development reviewed above (Fortes and EvansPritchard (1940), Schapera (1967), Stevenson (1968), Goody (1971), Bates (1983), Robinson (2002), Boone (2003), Englebert (2009); Besley and Reynal-Querol (2012)). The most
closely related line of research is that of Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) who present cross1

Logan (2011) shows that ethnic leaders are equally important as the local and central governments is
assigning property rights. Respondents tend to rely more on local chiefs and ethnic institutional structures for
the resolution of disputes as compared to national and local government. Ethnic-specific political actors and
institutions play also some role in the provision of education and health.
2
Mamdani (1996), nevertheless, differs in his assessment on the beneficial contemporary role of hierarchical
pre-colonial structures arguing that the legacy of indirect rule in Africa through traditional chiefs was a basis
for post-independence poor institutional and economic performance.

3

country evidence showing that pre-colonial political centralization correlates positively with
public goods provision and contemporary institutions. We advance this literature by establishing that, unlike other observable ethnicity-level variables, pre-colonial ethnic institutions
captured by the degree of political complexity are systematically linked to contemporary regional development within countries as well as within pairs of contiguous ethnic homelands.
Our study also belongs to a growing body of work on the historical origins and the
political economy of African development. Nunn (2008) stresses the importance of the slave
trades, while Huillery (2009), Berger (2009) and Arbesu (2011) quantify the long-run effects
of colonial investments and tax collection systems. Englebert, Tarango, and Carter (2002),
Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011b) examine
the negative effects of the improper colonial border design during the Scramble for Africa.
On a broader scale our work relates to the literature on the institutional origins of contemporary development (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) for a review). Our micro
approach enables us to overcome problems inherent to the cross-country framework adding to
a vibrant body of research that examines the within-country impact of various historical institutional arrangements (e.g. Banerjee and Iyer (2005); Iyer (2010); Dell (2010)). Moreover,
our within-country results linking pre-colonial political centralization to contemporary regional
development complement the cross-country findings of Bockstette, Chanda, and Putterman
(2002) on the beneficial long-run consequences of statehood.
Finally, our work has implications for the literature on state capacity that examines the
origins and consequences of weak states’ inability to monopolize violence, collect taxes, and
protect private property (e.g. Besley and Persson (2011)). Our work shows that in presence
of weak states, local institutions (ethnic in Africa) may fill in the void created by the limited
penetration of national institutions (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2012)).
Paper Structure In the next section we present the pre-colonial ethnic institutional
measures and discuss the luminosity data. We cross-validate our main data and report descriptive statistics illustrating the relationship between ethnic-level political organization and
development. Section 3 presents our results at the ethnic homeland level. First, we lay down
the general econometric framework and report our benchmark within-country estimates. Then,
we examine the role of other ethnic-specific features. In Section 4 we first report our baseline
results at the pixel level and then examine whether regional development differs systematically
across contiguous territories where ethnicities with a different degree of political centralization
reside. In section 5 we conclude discussing directions for future research.

4

2
2.1

Data
Data on the location of historical ethnic homelands

The starting point in compiling our dataset is George Peter Murdock’s (1959) Ethnolinguistic
Map that portrays the spatial distribution of ethnicities across Africa in the eve of European
colonization in the mid/late 19th century. Murdock’s Map (Figure 1a) includes 843 tribal areas
(the mapped groups correspond roughly to levels 7 − 8 of the Ethnologue’s language family
tree); 8 areas are classified as uninhabited upon colonization and are therefore excluded. We
also drop the Guanche, a group in the Madeira islands that is currently part of Portugal. One
may wonder how much the spatial distribution of ethnicities across the continent has changed
over the past 150 years. Reassuringly, using individual data from the Afrobarometer Nunn
and Wantchekon (2011) show a 0.55 correlation between the location of the respondents in
2005 and the historical homeland of their ethnicity as identified in Murdock’s map. Similarly,
Glennerster, Miguel, and Rothenberg (2010) document that in Sierra Leone after the massive
displacement of the 1991 − 2002 civil war there has been a systematic movement of individuals
towards their ethnic group’s historical homeland. We intersect Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map
with the 2000 Digital Chart of the World that portrays contemporary national boundaries to
identify partitioned ethnicities and assign each area to the respective country.

2.2

Ethnic Institutional Traits

In work following the mapping of African ethnicities, Murdock (1967) produced an Ethnographic Atlas (published in twenty nine installments in the anthropological journal Ethnology)
that coded around 60 variables, capturing cultural, geographical, and economic characteristics
of 1, 270 ethnicities around the world. We assigned the 834 African ethnicities of Murdock’s
Map of 1959 to the ethnic groups in his Ethnographic Atlas of 1967. The two sources do not
always use the same name to identify an ethnic group. Utilizing several sources and the updated version of Murdock’s Atlas produced by Gray (1999), we match 534 ethnicities from the
Ethnographic Atlas to 490 ethnic homelands in Murdock’s Map (Figure 1a).3
We measure pre-colonial political institutions using Murdock’s (1967) "Jurisdictional
Hierarchy beyond the Local Community Level" index (see also Gennaioli and Rainer (2006,
2007)). This is an ordered variable, ranging from 0 to 4, that describes the number of political
jurisdictions above the local (usually village) level for each ethnicity. A zero score indicates
stateless societies “lacking any form of centralized political organization”. A score of 1 indicates
3
In 34 instances an ethnic homeland from Murdock’s Map is assigned to more than one groups in the
Ethnographic Atlas; in these cases we assigned to the ethnic homeland the median value of the ethnic institutions
index.

5

petty chiefdoms; a score of 2 designates paramount chiefdoms; and 3 and 4 indicate groups that
were part of large states. Murdock (1967) explicitly excludes colonial regimes and attempts
to capture political complexity before European colonization. This classification is similar to
Diamond (1997) who distinguishes between four main types of societal arrangements: bands,
tribes, chiefdoms, and centralized states. Figure 1b illustrates the significant heterogeneity in
pre-colonial political organization across African groups. Examples of ethnicities without any
level of political organization above the local level include the Bura and the Lango in Uganda.
Examples of tribes belonging to petty chiefdoms are the Mende in Sierra Leone and the Ibo of
Nigeria. The Mbundu in Angola and the Zerma in Niger were part of paramount chiefdoms,
while the Ndebele in Zimbabwe and the Mossi in Burkina Faso are societies that were parts of
states before colonization. The Bubi in Equatorial Guinea and the Beduin Arabs are the only
groups classified as having been part of large complex states (score of 4).

Historical Boundaries of
Ethnicities Before Colonization

Pre-Colonial Jurisdictional
Hierarchy Beyond Local
Community Across Groups

Traditional Ethnic Homelands

Ethnicities' Homelands
0
1
2
3
4

Ü

Ü
Figure 1a: Ethnic Boundaries

Figure 1b: Ethnic Pre-Colonial Institutions

Cross-validation of Murdock’s Jurisdictional Hierarchy Index We cross-validated
Murdock’s data going over the African historiography. Our reading of the literature suggests
that the jurisdictional hierarchy index -while not perfect- is in accordance with works describing
the degree of political complexity in pre-colonial Africa. Murdock (1967) classifies as centralized
the dominant ethnic groups of most major pre-colonial states. For example, the Ankale and
the Buganda, which were the central ethnic groups in the strong kingdoms of Eastern Africa,
get a score of 3. The same applies to other ethnic groups that were part of large states, such
as the Zulu and the Swazi in South Africa, the Ife and the Igala in Nigeria, and the Shongai in
Mali (Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940); Goody (1971)).
6

Murdock also seems to correctly identify stateless ethnicities. The jurisdictional hierarchy index equals zero or one for the Amba, the Konkomba, the Tiv, the Dinka, and the Lugbara,
in line with the analysis of Middleton and Tait (1958) who describe them as acephalous societies. Regarding the Amba, for example, Winter (1958) writes that “the village is the largest
unilateral unit of power ”, whereas Tait (1958) characterizes the Konkomba as an ethnic group
that is “organized locally, without formal laws, and central authority.” Likewise, the Lobbi is
classified as stateless in line with Goody (1971) who characterizes them as “people with no
state organization at all”. The classification also identifies properly societies with intermediate
levels of political centralization (paramount chiefdoms). The Nupe in Nigeria, the Bemba in
Zambia, and the Ngwato in Botswana which formed small states get a score of 2 (Fortes and
Evans-Pritchard (1940)). Clearly there is some subjectivity in Murdock’s characterization of
ethnic-specific institutional structures. Yet to the extent that these biases are not systematic,
this should lead to attenuation and as such our estimates will be on the conservative side.

2.3

Satellite Light Density at Night

The nature of our study requires detailed spatial data on economic development. To the best of
our knowledge, geocoded high-resolution measures of economic development spanning all Africa
are not available. To overcome this limitation we use satellite light density at night to proxy for
local economic activity. The luminosity data come from the Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program’s Operational Linescan System that reports images of the earth at night captured
from 20 : 30 to 22 : 00 local time. The satellite detects lights from human settlements, fires,
gas flares, lightning, and the aurora. The measure is a six-bit number (ranging from 0 to 63)
calculated for every 30-second area (approximately 1 square kilometer). The resulting annual
composite images of time-stable lights are created by overlaying all images captured during
a calendar year, dropping images where lights are shrouded by cloud or overpowered by the
aurora or solar glare (near the poles), and removing ephemeral lights like fires and lightning.
We construct average light density per square kilometer for 2007 and 2008 averaging across
pixels at the desired level of aggregation.
The use of luminosity data as a proxy for development builds on the recent contribution
of Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2011) and previous works (e.g. Elvidge, Baugh, Kihn,
Kroehl, and Davis (1997); Doll, Muller, and Morley (2006)) showing that light density at night
is a robust proxy of economic activity (see also Pinkovskiy (2011)). These studies establish a
strong within-country correlation between light density at night and GDP levels and growth
rates. There is also a strong association between luminosity and access to electricity and
public-goods provision, especially across low income countries (see Min (2008)). Even Chen

7

and Nordhaus (2011), who emphasize some problems of the satellite image data, argue that
luminosity can be quite useful for regional analysis in war-prone countries with poor quality
income data. Luminosity data are subject to saturation and blooming. Saturation occurs
at a level of light similar to that in the urban centers of rich countries and results in topcoded values. Blooming occurs because lights tend to appear larger than they actually are,
especially for bright lights over water and snow. These issues, however, are less pressing within
Africa. First, there are very few instances of top-coding (out of the 30, 457, 572 pixels of light
density only 0.00017% are top-coded). Second, since luminosity is quite low across African
regions, blooming (bleeding) is not a major problem. Moreover, in the within-contiguousethnic-homelands analysis blooming would work against our hypothesis.
Cross-Validation: Satellite Light Density and Regional Development In our empirical analysis we primarily explore within-country variation. Thus we examined the relationship
between luminosity and economic performance using micro-level data from the Demographic
and Health Surveys (DHS) (see the Supplementary Appendix for additional cross-validation
checks). The DHS team in each country produces a composite wealth index, based on individual responses on whether households have access to basic public goods, such as electrification,
clean water, etc. We examine the correlation between log light density and the wealth index
within four large countries from different parts of Africa; Nigeria from Western Africa, Tanzania
from Eastern Africa, the Democratic Republic of Congo from Central Africa, and Zimbabwe
from Southern Africa. We derive the average wealth index across households for each enumeration area (usually a village or a small town) and associate it with light density of each DHS
area using a radius of 10km. Figures 2a − 2d offer a visual representation of the significant
correlation (around 0.75) between luminosity and the composite wealth index. To mitigate
concerns that the correlation is driven by outliers we drop the top 1% of lit areas effectively
excluding the capital city and few other major urban hubs (the dashed line representing the
median regression slope is almost identical to the LS line).

8

Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Zimbabwe

Conditional in Population Density in 2000

Conditional in Population Density in 2000

Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
-1
0
1
2
3

Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
-2
-1
0
1
2

Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Tanzania

-2

0
2
Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster

4

-4

-2
0
2
4
Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster

Figure 2a

Figure 2b

Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Congo DRC

Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Nigeria

Conditional in Population Density in 2000
Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
-1
0
1
2
3

Conditional in Populati on Densi ty in 2000

-2

Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
-1
0
1
2
-4

-2
0
2
Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster

-4

4

-2
0
2
4
Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster

6

Figure 2d

Figure 2c

2.4

6

Summary Statistics

Figures 3a and 3b portray the distribution of luminosity across African ethnic homelands. In
Figure 3a we aggregate the luminosity data at the country-ethnic homeland level, which serves
as our unit of analysis in Section 3. In Figure 3b we divide the continent into pixels of 12.5∗12.5
decimal degrees (approximately 12.5km ∗ 12.5km) and map lit and unlit pixels. Table 1 reports
descriptive statistics of the luminosity data both at the ethnic-country homeland level and
at the pixel level. The mean value of luminosity at the ethnic homeland level is 0.368. The
median is significantly lower, 0.022, because of few areas where light density is extremely high.
There are 7 observations where luminosity exceeds 7.4 and 14 observations where light density
exceeds 4.06. On average 16.7% of all populated pixels are lit, while in the remaining pixels
satellite sensors do not detect the presence of light.

9

Luminosity in 2007-2008

Average Light Density 2007-2008
Across Ethnic Groups in Africa

Pixel - Level Light Density
Lit Pixels

0.2127 - 25.1403
0.0546 - 0.2126
0.0141 - 0.0545
0.0001 - 0.0140
0.0000

Ü

Unlit Pixels

Figure 3a: Luminosity at the Ethnic Homeland

Figure 3b: Pixel-Level Luminosity

The summary statistics reveal large differences in luminosity across homelands where
ethnicities with different pre-colonial political institutions reside. The mean (median) luminosity in the homelands of stateless societies is 0.248 (0.017) and for petty chiefdoms the
respective values are 0.269 (0.013); and only 10% and 12.9% of populated pixels are lit, respectively. Focusing on groups that formed paramount chiefdoms, average (median) luminosity is
0.311 (0.037), while the likelihood that a pixel is lit is 16.9%. Average (median) luminosity
in the homelands of ethnicities that were part of centralized states before colonization is 0.993
(0.082). On average 30.2% of pixels falling in the homelands of highly centralized groups are
lit, three times more than the respective likelihood for stateless societies. Light density in the
homelands of pre-colonial states is significantly higher, even when compared to groups organized as paramount chiefdoms. The mean (median) difference is 0.68 (0.045); and simple test
of means (medians) suggest that these differences are significant at the 99% confidence level.
The descriptive statistics reveal that regional development across ethnic homelands correlates
with the form of the pre-colonial political organization. Light density increases significantly
when one moves from the homelands of stateless at the time of colonization societies and petty
chiefdoms to the homelands of ethnicities organized as paramount chiefdoms; and luminosity
is even higher in the homelands of ethnicities that were part of large states.

10

3

Ethnic Homeland Analysis

3.1

Empirical Framework

To formally examine the relationship between pre-colonial ethnic institutions and development
across ethnic homelands, we estimate variants of the following specification:

yi,c = a0 + γIQLi + Xi,c
Φ + λP Di,c + ac + εi,c .

(1)

The dependent variable, yi,c , reflects the level of economic activity in the historical
homeland of ethnic group i in country c, as proxied by light density at night. IQLi denotes
local ethnic institutions as reflected in the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
level. For ethnicities that fall into more than one country each partition is assigned to the
corresponding country c. For example, regional light density in the part of the Ewe in Ghana is
assigned to Ghana, while the adjacent region of the Ewe in Togo is assigned to Togo.4 In most
specifications we include country fixed effects (ac ), so as to exploit within-country variation.
While fixed effects estimation may magnify problems of measurement error (by absorbing a
sizable portion of the variation), it accounts for differences in national policies, the quality of
national institutions, the identity of the colonizer, the type of colonization, as well as other
country-wide factors.
A merit of our regional focus is that we can account for local geography and other factors
(captured in vector Xi,c ). In many specifications we include a rich set of controls, reflecting land
endowments (elevation and area under water), ecological features (a malaria stability index,
land suitability for agriculture), and natural resources (diamond mines and petroleum fields).
Several studies suggest the inclusion of these variables. First, Nunn and Puga (2012) show that
elevation and terrain ruggedness have affected African development both via goods and via slave
trades. Second, the inclusion of surface under water accounts for blooming in the lights data and
for the potential positive effect of water streams on development via trade. Third, controlling for
malaria prevalence is important as Gallup and Sachs (2001) and subsequent studies have shown
a negative impact of malaria on development. Fourth, there is a vast literature linking natural
resources like oil and diamonds to development (e.g. Ross (2006)). Fifth, Michalopoulos (2012)
shows that differences in land suitability and elevation across regions lead to the formation of
ethnic groups, whereas Ashraf and Galor (2011) show that land quality is strongly correlated
with pre-colonial population densities. We also control for the location of each ethnic area
inside a country augmenting the specification with the distance of the centroid of each ethnic
4

After intersecting Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map with the 2000 Digital Chart of the World we drop ethnic
partitions of less than 100 km2 , as such tiny partitions are most likely due to the lack of precision in the
underlying mapping.

11

group i in country c from the respective capital, the national border, and the nearest sea
coast. The coefficient on distance from the capital reflects the impact of colonization and
the limited penetration of national institutions. Distance to the national border captures the
potentially lower level of development in border areas whereas distance to the sea reflects the
effect of trade as well as the penetration of colonization. In several specifications we control
for log population density (P Di,c ) though the latter is likely endogenous to ethnic institutional
development. Appendix Table 2 reports the summary statistics for all control variables.
The distribution of luminosity across ethnic homelands is not normal, as (i) a significant
fraction (around 24%) of the observations takes on the value of zero and (ii) we have a few
extreme observations in the right tail of the distribution (Appendix Figure 1a). To account for
both issues we use as dependent variable the log of light density adding a small number ((yi,c ≡
ln(0.01 + LightDensityi,c ), Appendix Figure 1b).5 This transformation ensures that we use
all observations and that we minimize the problem of outliers. We also estimate specifications
ignoring unlit areas (yi,c ≡ ln(LightDensityi,c )), as in this case the dependent variable is
normally distributed (Appendix Figure 1c). Moreover, in our pixel-level analysis, where we
focus on regions of 0.125 ∗ 0.125 decimal degrees, we use as dependent variable a dummy that
takes on the value one when the pixel is lit and zero otherwise.
In all specifications we employ the approach of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011) and
cluster standard errors at the country level and at the ethnic-family level. Murdock assigns
the 834 groups into 96 ethnolinguistic clusters/families. Double-clustering accounts for the fact
that ethnicity-level characteristics are likely to be correlated within an ethnolinguistic family.
Moreover, clustering at the ethnic-family level is appropriate because partitioned ethnicities
appear more than once. Finally, the multi-way clustering method allows for arbitrary residual correlation within both dimensions and thus accounts for spatial correlation (Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2011) explicitly cite spatial correlation as an application of the multiclustering approach). We also estimated standard errors accounting for spatial correlation of
an unknown form using Conley’s (1999) method. The two approaches yield similar standard
errors; and if anything the two-way clustering produces somewhat larger standard errors.

3.2

Preliminary Evidence

Table 2 reports cross-sectional LS specifications that associate regional development with precolonial ethnic institutions. Below the estimates we report both double-clustered (in parentheses) and Conley’s (in brackets) standard errors.6 Column (1) reports the unconditional
5

In the previous draft of the paper we added one to the luminosity data before taking the logarithm finding
similar results.
6
Conley’s method requires a cutoff distance beyond which the spatial correlation is assumed to be zero; we
experimented with values between 100km and 3000km. We report errors with a cutoff of 2000km that delivers

12

estimate. In line with the pattern shown in Table 1, the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index is positive (0.411) and highly significant. The coefficient remains significant when
we control for population density in column (2). In column (3) we control for distance to the
capital city, distance to the border, and distance to the coast ("location controls") whereas in
column (4) we augment the specification with a rich set of geographic features.7 Adding these
controls reduces the size of the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index; yet the estimate
retains significance at the 99% confidence level. In columns (5) and (6) we examine whether the
strong positive correlation between pre-colonial political institutions and regional development
is driven by differences in national institutional quality or income per capita, respectively. This
check is motivated by Gennaioli and Rainer (2006) who show that across African countries
there is a positive association between the average level of pre-colonial political centralization
and contemporary national institutions (in our sample the correlation between the rule of law
in 2007 and the jurisdictional hierarchy index is 0.19). Conditioning on either (or both) of
these country-level measures of institutional and economic development has little effect on our
main result. The coefficient on jurisdictional hierarchy remains intact.8

3.3

Benchmark Fixed Effects Estimates

The positive correlation between local institutions and regional development may be driven by
a myriad of nationwide features. In Table 3 we estimate country fixed effects specifications
associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. Table 3A reports estimates using all observations. In Table 3B we focus on the intensive margin of luminosity. By
doing so we (i) account for nonlinearities in the dependent variable and (ii) focus on densely
populated areas (since non-lit areas have a median population density of 11.06 people per
square kilometer whereas lit regions have a median of 35.54).
Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond the Local Community The coefficient on the
jurisdictional hierarchy index in column (1) of table 3A is 0.326 and highly significant.9 The estimate is moderately smaller than the analogous unconditional specification reported in Table 2
- column (1), suggesting that common-to-all-ethnicities country-level factors are not driving the
the largest in magnitude standard errors.
7
Land suitability for agriculture, which reflects climatic and soil conditions, enters most models with a positive
and significant estimate. The malaria stability index enters with a statistically negative estimate. The coefficient
on land area under water is positive and in many specifications significant. Elevation enters with a negative
estimate which is significant in some models. The petroleum dummy enters always with a positive and significant
coefficient. The diamond dummy enters in most specifications with a negative estimate.
8
We lose three observations when we condition on the rule of law or GDP, because we lack data on Western
Sahara. The results are unaffected if we assign the Western Saharan ethnic homelands to Morocco.
9
When we add country fixed effects we lose one observation. This is because in Swaziland we have only one
group, the Swazi.

13

positive cross-sectional correlation.10 Standard errors drop also with the inclusion of country
fixed effects and as such the statistical significance of the estimate is unaffected. In column (2)
we augment the specification with distance to the coast, distance to the border, distance to the
capital and the rich set of geographic controls. The coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy
beyond the local community index retains its statistical and economic significance. In column
(3) we control for population density, while in column (4) we control jointly for geography, location, and population density. Compared to column (1) the estimate on jurisdictional hierarchy
falls by almost a half. This is not surprising as according to the African historiography (e.g.
Stevenson (1968), Fenske (2009)) there is a strong interplay between geography, population
density, and political complexity.11 The size of the coefficient in column (3) - Table 3A implies
that a one-standard-deviation increase in the jurisdictional hierarchy index (which corresponds
to approximately one-unit increase; see Appendix Table 2) is associated with a 0.12 standarddeviation increase in luminosity. This magnitude is similar to the one documented by Nunn
and Wantchekon (2011) in their within-country cross-regional examination of the effect of the
African slave trades on trust (where they report "beta" coefficients in the range of 0.10 − 0.16).
Political Centralization In columns (5) and (8) we use an alternative indicator of
pre-colonial political institutions. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) we define a
dummy variable that takes the value of zero when the group lacks any political organization
beyond the local level or is organized as a petty chiefdom; the index equals one if Murdock
classifies the ethnicity as being a large chiefdom or part of a state. Experimenting with the
re-scaled index is useful because the aggregation may account for measurement error in the
jurisdictional hierarchy index. Moreover, the binary classification is in line with the distinction
of African pre-colonial political systems into centralized ones and those lacking any form of
centralized political authority.12 The coefficient on political centralization is positive and highly
significant. The estimate retains significance, when we control for geography (in (6)), current
10
The Hausman-type test that compares the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index of the crosssectional to the within-country model, suggests that one cannot reject the null hypothesis of coefficient equality.
11
Since population density may be both a cause and an effect of ethnic institutions, the specifications where
we also control for population density should be cautiously interpreted. Following Angrist and Pishcke’s (2008)
recommendation we also used lagged (at independence) population density. In these models (not reported) the
estimates on the ethnic institutions measures are larger (and always significant at the 95% level).
12
Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940) argue that "the political systems fall into two main categories. One group
consists of those societies which have centralized authority, administrative machinery, and judicial institutionsin short, a government-and in which cleavages of wealth, privilege, and status correspond to the distribution of
power and authority. This group comprises the Zulu, the Ngwato, the Bemba, the Banyankole, and the Kede. The
other group consists of those societies which lack centralized authority, administrative machinery, and judicial
institutions-in short which lack government-and in which there are no sharp divisions of rank, status, or wealth.
This group comprises the Logoli, the Tallensi, and the Nuer." Other African scholars make a trichotomous
distinction between stateless societies, large chiefdoms, and centralized states.

14

levels of population density (in (7)) or both (in (8)). The magnitude of political centralization
in column (8) in Table 3B suggests that luminosity is 34 percent (exp(0.295)−1 = 0.343) higher
in ethnic homelands where politically centralized societies reside (e.g. Yoruba in Nigeria), as
compared to stateless societies or small chiefdoms (e.g. the Sokoto or the Tiv in Nigeria).
Flexibly Estimating the Role of Jurisdictional Hierarchy In columns (9)-(12)
we flexibly estimate the relationship between pre-colonial political institutional structures and
contemporary development. We define three dummy variables that take on the value one for
petty chiefdoms, paramount chiefdoms, and pre-colonial states, respectively; the comparison
group being stateless societies.13 The difference in regional development between stateless societies and small chiefdoms is statistically indistinguishable from zero. This result is in accord
with the African historiography that usually does not distinguish between these organizational
structures (see also Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007)). Sizable differences in regional development emerge for large paramount chiefdoms and particularly for groups that were part
of pre-colonial states. This finding is consistent with Diamond (1997), Bockstette, Chanda,
and Putterman (2002), and Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), who argue that centralization and
statehood experience of preindustrial societies are the traits most conducive to development.
Nigeria offers an illustration of these results. Average (median) luminosity in the homelands of the five ethnic groups that were part of states in pre-colonial Africa, namely the Yoruba,
the Fon, the Ife, the Igala, and the Edo is 1 (0.72). Mean (median) luminosity in the homelands
of ethnic groups organized solely at the local level or in petty chiefdoms is 0.88 (0.075). Likewise, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, average luminosity in the homeland of stateless
ethnicities and petty chiefdoms is 0.037; luminosity in paramount chiefdoms is only slightly
higher, 0.042; yet mean luminosity across homelands of ethnicities belonging to pre-colonial
centralized states is three times larger, 0.12.

3.4

Institutions or Other Ethnic Traits?

One concern with the previous estimates is that some other ethnicity feature related to the
economy, culture, or societal structure, is driving the positive correlation between luminosity
and pre-colonial institutions. To address this issue we examined whether some other ethnic
trait, in lieu of political centralization, correlates with contemporary development. In Table 4
we report within-country specifications associating log light density with around twenty different variables from Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (see the Data Appendix for detailed variable
13

Since we have just two ethnic groups where the jurisdictional hierarchy index equals four, we assign these
ethnicities into the groups where the jurisdictional hierarchy index equals 3.

15

definitions).14 These measures reflect the type of economic activity (dependence on gathering,
hunting, fishing, animal husbandry, milking of domesticated animals, and agriculture), societal
arrangements (polygyny, presence of clans at the village level, slavery), early development (size
and complexity of pre-colonial settlements), and proxies of local institutional arrangements (an
indicator for the presence of inheritance rule for property, elections for local headman, class
stratification and jurisdictional hierarchy at the village level).
In Specification A we regress regional light density on the ethnic-level variables, simply
conditioning on country fixed effects and on population density (the results are similar if we
omit population density). Most of the additional variables are statistically insignificant. An
indicator for societies where fishing contributes more than 5% in the pre-colonial subsistence
economy enters with a positive coefficient as economic development is higher in regions close to
the coast and other streams and potentially because of blooming in luminosity. An agricultural
intensity index ranging from 0 to 9, where higher values indicate higher dependence, is negative
and significant, but the correlation between pre-colonial agricultural intensity and regional
development is not robust to an alternative index of agricultural dependence.
The results in columns (1)-(2) show that class stratification, a societal trait that has been
linked to property rights protection and the emergence of centralized states with a bureaucratic
structure, correlates significantly with luminosity.15 Regional development is higher across
regions populated by stratified, as compared to egalitarian, societies. The positive association
between stratification and regional development, though surprising at first glance, is in line with
recent works in Southern America (e.g. Acemoglu, Bautista, Querubin, and Robinson (2008),
Dell (2010)). A potential explanation is that in weakly institutionalized societies inequality
may lead to some form of legal institutions, property rights, and policing, as the elite has the
incentive to establish constraints (Diamond (1997); Herbst (2000)).
In Specification B we add the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index
to test whether it correlates with regional development conditional on the other ethnic traits. In
all specifications the jurisdictional hierarchy index enters with a positive and stable coefficient
(around 0.20), similar in magnitude to the (more efficient) estimate in Table 3A - column 3.
The coefficient is always significant at standard confidence levels (usually at the 99% level).
Clearly the positive correlation between pre-colonial political institutions and contemporary
development may still be driven by some other unobserved or hard-to-account for factor, related
for example to genetics or cultural similarities with some local frontier economy (see for example
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) and Ashraf and Galor (2012)). However, the results in Table 4
14

We are grateful to an anonymous referee for proposing this test.
In line with these arguments in our sample the correlation of class stratification and the jurisdictional
hierarchy index is 0.63.
15

16

reassure that we are not capturing the effect of cultural traits, the type of economic activity,
or early development, at least as reflected in Murdock’s statistics.

3.5

Further Sensitivity Checks

In the Supplementary Appendix we further explore the sensitivity of our results: (1) dropping
observations where luminosity exceeds the 99th percentile; (2) excluding capitals; (3) dropping
each time a different part of the continent; (4) using log population density as an alternative proxy for development. Moreover, using data from the Afrobarometer Surveys on living
conditions and schooling, we associate pre-colonial institutions with these alternative proxies
of regional development. Across all specifications, we find a significantly positive correlation
between a group’s current economic performance and pre-colonial political centralization.

4

Pixel-Level Analysis

We now proceed to the pixel-level analysis. In this section the unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125∗
0.125 decimal degrees. As a result we now have multiple observations within each ethnic area
in each country. Since there are several unpopulated pixels (in the Sahara and the rainforests)
we exclude pixels with zero population (including unpopulated pixels if anything strengthens
the results). Figure 4 illustrates the new unit of analysis showing pixel-level luminosity within
two Bantu groups in Northern Zambia, the Lala and the Lamba.
L a la a n d L a m b a in Z a m b ia
Eth n ic B ord e r - La m b a on th e W e s t - La la o n the E a s t;

L ig h t D e n s ity in 2 0 0 7 -2 0 0 8
No n -L it P ix e l
Lit P ix e l

Ü
Figure 4: Example of the Pixel-Level Analysis
Moving to the pixel level offers some advantages. First, we can condition on geography,
natural resources, and the disease environment at an even finer level. Second, since the dependent variable is an indicator for lit pixels, the non-linear nature of luminosity is no longer a
concern. Third, we account for the possibility that average luminosity at the ethnic homeland

17

also reflects inequality; this may be the case when average light density at the ethnic homeland
is driven by a few extremely lit pixels.

4.1

Benchmark Pixel-Level Estimates

Our specification for the pixel-level analysis reads:



yp,i,c = a0 + ac + γIQLi + λP Dp,i,c + Zp,i,c Ψ + Xi,c
Φ + ζ p,i,c .

The dependent variable, yp,i,c , reflects economic activity in pixel p that belongs to the
historical homeland of ethnicity i in country c. P Dp,i,c denotes log population density, while


 is the set of conditioning variables
vector Zp,i,c includes other controls at the pixel level; Xi,c

at the ethnic-country level.
Table 5 - Panel A reports the results. In columns (1)-(5) we report linear probability
models where the dependent variable equals one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. The
coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index in the unconditional specification in column (1)
is positive and highly significant. The estimate retains significance when we add a vector of
country constants (in (2)). In column (3) we control for log pixel population density. As in
our analysis at the ethnic homeland level, the coefficient on the pre-colonial ethnic institutions
index declines, though it remains significant. In column (4) we augment the specification with
a rich set of pixel-specific controls. Namely, we control for land suitability for agriculture,
elevation, malaria stability, surface area, distance from the centroid of each pixel to the sea
coast, the capital city, and the national border and we add indicators capturing the presence
of diamond mines, petroleum fields, and water bodies.16 In spite of the inclusion of this rich
set of controls, the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community continues to enter with
a positive and highly significant (at the 99% confidence level) coefficient. In column (5) we
condition on the location and geographic controls at the country-ethnic level. The coefficient
on the jurisdictional hierarchy index remains intact. The estimate (0.031) in column (4) implies
that compared to stateless ethnicities, pixels in the homelands of ethnic groups that were part
of paramount chiefdoms are on average 6% more likely to be lit. Similarly, the likelihood that
a pixel is lit is 9 percentage points higher if it falls in the homeland of groups that had complex
centralized institutions at the time of colonization. These magnitudes are not negligible, since
only 17% of populated pixels are lit across Africa.17
In Panel B we estimate in a flexible manner the relationship between pre-colonial political
16
Note that not all pixels have the same surface area since pixels by the coast, lakes, and ethnic boundaries
are smaller.
17
The results are similar using the Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) binary index of political centralization
(see Appendix Table 6).

18

organizational forms and contemporary development. The estimates show that differences in
development become economically and statistically significant when one compares paramount
chiefdoms to stateless societies or groups organized as petty chiefdoms. Contemporary development is even higher in areas populated by societies that were part of pre-colonial states.
The most conservative estimates imply that the likelihood that a pixel is lit is approximately
8 percentage points higher when one moves from the homeland of stateless ethnicities to regions with ethnic groups that pre-colonially were part of a centralized state. Examples from
Botswana illustrate the point estimates. The Naron and the Kung are two stateless societies
whereas the (Ba)Ngwato (a traditional Sotho-Tswana tribe) and the Ndebele (which originate
to the Zulus, the dominant ethnic group of one of the largest pre-colonial states in Southern
Africa) are centralized groups. On average 27.8% of the homeland of the Ndebele and the
Ngwato is lit, while only 5.4% of the homeland of the Naron and the Kung is lit.
In columns (6)-(10) of Table 5 we report otherwise identical to columns (1)-(5) LS specifications using as the dependent variable the log of luminosity adding a small number (0.01).
The coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index is more than two standard errors larger
than zero across all perturbations; this shows that our results at the ethnic homeland level were
not driven by the transformation of luminosity.

4.2

Contiguous Ethnic Homeland Analysis
Approach and Empirical Specification In spite of employing a rich conditioning

set, one may still be worried that some unobservable local geographic feature is driving the
results. To mitigate such concerns we focus on contiguous ethnicities with a different degree of
pre-colonial political centralization and exploit within-country, within-adjacent ethnicities variation in luminosity and ethnic institutions. In some sense this approach extends the pioneering
case study of Douglas (1962), who attributed the large differences in well-being between the
neighboring Bushong and the Lele in the Democratic Republic of Congo to their local institutions and the degree of political centralization in particular.18
We first identified contiguous ethnic homelands, where groups differ in the degree of
political centralization, using the Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) binary classification. There
are 252 unique adjacent ethnic pairs comprising a centralized and a non-centralized ethnicity.
Figure 4 illustrates this using the Lala and the Lamba. The Lala were organized as a petty
chiefdom at the time of colonization; as such the binary political centralization index equals
zero. The Lamba are classified as a paramount chiefdom and therefore as politically centralized.
When a group is adjacent to more than one ethnicities with different pre-colonial centralization
18

We are thankful to Jim Robinson for providing us with this reference.

19

in the same country, we include all pairs.19 Then we examine whether there are systematic
differences in development within contiguous ethnic homelands in the same country running
specifications of the following form:


yp,i(j),c = ai(j),c + δIQLi + λP Dp,i,c + Zp,i,c Ψ + ζ p,i(j),c .
The dependent variable takes on the value of one if pixel p is lit and zero otherwise.
Every pixel p falls into the historical homeland of ethnicity i in country c that is adjacent to the
homeland of ethnicity j in the same country c (where ethnicities i and j differ in their degree of
pre-colonial political centralization). Since we now include country-specific, ethnicity-pair fixed
effects, ai(j),c , the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index,
δ, captures whether differences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions translate into differences in
light density across pixels within pairs of contiguous ethnicities in the same country.
Validation Before we present the results, we examine whether there is a systematic
correlation between pre-colonial institutions and various characteristics within adjacent ethnic
pairs in the same country. To do so we run ethnic-pair-country fixed effects specifications
(with ai(j),c ) associating the jurisdictional hierarchy index with natural resources (presence of
diamond mines or petroleum fields), location (distance to capital, to the sea and the national
border), and geography (elevation, presence of water bodies, soil quality for agriculture and
the malaria stability index). These regressions, reported in Table 6, yield statistically and
economically insignificant estimates suggesting that by focusing on neighboring ethnic areas
we neutralize the role of local (observable) geographic and location factors.
Results Table 7 reports the results of the contiguous-ethnic-homeland analysis. The
estimate in (1) shows that within country, within pairs of contiguous ethnic homelands luminosity is significantly higher in the historical homeland of ethnicities with more complex
political institutions. In column (2) we condition on pixel population density. The coefficient
on the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index falls, though it becomes more
precisely estimated. In column (3) we control for the rich set of pixel-level geographic variables.
While some of these variables enter with significant estimates, given their minimal correlation
with the jurisdictional hierarchy index (shown in Table 6), this has a negligible effect on the
estimate. The coefficient in column (3) implies that the likelihood that a pixel is lit is approximately 2.5 percentage points higher if one moves from the homeland of a stateless group
19
For example, the Dagomba in Ghana, a centralized group (the jurisdictional hierarchy index equals 3) is
adjacent to two non-centralized groups in Ghana, the Basari and the Konkomba. In such cases we include both
pairs. The median (average) distance between the centroids of neighboring ethnicities is 179km (215km).

20

to the neighboring homeland in the same country of an ethnic group that was organized as a
paramount chiefdom. In columns (4)-(6) we restrict our analysis to pairs of contiguous ethnic
homelands with large differences (two levels or greater) in the jurisdictional hierarchy index;
this is helpful not only because we now focus on sharper discontinuities, but also because we
can account (to some degree) for measurement error in Murdock’s classification of pre-colonial
political organization. The estimate on the pre-colonial ethnic institutions index retains its statistical and economic significance. In columns (7)-(9) we require that one of the two adjacent
ethnic groups was part of a pre-colonial state. Thus, in these models in each pair of adjacent
ethnicities we compare a group which had been either stateless or part of a petty chiefdom (the
Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) index equals zero) to an ethnicity that was organized as a state at
the time of colonization. There is a strong positive correlation between differences in luminosity
and differences in the degree of pre-colonial political institutions. The estimates suggest that
the probability that a pixel is lit is 5.5% − 7.5% higher when one moves from the homeland of
stateless societies to the areas of groups that formed large states before the colonial era.
A couple of examples are useful. In Uganda 2% of the pixels falling in the homeland of
the Acholi, a non-centralized group (jurisdictional hierarchy index equals 1) are lit, while 4.2%
of the pixels are lit in the adjacent homeland of the Nyoro, an ethnic group that was part the
large Banyoro kingdom (jurisdictional hierarchy index equals 3). Similarly, 21.4% of the pixels
are lit in the homeland of the Ganda, the central ethnic group of the powerful kingdom of
Buganda that had a highly centralized bureaucracy under the kabaka/king, compared to only
6.7% lit pixels in the neighboring territory of the stateless Lango.
Further Evidence To further assuage concerns that some local unobserved geographic
feature is driving the results, we narrowed our analysis to pixels close to the ethnic boundary.
This approach is similar in spirit to regression discontinuity type analyses that are becoming
increasingly popular in institutional economics.20 In our context, implementing a standard
regression discontinuity design across ethnic boundaries like the ones that are usually performed
across the national border is not advisable for several reasons. First, while national borders
are accurately delineated, drawing error in Murdock’s map on the exact location of ethnic
boundaries is likely to be non-trivial. Second, since Murdock’s map, originally printed in the
end of his book on African ethnicities, is available at a small scale, its digitization magnifies
any noise inherent to the initial border drawing. Third, Murdock assigns each part of Africa
to a single dominant group, while (some) ethnicities (may) overlap; and naturally population
mixing is higher closer to ethnic boundaries. Fourth, due to bleeding in the luminosity data
20

See, for example, Dell (2010), Bubb (2012), and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2012), among others.

21

(occurring from the diffusion of light) and since electricity grids are crossing adjacent regions
within the same country, we may not be able to detect significant differences in luminosity in
areas very close to ethnic borders.
In spite of these limitations we took the (heroic) step to estimate the role of local institutions close to the ethnic boundaries. In an effort to counterbalance the potential merits
of focusing very close to the ethnic border and accounting for the aforementioned problems,
we perform estimation in areas close to the ethnic boundaries, but excluding pixels that fall
within 25 kilometers or within 50 kilometers from each side of the border. Essentially, this boils
down to assuming that the ethnic border is "thick" (by either 50km or 100km). We perform
the analysis within adjacent ethnic homelands with different pre-colonial political institutions
in the same country. In case of ethnic homelands having multiple neighbors with different
pre-colonial centralization we chose the largest in size bordering group.
Table 8A reports LS regression estimates using three different bandwidths (100km,
150km, and 200km) from the original ethnic border. In the most restrictive specification
in column (1) of Panel A, when we limit our attention to areas within 100 kilometers from the
ethnic border (while excluding pixels within a 25 kilometers range), the coefficient on the index
of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community is positive (0.019) and statistically significant at the 90% level. When we increase the bandwidth to 150 kilometers in column (2) the
coefficient increases somewhat (0.023) and retains its statistical significance; further increasing
the bandwidth to 200 kilometers (or more) has no impact on the coefficient, while due to the
increase in the sample, the standard errors become tighter. Turning now to Panel B, when
we exclude pixels 50 kilometers from the ethnic border, the coefficient is 0.023 when we use
the narrow bandwidth of 100 kilometers and 0.028 when we increase the bandwidth to 150 or
200 kilometers. In columns (4)-(6) we focus on pairs of ethnicities in the same country with
sharp discontinuities in the strength of pre-colonial ethnic institutions. The estimates show
that regional development is significantly higher in the homeland of societies with advanced
pre-colonial institutions. Finally, in columns (7)-(9) we perform the analysis requiring that
the centralized ethnic group has been part of a state before colonization. The estimates are
somewhat larger, while the standard errors fall. Across all specifications the coefficient on the
jurisdictional hierarchy index is in the range of 0.020 − 0.035, quite similar to the estimates in
Tables 5 and 7. This reassures that our benchmark estimates were not driven by unobserved
local features.
In Table 8B we estimate locally linear regressions including in the set of controls an RDtype fourth-order polynomial in distance to the "thick" ethnic border, allowing the coefficients
on the distance terms to be different for the relatively high and the relatively low institutional

22

quality homelands, respectively. Compared to the analogous estimates in Table 8A this allows
us to estimate the role of pre-colonial ethnic institutions exactly at the ethnic border. Across
all specifications the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index is positive and if anything
somewhat higher than the corresponding specifications in Table 8A where we did not include
the RD-type polynomial in distance to the ethnic boundary. While standard errors are somewhat larger, the estimates are statistically significant at the standard confidence levels in most
specifications.
Figures 5a and 5b illustrate graphically the relationship between pixel luminosity and
distance to the ethnic border for adjacent groups with large differences (two levels or greater)
in the jurisdictional hierarchy index. Figure 5a, which includes the boundary pixels, suggests
that while light density is overall higher in the homelands of centralized ethnic groups, these
differences become miniscule and are statistically indistinguishable from zero for pixels exactly
at the ethnic border. Yet, as Figure 5b shows, when we just exclude 25 kilometers from each
side of the ethnic border, then differences in pixel-level light density become both economically
and statistically significant.

Pre-Colonial Political Centralization and Light Density in 2007-2008

Pre-Colonial Political Centralization and Light Density in 2007-2008

Local Mean Smoothing Plot with 95% Confidence Intervals

.25
.2
.15

Light Density per Pixel)

.05

.05
-200

-100

0

100

200

Distance to the Ethnic Border
Positive Values: Pixels in the Centralized Groups
Negative Values: Pixels in the Non-Centralized Groups

-200

-100
0
100
Distance to the Ethnic Border
Positive Values: Pixels in the Centralized Groups
Negative Values: Pixels in the Non-Centralized Groups

200

Figure 5b - Border Thickness: 25 km

Figure 5a - Border Thickness: 0 km

5

.1

.2
.15
.1

Light Density per Pixel)

.25

Local Mean Smoothing Plot with 95% Confidence Intervals

Conclusion

In this study we combine anthropological data on the spatial distribution and local institutions
of African ethnicities at the time of colonization with satellite images on light density at night
to assess the role of deeply-rooted ethnic institutions in shaping contemporary comparative
African development. Exploiting within-country variation, we show that regional development
is significantly higher in the historical homelands of ethnicities with centralized, hierarchical,
pre-colonial political institutions.
Since we do not have random assignment on ethnic institutions, this correlation does
23

not necessarily imply causation. Hard-to-account-for factors related to geography, culture, or
early development may confound these results. Yet, the uncovered pattern is robust to a host
of alternative explanations. First, we show that the strong correlation between pre-colonial
institutional complexity and current development is not driven by observable differences in geographic, ecological, and natural resource endowments both at the ethnic homeland and at the
pixel level. Second, the uncovered link between historical political centralization and contemporary development is not mediated by observable ethnic differences in culture, occupational
specialization, and the structure of economic activity before colonization. Third, the positive
association between pre-colonial ethnic political institutions and luminosity is present within
pairs of adjacent ethnic homelands in the same country where groups with different pre-colonial
institutions reside. Our analysis, therefore, provides large-scale formal econometric evidence
in support of the African historiography that dates back to Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940)
emphasizing the importance of ethnic institutions in shaping contemporary economic performance.
The uncovered empirical regularities call for future research. First, our results imply that
the literature on the political economy of African development should move beyond countrylevel features and examine the role of ethnic-specific attributes. Second, future research should
shed light on the mechanisms via which ethnic institutional and cultural traits shape economic performance. Third, empirical and theoretical work is needed to understand how local
ethnicity-specific institutions and cultural norms emerge. Finally, our approach to combine
high resolution proxies of development (such as satellite light density at night) with anthropological data on culture and institutions provides a platform for subsequent research, allowing,
for example, one to investigate the interplay between ethnic traits and national policies.

24

References
A, D., M. A. B, P. Q,  J. A. R (2008): “Economic
and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia,” in Institutions and Economic Performance, ed. by E. Helpman. Harvard University Press.
A, D.,  S. J (2005): “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(5), 949—995.
A, D., S. J,  J. A. R (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91(5),
1369—1401.
(2002): “Reversal Of Fortune: Geography And Institutions In The Making Of The
Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1231—1294.
(2005): “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Handbook of
Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, pp. 109—139. Elsevier North-Holland,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
A, D., T. R,  J. A. R (2012): “Chiefs,” mimeo, Harvard University
and MIT.
A, D.,  J. A. R (2012): Why Nations Fail? The Origins of Power,
Prosperity, and Poverty. Crown Publishers, New York, NY.
A, A., W. E,  J. M ! (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.
A, J.,  J.-S. P! (2008): Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
A, H. A. L. (2011): “Colonialism and Economic Development: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment in Colonial Nigeria,” mimeo MIT.
A%, Q.,  O. G (2011): “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch:
Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
(2012): “Human Genetic Diversity and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
B(, K. (2010): “Why Vote with the Chief? Political Connections and Public Goods
Provision in Zambia,” Working Paper, Department of Political Science, University of Florida.
25

(2011): “When Politicians Cede Control of Resources: Land, Chiefs, and Coalition
Building in Africa,” Working Paper, Department of Political Science, University of Florida.
B*, A.,  L. I (2005): “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The
Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 95, 1190—
1213.
B, R. H. (1983): “Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics
in Contemporary Africa,” in State versus Ethnic Claims: African Policy Dilemmas, ed. by
D. Rothchild, and V. A. Olunsorola. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.
B, D. (2009): “Taxes, Institutions and Governance: Evidence from Colonial Nigeria,”
mimeo, New York University.
B, T.,  T. P (2011): Pillars of Prosperity. The Political Economics of Development Clusters. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
B, T.,  M. R-Q (2012): “The Legacy of Historical Conflicts. Evidence
from Africa,” mimeo, London School of Economics and UPF.
B!, V., A. C,  L. P (2002): “States and Markets: The
Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7(4), 347—369.
B, C. (2003): Political Topographies of the African State: Territorial Authority and
Institutional Choice. Cambridge University Press.
B, R. (2012): “States, Law, and Property Rights in West Africa,” Working Paper, New
York University School of Law.
C, C. A., J. G,  D. M (2011): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way
Clustering,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(2), 238—249.
C, X.,  W. D. N (2011): “Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic
Statistics,” Proceeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(21), 8589—8594.
C, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics, 92(1), 1—45.
D, M. (2010): “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), 839—
857.
D, J. (1997): Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. W. W. Norton
& Co., New York, NY.
26

D, C. N., J.-P. M,  J. G. M (2006): “Mapping Regional Economic
Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery,” Ecological Economics, 57, 75—92.
D, M. (1962): “Lele Economy Compared with the Bushong: A Study of Economic
Backwardness,” in Markets in Africa, ed. by P. Bohannan, and G. Dalton, pp. 211—233.
Northwestern University Press, Evanston, ILL.
E0, C., K. B, E. K, H. K,  E. D0 (1997): “Mapping of City
Lights Using DMSP Operational Linescan System data,” Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 63, 727—734.
E, P. (2009): Africa, Unity, Sovereignty and Sorrow. Lynne Rienner Publishers,
Inc., Boulder, Colorado.
E, P., S. T,  M. C (2002): “Dismemberment and Suffocation: A
Contribution to the Debate on African Boundaries,” Comparative Political Studies, 35(10),
1093—1118.
E (2005): Languages of the World, SIL International; Fifteenth edition.
F!, J. (2009): “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions,” mimeo Yale University.
F, M.,  E. E0-P (1940): African Political Systems. Oxford University
Press.
G2, J. L.,  J. D. S (2001): “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” The American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 64(1), 85—96.
G, N.,  I. R (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality
in Africa,” in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and
K. Konrad. MIT Press.
(2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.
G, R., E. M,  A. R (2010): “Collective Action in Diverse
Sierra Leone Communities,” Working Paper, NBER, No. 16196.
G, M.,  C. U (2008): “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural
Investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), 981—1022.

27

G, J. (1971): Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa. International African Institute by Oxford University Press.
G, P. J. (1999): “A Corrected Ethnographic Atlas,” Wolrd Cultures, 10, 24—85.
H, V. J., A. S,  D. N. W (2011): “Measuring Economic Growth
from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
H, J. (2000): States and Power in Africa. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
H, E. (2009): “History Matters: The Long Term Impact of Colonial Public Investments
in French West Africa,” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics, 1(2), 176—215.
I, L. (2010): “Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-term Consequences,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 693—713.
L, C. (2011): “The Roots of Resilience: Exploring Popular Support for African Traditional Authorities,” Afrobarometer Working Paper No. 128.
M, M. (1996): Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late
Colonialism. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
M2, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.
M2, S.,  E. P2 (2011a): “Divide and Rule or the Rule of the
Divided? Evidence from Africa,” NBER Working Paper 17184.
(2011b): “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa,” CEPR Discussion Paper
No. 8676.
(2012): “National Institutions and African Development: Evidence from Partitioned
Ethnicities,” mimeo, Brown University and Dartmouth College.
M, J.,  D. T (1958): Tribes without Rulers. Routlege and Kegan Paul, London.
M, B. (2008): “Democracy and Light: Electoral Accountability and the Provision of Public
Goods,” Working Paper, mimeo UCLA.
M!, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York.

28

(1967): Ethnographic Atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
N, N. (2008): “The Long Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123(1), 139—176.
N, N.,  D. P (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20—36.
N, N.,  L. W! (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.
P!0!, M. L. (2011): “Economic Discontinuities across Borders: Evidence from Satellite
Data on Lights at Night,” mimeo, MIT, Department of Economics.
P, R. L., F. L.  S, A. S%,  R. V (1997): “Legal Determinants
of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131—1150.
(1998): “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113—1155.
R, J. A. (2002): “States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and
Control by Jeffrey I. Herbst: A Review Essay,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 510—519.
R, M. L. (2006): “A Closer Look on Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,” Anuual Review of
Political Science, 9(1), 265—300.
S2, I. (1967): Government and Politics in Tribal Societies. Humanities Press, London:
Watts.
(1970): “Tribal Innovators: Tswana Chiefs and Social Change, 1795-1940,” London
School of Economics Monographs on Social Anthropology, (43).
S2, E.,  R. W  (2009): “The Diffusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(2), 469—529.
S0, R. F. (1968): Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa. Columbia
University Press.
T, D. (1958): “The Territorial Pattern and Lineage System of Konkomba,” in Tribes without
Rulers, ed. by J. Middleton, and D. Tait, pp. 167—202. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
W, E. (1958): “The Aboriginal Political Structure of Bwamba,” in Tribes without Rulers,
ed. by J. Middleton, and D. Tait, pp. 136—166. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics
variable

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

p25

median

p75

min

max

Panel A: All Observations
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)

683
683

0.368
-2.946

1.528
1.701

0.000
-4.575

0.022
-3.429

0.150
-1.835

0.000
-4.605

25.140
3.225

Pixel-Level Light Density
Lit Pixel

66570
66570

0.560
0.167

3.422
0.373

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

62.978
1.000

Panel B: Stateless Ethnicities
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)

183
183

0.248
-3.273

1.878
1.427

0.000
-4.605

0.017
-3.621

0.080
-2.408

0.000
-4.605

25.140
3.225

Pixel-Level Light Density
Lit Pixel

13174
13174

0.172
0.100

1.556
0.301

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

55.634
1.000

Panel C: Petty Chiefdoms
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)

276
276

0.269
-3.238

1.155
1.584

0.000
-4.605

0.013
-3.753

0.084
-2.370

0.000
-4.605

13.086
2.572

Pixel-Level Light Density
Lit Pixel

20259
20259

0.283
0.129

2.084
0.335

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

60.022
1.000

Panel D: Paramount Chiefdoms
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)

175
175

0.311
-2.788

0.940
1.711

0.001
-4.545

0.037
-3.058

0.191
-1.604

0.000
-4.605

9.976
2.301

Pixel-Level Light Density
Lit Pixel

20972
20972

0.388
0.169

2.201
0.375

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

58.546
1.000

Panel E: Pre-Colonial States
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)

80
80

0.993
-2.022

2.246
2.183

0.007
-4.106

0.082
-2.391

0.803
-0.207

0.000
-4.605

14.142
2.650

Pixel-Level Light Density
Lit Pixel

12165
12165

1.739
0.302

6.644
0.459

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.160
1.000

0.000
0.000

62.978
1.000

The table reports descriptive statistics for the luminosity data that we use to proxy economic development at the country-ethnic
homeland level and at the pixel level. Panel A gives summary statistics for the full sample. Panel B reports summary statistics for
ethnicities that lacked any form of political organization beyond the local level at the time of colonization. Panel C reports
summary statistics for ethnicities organized in petty chiefdoms. Panel D reports summary statistics for ethnicities organized in
large paramount chiefdoms. Panel E reports summary statistics for ethnicities organized in large centralized states. The
classification follows Murdock (1967). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.

Table 2: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development
Cross-Sectional Estimates

Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.
Conley's s.e.

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.4106***
(0.1246)
[0.1294]

0.3483**
(0.1397)
[0.1288]

0.3213***
(0.1026)
[0.1014]

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.1852*** 0.1599*** 0.1966***
(0.0676)
(0.0605) (0.0539)
[0.0646]
[0.0599] [0.0545]

Rule of Law (in 2007)

0.4809**
(0.2213)
[0.1747]

Double-clustered s.e.
Conley's s.e.

Log GDP p.c. (in 2007)

0.5522***
(0.1232)
[0.1021]

Double-clustered s.e.
Conley's s.e.

Adjusted R-squared

0.056

0.246

0.361

0.47

0.488

0.536

Population Density
Location Controls
Geographic Controls
Observations

No
No
No
683

Yes
No
No
683

Yes
Yes
No
683

Yes
Yes
Yes
683

Yes
Yes
Yes
680

Yes
Yes
Yes
680

Table 2 reports OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in Murdock’s
(1967) index of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community. The dependent variable is log (0.01 + light density at night from
satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In columns (5) we control for national institutions augmenting the specification with the rule
of law index (in 2007). In column (6) we control for the overall level of economic development augmenting the specification with the
log of per capita GDP (in 2007). In columns (2)-(6) we control for log (0.01 + population density). In columns (3)-(6) we control for
location augmenting the specification with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the respective capital city,
distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls in columns (4)-(6) includes
log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria
stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses doubleclustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. We also report in brackets Conley’s (1999) standard
errors that account for 2-dimensional spatial auto-correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance with the most
conservative standard errors at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 3A: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries
(1)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Petty Chiefdoms

0.1538
(0.2108)

0.1442
(0.1739)

0.1815
(0.1542)

0.1361
(0.1218)

Paramount Chiefdoms

0.4258* 0.4914* 0.3700** 0.3384**
(0.2432) (0.2541) (0.1628) (0.1612)

Jurisdictional Hierarchy

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.3260*** 0.2794*** 0.2105*** 0.1766***
(0.0852) (0.0853) (0.0554) (0.0502)

Binary Political Centralization

0.5264*** 0.5049*** 0.3413*** 0.3086***
(0.1492) (0.1575) (0.0898) (0.0974)

Pre-Colonial States

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

1.1443*** 0.8637*** 0.6809*** 0.5410***
(0.2762) (0.2445) (0.1641) (0.1486)
0.409
682

0.540
682

0.400
682

0.537
682

0.597
682

0.661
682

0.593
682

0.659
682

0.413
682

0.541
682

0.597
682

0.661
682

Country Fixed Effects
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Population Density

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Table 3B: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries
Intensive Margin
(1)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Petty Chiefdoms

0.1065
(0.2796)

0.1048
(0.2363)

0.0987
(0.1791)

0.0135
(0.1733)

Paramount Chiefdoms

0.2816 0.6253*
(0.3691) (0.3373)

0.2255
(0.2261)

0.2374
(0.2392)

Jurisdictional Hierarchy

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.3279*** 0.3349*** 0.1651** 0.1493**
(0.1240) (0.1120) (0.0705) (0.0729)

Binary Political Centralization

0.4819** 0.6594*** 0.2649** 0.2949**
(0.2386) (0.2090) (0.1234) (0.1394)

Pre-Colonial States

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Country Fixed Effects
Location Controls
Geographic Controls
Population Density

1.2393*** 0.9617*** 0.5972*** 0.4660**
(0.3416) (0.3224) (0.2226) (0.2208)
0.424
517

0.562
517

0.416
517

0.562
517

0.638
517

0.671
517

0.636
517

0.671
517

0.431
517

0.564
517

0.639
517

0.672
517

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 3 reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. In Panel A the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at
night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the dependent variable is the log (light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level; as such we exclude areas
with zero luminosity. In columns (1)-(4) we measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions using Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. In columns (5)-(8)
we use a binary political centralization index that is based on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community variable. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), this
index takes on the value of zero for stateless societies and ethnic groups that were part of petty chiefdoms and one otherwise (for ethnicities that were organized as paramount chiefdoms
and ethnicities that were part of large states). In columns (9)-(12) we augment the specification with three dummy variables that identify petty chiefdoms, paramount chiefdoms, and large
states. The omitted category consists of stateless ethnic groups before colonization. All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported).
In even-numbered columns we control for location and geography. The set of control variables includes the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the respective
capital city, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land suitability for
agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the
estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

Table 4: Examining the Role of Other Pre-colonial Ethnic Features
Specification A

Specification B

Additional Variable

Obs.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Gathering

-0.0937
(0.1689)

749

-0.0771
(0.1842)

0.2082***
(0.0552)

682

Hunting

-0.0292
(0.1217)

749

-0.0167
(0.1238)

0.2099***
(0.0563)

682

Fishing

0.2385*
(0.1315)

749

0.2359*
(0.1269)

0.2087***
(0.0552)

682

Animal Husbandry

0.0549
(0.0407)

749

0.0351
(0.0432)

0.2008***
(0.0618)

682

Milking

0.1782
(0.1395)

702

0.0872
(0.1443)

0.2016***
(0.0581)

680

-0.1058**
(0.0436)

749

-0.1032**
(0.0454)

0.2078***
(0.0558)

682

Agriculture Type

0.0237
(0.1015)

703

-0.0131
(0.1022)

0.2092***
(0.0549)

680

Polygyny

0.0744
(0.1197)

735

0.0796
(0.1290)

0.2140***
(0.0562)

677

-0.019

749

0.007

0.2106***

682

(0.1482)

(0.0544)

Agriculture Dependence

Polygyny Alternative

(0.1588)

Additional Variable Jurisdictional Hierarchy

Obs.

Clan Communities

-0.1294
(0.1479)

617

-0.0079
(0.1404)

0.2158***
(0.0537)

567

Settlement Pattern

-0.0159
(0.0350)

701

-0.0057
(0.0378)

0.2103***
(0.0572)

679

Complex Settlements

0.2353
(0.1597)

701

0.2154
(0.1609)

0.1991***
(0.0554)

679

Table 4: Examining the Role of Other Pre-colonial Ethnic Features, cont.
Specification A

Specification B

Additional Variable

Obs.

Additional Variable Jurisdictional Hierarchy

Obs.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Hierarchy of Local
Community

0.0197
(0.0825)

686

-0.0009
(0.0869)

0.2085***
(0.0566)

680

Patrilineal Descent

-0.1880
(0.1313)

733

-0.2011
(0.1309)

0.1932***
(0.0500)

671

Class Stratification

0.1268**
(0.0493)

608

0.0672
(0.0581)

0.1556**
(0.0697)

570

Class Stratification Indicator

0.3970**
(0.1817)

608

0.2757
(0.1900)

0.1441**
(0.0563)

570

Elections

0.3459
(0.2462)

536

0.2764
(0.2583)

0.2217***
(0.0583)

500

Slavery

-0.0236
(0.1559)

661

-0.1192
(0.1583)

0.2016***
(0.0619)

616

Inheritance Rules for
Property Rights

-0.1963
(0.2172)

569

-0.1788
(0.2283)

0.2196***
(0.0691)

529

Table 4 reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic features as reflected in
Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicitycountry level. All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log
(0.01 + population density at the ethnicity-country level). In specification A (in columns (1)-(2)) we regress log (0.01 + light density)
on various ethnic traits from Murdock (1967). In specification B (columns (3)-(5)) we regress log (0.01 + light density) on each of
Murdock’s additional variables and the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Table 5: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development: Pixel-Level Analysis
Lit/Unlit Pixels
(1)

(2)

(3)

Ln (0.01 + Luminosity)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Panel A: Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond the Local Community Level
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared

0.0673**
(0.0314)

0.0447**
(0.0176)

0.034

0.272

0.0280*** 0.0308*** 0.0265***
(0.0081)
(0.0074)
(0.0071)
0.358

0.375

0.379

0.3619**
(0.1837)

0.2362**
(0.1035)

0.045

0.320

0.1528*** 0.1757*** 0.1559***
(0.0542)
(0.0506)
(0.0483)
0.418

0.448

0.456

0.0531
(0.0837)

Panel B: Pre-colonial Institutional Arrangements
Petty Chiefdoms
Double-clustered s.e.

Paramount Chiefdoms
Double-clustered s.e.

Pre-Colonial States
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Country Fixed Effects
Population Density
Controls at the Pixel Level
Controls at the Ethnic-Country Level
Observations

0.0285
(0.0255)

0.0373
(0.0339)

0.0228
(0.0220)

0.0161
(0.0175)

0.0125
(0.0141)

0.1320
(0.1192)

0.1520
(0.1832)

0.0796
(0.1271)

0.0642
(0.0976)

0.0685**
(0.0334)

0.0773
(0.0489)

0.0546*
(0.0295)

0.0614**
(0.0266)

0.0519***
(0.0178)

0.3103**
(0.1560)

0.3528
(0.2472)

0.2389
(0.1498)

0.3054** 0.2802***
(0.1347)
(0.0964)

0.2013**
(0.0956)

0.1310**
(0.0519)

0.0765*** 0.0798*** 0.0688***
(0.0240)
(0.0216)
(0.0235)

1.0949**
(0.5488)

0.6819**
(0.2881)

0.033

0.271

0.357

0.375

0.379

0.046

0.319

0.417

0.448

0.456

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No
66570

No
No
66570

No
No
66570

Yes
No
66173

Yes
Yes
66173

No
No
66570

No
No
66570

No
No
66570

Yes
No
66173

Yes
Yes
66173

0.4089*** 0.4544*** 0.3994***
(0.1432)
(0.1430)
(0.1493)

Table 5 reports OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in satellite light density at night, with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x
0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers). In columns (1)-(5) the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. In
columns (6)-(10) the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite). In Panel A we measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions with Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community index. In Panel B we examine in a flexible way the role of each pre-colonial political structure on regional development, augmenting the specification
with three dummy variables that identify ethnic groups that were organized as petty chiefdoms, large paramount chiefdoms, and large states before colonization. The omitted category
consists of stateless upon colonization ethnic groups.
In columns (3)-(5) and (8)-(10) we control for ln (pixel population density). In columns (4), (5), (9) and (10) we control for a set of geographic and location variables at the pixel level. The
set of controls includes the distance of the centroid of each pixel from the respective capital city, the distance of each pixel from the sea coast, the distance of each pixel from the national
border, an indicator for pixels that have water (lakes, rivers, and other streams), an indicator for pixels with diamond mines, an indicator for pixels with oil fields, pixel’s land suitability for
agriculture, pixel’s mean elevation, pixel’s average value of a malaria stability index, and the log of the pixel’s area. In columns (5) and (10) we also control for location and geographic
features at the ethnic-country level. Specifically, the set of control variables includes the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the respective capital city, the distance
from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria
stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses
double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 6: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Geographic Characteristics within Contiguous Ethnic Homelands in the Same Country
Dependent variable is:
Oil Indicator

Water
Indicator

Distance to
the Capital

Distance to
the Sea

Distance to
the Border

Malaria
Stability

Land
Suitability

Mean
Elevation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0011
(0.0008)

0.0063
(0.0051)

-0.0058
(0.0077)

-9.1375
(20.1494)

9.4628
(6.3349)

-3.7848
(10.0488)

-0.001
(0.0181)

-0.0059
(0.0060)

21.3826
(19.5522)

Adjusted R-squared

0.508

0.019

0.126

0.915

0.944

0.660

0.629

0.835

0.767

Mean of Dependent Variable

0.004

0.036

0.125

521.899

643.984

157.596

0.754

0.377

743.446

Observations
Adjacent-Ethnic-Groups Fixed Effects

78139
Yes

78139
Yes

78139
Yes

78139
Yes

78139
Yes

78139
Yes

77985
Yes

77983
Yes

78139
Yes

Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Diamond
Indicator

Table 6 reports OLS estimates associating various geographical, ecological, and other characteristics with pre-colonial ethnic institutions within pairs of adjacent ethnicities. The unit of
analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers). Every pixel falls into the historical homeland of ethnicity i in country c that is adjacent to the homeland
of another ethnicity j in country c, where the two ethnicities differ in the degree of political centralization.
The dependent variable in column (1) is a binary index that takes on the value of one if there is a diamond mine in the pixel; in column (2) a binary index that takes on the value of one if
an oil/petroleum field is in the pixel; in column (3) a binary index that takes on the value of one if a water body falls in the pixel. In columns (4)-(6) the dependent variable is the distance
of each pixel from the capital city, the sea coast, and the national border, respectively. In column (7) the dependent variable is the average value of a malaria stability index; in column (8)
the dependent variable is land's suitability for agriculture; in column (9) the dependent variable is elevation. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 7: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within Contiguous Ethnic Homelands in the Same Country

Difference in Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Index > | 1 |

All Observations

Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Adjacent-Ethnic-Groups Fixed Effects
Population Density
Controls at the Pixel Level

One Ethnic Group was Part of a Precolonial State

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0253*
(0.0134)

0.0152**
(0.0073)

0.0137**
(0.0065)

0.0280*
(0.0159)

0.0170**
(0.0079)

0.0151**
(0.0072)

0.0419**
(0.0213)

0.0242**
(0.0096)

0.0178***
(0.0069)

0.329
78139
Yes

0.391
78139
Yes

0.399
77833
Yes

0.338
34180
Yes

0.416
34180
Yes

0.423
34030
Yes

0.424
16570
Yes

0.501
16570
Yes

0.512
16474
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Table 7 reports adjacent-ethnicity (ethnic-pair-country) fixed effects OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in satellite light density at night with pre-colonial
ethnic institutions, as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index within pairs of adjacent ethnicities with a different degree of political
centralization in the same country. The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers). Every pixel falls into the historical homeland of ethnicity
i in country c that is adjacent to the homeland of another ethnicity j in country c, where the two ethnicities differ in the degree of political centralization. The dependent variable is a
dummy variable that takes on the value of one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise.
In columns (4)-(6) we restrict estimation to adjacent ethnic groups with large differences in the 0-4 jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level index (greater than one point). In
columns (7)-(9) we restrict estimation to adjacent ethnic groups in the same country where the one of the two ethnicities was part of a large state before colonization (in this case the
jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level index equals 3 or 4). In columns (2), (3), (5), (6), (8), and (9) we control for ln (pixel population density). In columns (3), (6), and (9) we
control for a set of geographic and location variables at the pixel level. The set of controls includes the distance of the centroid of each pixel from the respective capital, the distance of
each pixel from the sea coast, the distance of each pixel from the national border, an indicator for pixels that have water (lakes, rivers, and other streams), an indicator for pixels with
diamond mines, an indicator for pixels with oil fields, pixel’s land suitability for agriculture, pixel’s mean elevation, pixel’s average value of a malaria stability index, and the log of the
pixel’s area. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 8A: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within Contiguous Ethnic Homelands in the Same Country
Pixel-Level Analysis in Areas Close to the Ethnic Border
All Observations
Adjacent Ethnicities in the Same Country

Difference in Jurisdictional Hierarchy Index
>|1|

One Ethnic Group was Part of a precolonial Centralized State

<100 km of
<150 km of
<200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

<100 km of
<150 km of
<200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

<100 km of <150 km of <200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Panel A: Border Thickness (total: 50KM; 25KM from each side of the ethnic boundary)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0194*
(0.0102)

0.0230**
(0.0106)

0.0231**
(0.0102)

0.0269***
(0.0092)

0.0285***
(0.0088)

0.0280***
(0.0084)

0.0240***
(0.0090)

0.0297***
(0.0067)

0.0300***
(0.0069)

0.463
6830

0.439
10451

0.429
13195

0.421
3700

0.430
5421

0.434
6853

0.485
2347

0.500
3497

0.501
4430

Panel B: Border Thickness (total: 100KM; 50KM from each side of the ethnic boundary)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Adjacent-Ethnic-Groups
Fixed Effects
Population Density
Controls at the Pixel Level

0.0227**
(0.0114)

0.0278**
(0.0117)

0.0274**
(0.0108)

0.0318***
(0.0094)

0.0331***
(0.0083)

0.0312***
(0.0076)

0.0317***
(0.0092)

0.0367***
(0.0057)

0.0350***
(0.0068)

0.467
4460

0.433
8081

0.423
10825

0.458
2438

0.451
4159

0.452
5591

0.525
1538

0.526
2688

0.521
3621

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Table 8B: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within Contiguous Ethnic Homelands in the Same Country
Pixel-Level Analysis in Areas Close to the Ethnic Border
Controlling for an RD-type 4th-order Polynomial in Distance to the Ethnic Border
All Observations
Adjacent Ethnicities in the Same Country

Difference in Jurisdictional Hierarchy Index
>|1|

One Ethnic Group was Part of a precolonial Centralized State

<100 km of
<150 km of
<200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

<100 km of
<150 km of
<200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

<100 km of <150 km of <200 km of
ethnic border ethnic border ethnic border

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Panel A: Border Thickness (total: 50KM; 25KM from each side of the ethnic boundary)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0472***
(0.0156)

0.0425***
(0.0146)

0.0428***
(0.0147)

0.0470**
(0.0222)

0.0517***
(0.0192)

0.0480***
(0.0180)

0.0407*
(0.0231)

0.0419*
(0.0234)

0.0384**
(0.0190)

6830
0.464

10451
0.441

13195
0.431

3700
0.422

5421
0.432

6853
0.436

2347
0.489

3497
0.504

4430
0.504

Panel B: Border Thickness (total: 100KM; 50KM from each side of the ethnic boundary)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
RD-type Polynomial
Adjacent-Ethnic-Groups
Fixed Effects
Population Density
Controls at the Pixel Level

0.0475***
(0.0166)

0.0336**
(0.0146)

0.0343***
(0.0120)

0.0525***
(0.0179)

0.0426***
(0.0131)

0.0376***
(0.0094)

0.0495**
(0.0245)

0.0244
(0.0190)

0.0147
(0.0192)

0.468
4460

0.434
8081

0.424
10825

0.460
2438

0.453
4159

0.453
5591

0.530
1538

0.530
2688

0.525
3621

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Table 8A and Table 8B report adjacent-ethnicity (ethnic-pair-country) fixed effects OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as
reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index within pairs of adjacent ethnicities. The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125
decimal degrees (around 12.5 x 12.5 kilometers). Every pixel falls into the historical homeland of ethnicity i in country c that is adjacent to the homeland of another ethnicity j in
country c, where the two ethnicities differ in the degree of political centralization. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if the pixel is lit and
zero otherwise. All columns report local-linear-regression estimates restricting estimation to pixels close to the ethnic border. In columns (1), (4), and (7) we focus on pixels within
100 kilometers on each side of the national border. In columns (2), (5), and (8) we focus on pixels within 150 kilometers from the ethnic border. In columns (3), (6), and (9) we
focus on pixels within 200 kilometers from the ethnic border. To account for population mixing in the areas along the ethnic boundary, measurement error on Murdock's map, and
bleeding/blooming in the luminosity data we exclude from the estimation pixels very close to the ethnic border. In Panel A we exclude areas 25km from each side of the ethnic
border (total 50km). In Panel B we exclude areas 50km from each side of the ethnic border (total 100km).

In all specifications we control for ln (pixel population density) and a rich set of geographic and location variables at the pixel level. The set of controls includes the distance of the
centroid of each pixel from the respective capital city, the distance of each pixel from the sea coast, the distance of each pixel from the national border, an indicator for pixels that
have water (lakes, rivers, and other streams), an indicator for pixels with diamond mines, an indicator for pixels with oil fields, pixel’s land suitability for agriculture, pixel’s mean
elevation, pixel’s average value of a malaria stability index, and the log of the pixel’s area. All specifications in Table 8B include a fourth-order regression discontinuity type
polynomial in distance of each pixel to the "thick" ethnic border, where we allow for the coefficients on the distance terms to be different for the relatively high and the relatively
low institutional quality homelands. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Supplementary Appendix
(not for publication)
Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African
Development ∗

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University and NBER
Elias Papaioannou
Dartmouth College, NBER and CEPR

June 29, 2012

Abstract
The Supplementary Appendix reports (i) descriptive statistics, (ii) further cross-validation
tests of the luminosity data, (iii) numerous sensitivity checks and (iv) the detailed Data
Appendix.

∗

We thank 4 anonymous referees and the Editor for proposing many of the sensitivity checks reported in this
Supplementary Appendix. All errors are our sole responsibility.

0

1

Descriptive Analysis

Appendix Figure 1a reports the distribution of satellite light density at night across ethnic
homelands. Appendix Figure 1b plots the distribution of the log of light density adding a small
number (yi,c ≡ ln(0.01 + Light Densityi,c ). The latter is the dependent variable used in Tables
2, 3A, and 4. This transformation assures that (i) we use all observations and (ii) we minimize
the problem of outliers. Appendix Figure 1c graphs the distribution of log light density across
lit ethnic-country areas (yi,c ≡ ln(LightDensityi,c )). We use log luminosity as the dependent
variable in Table 3B so as to show that our results at the ethnic homeland level are not sensitive
to the transformation of the luminosity data.

Kernel density estimate

0

0

1

.1

2

Density
.2

Density
3

.3

4

5

.4

Kernel density estimate

0

5

10
15
20
mean satelitte light density in 2007-2008.

25

-6

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0270

-4
-2
0
2
ln of mean satelitte light density in 2007-2008 + 0.01 (all)

4

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4150

Appendix Figure 1a

Appendix Figure 1b

0

.05

Density
.1

.15

.2

Kernel density estimate

-10

-5
0
ln of mean satelitte light density in 2007-2008 (intensive)

5

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.5198

Appendix Figure 1c
Appendix Table 2 Panel A reports summary statistics for all control variables at the
ethnic-country homeland level. Appendix Table 2 Panel B reports summary statistics for the
control variables at the pixel level.

1

2

Further Cross-Validation Checks

We performed several cross-validation exercises investigating the relationship between luminosity and various economic indicators across African countries and regions within countries.
Cross-country analysis We start by examining whether luminosity correlates with
development across African countries. Appendix Figure 2a illustrates the unconditional correlation between log light density and log GDP per capita in 2000. The R2 is 0.35 and the estimate
is more than 6 standard errors larger than zero. Besides economic performance, light density
also reflects urbanization. Appendix Figure 2b shows the relationship between log GDP per
capita and log light density partialling out log population density. The relationship between
log light density and log GDP p.c. is now stronger (the coefficient increases from 0.31 to 0.47
and the t-stat jumps to 10).

Light Density and Income per Capita Across African Countries

Light Density and Income per Capita Across African Countries

Unconditional Relationship

Conditional on Population Density

7

Mauritania
S omalia
Mali
Central African Re public

2

Li bya

Lesotho
Senegal
Benin
CoteGhana
D'Ivoire
Zimbabwe

Cameroon
Djibouti
SudanKenya

Nigeria

The Gambia

Liberia
Burkina Faso Rwanda
Angola
Uganda
Madagascar
Guinea-Bissau
Malawi
Zambia
Ethiopia
Guinea
Burundi TogoComoros
Tanzania

Niger
Chad

6

Sierra Leone

Congo (Democratic Republic of the)

South A frica

1

Botswana
Namibia

Egypt
Morocco
Gabon
Swazi land
Algeria

Republic of Congo
Lesotho

Libya

Senegal
Ghana
B enin
Cote Nigeria
D'Ivoi re
Mozambique
Zimbabwe
Rwanda
Cameroon
K enya
Djibouti
The Gambia
Uganda Burkina Faso
Sudan
Liberia
Comoros
Malawi
Burundi
Somalia
Guinea-Bissau
Madagascar EthiopiaMaliMauritania
Angola
Togo
Zambia
Guinea
Tanzania
Central African Republic

0

8

Republic of Congo

Mozambique

Tunisia

Egypt
Morocco
Swaziland

Algeri a

Equatorial Guinea

Sierra Leone
Niger

-1

South Africa

Gabon

Tunisia

Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)

Botswana
Namibia

Chad

-2

Congo (Democra tic Republic of the)

5

Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)

9

Equatorial Guinea

-6

-4

-2

Log (Light Density in 2007-2008)

0

2

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Log (Light Density in 2007-2008)

Appendix Figure 2a

Appendix Figure 2b

Cross-region analysis Appendix Figures 3a and 3b plot luminosity and infant mortality across African administrative regions, using data from the Center for International Earth
Science Information Network (CIESIN) of Columbia University’s Earth Institute which are
comparable across African countries.1 The figures illustrate the significantly negative correlation between log light density and infant mortality across 264 African regions. The estimate is
−9.44 with a t-stat of 9; when we condition on log population density, the estimate increases
in absolute value (−14.89) retaining its significance at the 99% confidence level.
1

The data is available at: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/povmap/

2

Light Density and Infant Mortality Across African Regions

Infant Mortality and Light Density Across African Regions
Conditional on Populatio n Density
Spai
n
South
Sina
Matrouh
New Valley
Red Sea
Sud
Libya
North Sina
Suez Gauteng
Ismailia
Ouest (inc. Libreville )
Mpumalanga
Aswan
Northe
North
rnSouth
Cape
East
Sud
Northern
Province
We stern Cape Tunisia
East
Free
State
South
North
West
Seychelles
Quena
Behera
Harare
Central
Damietta
FayoumMeni
a
Giza
Beni-Suet
Sharkia
Kgatleng
EstSuhag
Kgalagadi
Assyout
Menoufi
a Ouest
KafrDakahlia
El-Sh
Mauritius
Centre
Central
Conakry Swaziland
Northern
Orien
tal
Sud
North
West
Maputo
Cidade
Gharbia
So
uthern
Kweneng
CapeKalyoubia
VerdeGhanzi
Zone
Tensift
Nord
(G3)
Copperbelt
Est
Nord-Ouest
Centre-Sud
Ni
leCentre
River
Khartoum
Regiγo Capital
Congo
Lusaka
Alexandria
Eastern
Cape
South
Nouakchott
East
KwaZulu
Natal
Gazira
Greater
Accra
Port-Said
Centre-Nord
Equatorial
Guinea
Northwest
Kordofa n
Maekel W.Sao
South
Tome Nai
West
androbi
Principe
Cτte
Northeast
Ouest Western
Cen
Brikama
tral
Cairo
Maputo
Atlantique
province
Red
Sead'Ivoire
Marities
Kigali Ville
(PVK)
Nord
Addis
Regiγo
Harari
Este
Regiγo Oeste
Mashonaland
Ashanti
Eastern
West
Lesotho
Dire
Dawa
WhiteNorth-Western
Nile Oueme
Southern
Regiγo
Centro
Sul
Koulikoro
(inc.
Bamako)
Regiγo Norte
Djibouti
Bulawayo
Central
Mashonaland
East
Volta
Coast
Matabeleland
South
Kassala
Cen
tral
Brong-Ahafo
Nord-Est
laberi
Central/South
(inc. Niamey)
OuagadougouSofala
Central
Sinnar Central
, South,
&Til
East
Midlands
Centre
Matabeleland North
Gaza&Kayes
Coastal
Banjul
N.Kordofan
South
Kigali Rurale
West & littoral
Inhambane
Northern
North
West
Blue
Nile
Central
Central
Central
Tahoua/Agadez
GadarefMashonaland
North
West
Gao/Kidal/Tombouctou
BanguiMono
Zou
Northern Highland sRiftS.Darfur
Western
Manica
North/West
Vall
e
y
Grande
S.Kordofan
Como
re
Tigray
Tete
Regiγo
Sul
Liberia
N.Darfur
Antananarivo
North
Upper
Borgou
East
East
Zone
Fleuve
(G2)
Gambela
Northern
Upper
West
UpperEastern
Guinea
Anseba
Eastern
Debub
Kerewan
RS
ISegou
Nampula
Mansakonko
Masvingo
Manicaland
Lower
Sud
Guinea
Chad
North/
Extreme
north/Adamaoua
Dem. Rep. Of Luapula
Kara
BasseCongo,Sikasso
Ben-Gumz
W. Darfur
Northwest
&Semenawi
southwest
Plateaux
Moheli
Niassa Mopti
Gash-Barka
KeihCyangugu
Bahri
Zone
Centre
(G4)
Centrale
L akeAtacora
Zinda/Diffa
Central
East Oromiya
North
Eastern
Antsiranana
Affar
Savanes
Southern
Highlands
Guinea-Bissau
Gisenyi
Zambezia
North
North/East
Western
Dosso
Keih
Bahri Nyanza
Maradi
Anjouan
Burundi
Sierra
Leone
SomaliDebubawi
Island
Zone Sud (G1) MacCarthy
Cabo
Delgado
SNNP
RS II
Eastern
Toamasina
Southern
Mahajanga
Amhara
Forest Guinea
Central Guinea
Toliary
RS IV
Gitarama
Western
Butare
Ruhengeri
RS V
Northern
Central/South
RS III Fianarantsoa

0
-2
-4

Log Light Density Within an African Region

2

4

5
0
-5

Kalyoubia
Menoufia
Occupied
Palestini
n TerritoriesMaputo Cidade
Damiett
Gharbia
a aSuha
Daka
hlia
Quena
gHarare
Assyout
Sharkia
Kigali Ville
Addi(PVK)
s
Nairobi
eCairo
xandria
KafrAl
El-Sh
Bulawayo
Gauteng
Behera
Beni-Suet
Mauritius
Ismailia
F ayoum
Greater
Accra BanguiConakry
Port-Said
Banjul
South East
Menia
Israel
Seychelles
Nouakchott
South
East
Suez MaekelAs wan
C entre
Ouest
Centre
Khartoum
Atlantique
OuestNatal
Harari
TunisiaGiza Est
M pumalanga
South
West
KwaZulu
Tensift
Marities
C Northe
ape Verde
rn Province
Oueme
Swaziland
NorthEast
West
Brikama
Gazira
Dire
Sao Tome andCentral
Principe
WesternSouth
Ca pe
Sina North
Centra l
North
Sina
Centre-Nord
kaDawa
Kigali Rurale
Coppe rbelt Lusa
Free Ashanti
St ateOriental
(inc.Cape
Libreville)
EaOuest
stern
Eastern
Maputo province
R egiγ o Capital
Centre-Sud
M atrouh
Western
Libya
Grande Comore
Mono
Cτ te d'IvoireSouth
Lesotho
R ed Sea Kgat leng
WestVolta
& littoral
Central/South
& Ouagadougou
Central
North
West
Central
White
Nile
Western
Cyangugu
Sud Central
Anjouan
Gisenyi
Guinea
SudCentre
Brong-Ahafo
Upper
EastEquatorial
Coastal
Mashonaland
East
Koulikoro
(inc. Bamako)
Nyanza
Debub
Sud
North
Congo
East
New Valley
Mashonaland
Southern
West
TigrayBurundi
Sinnar
Nile
River
Djibouti
Antananarivo
Moheli
Northern
Cape
W. Kordofan
Kweneng
Coast Kerewan
ZouButare
Northwest
Midlands
Kassala
Gitarama
Regiγo Oeste
Central
Mashonaland
Central
Ruhengeri
Basse
Tillaberi
North
(inc. Niam
W estey)
Valley
Lower
Guinea
Northern Highla ndsRift Southern
Northern
Sofa Regiγo
la
Norte
Centra
Manicaland
l, South,
Eastern
&Sud
East Mansakonko
Est
Matabeleland
Northwest South
& southwest
Plateaux
Kara
Gaza
Nampula
Inhambane
SNNP
Oromiya
Liberia
South
Upper
WestNord-Est
CenBlue
tral
Segou
MatCentra
abeleland
North
Eastern
Sikasso
Savanes
Red
Sea
Northeast
NortheGadaref
rn
Lake
Nile
Amhara
l Masvingo
Maradi
Centrale
Borgou
Regiγo
CManica
entro
Sul
Anseba
North/
MacCarthy
Ext
reme
north/Adamaoua
Island
Kayes
Sierra Leone
S.Darfur
Dosso
W . Darfur
S.Kordofan
Eastern
Western
Central
Guinea-Bissau
Tete
N.Kordofan
North-Western
Guinea
North East
Ataco
Congo,
ra Upper
Dem.
Rep. Of
North
WestKei
Semenawi
h Bahri
Gash-Barka
Antsiranana
Mopti Sul Zambezia
Luapula
Regiγo
Highlands
Affa
r Este
Nord Southern
North/West
Regiγo
N
ort
hern
Toamasina
RS
Forest
I
Guinea
Western
Ben-Gumz
Zone Fleuve
(G2)
Kgalagadi
Central
Guinea
Kibungo
Cabo Delgado
N.Darfur Zone Nord (G3)
Gam bela
Southern
Nort
hernChad
Tahoua/Agadez
Z inda/Dif faNiassa
North Eastern
Ghanzi
SomaliMahajanga
Byumba
Debubawi
Toliary
Bahri
RSKeih
IINorth/East
Fianarantsoa
Kibuye
Central/South
Gao/Kidal/Tombouctou
Zone Centre (G4)
Umutara
Zone Sud (G1)
RS III
RS V
RS IV

Kibungo
Umutara

-10

Byumba

Kibuye

-6

Log Light Density per African Region

Unconditional Relationship

0

50

100

150

200

-100

Infant Mortality per African Region

Appendix Figure 3a

-50

0
Infant Mortality per African Region

50

100

Appendix Figure 3b

Analysis across DHS Enumeration Areas Appendix Table 1 reports the unconditional and conditional on population density correlations between light density and the DHS
household composite wealth index, presence of electricity and average schooling, for four large
African countries across all African regions. Across all countries studied, Nigeria, Tanzania,
Zimbabwe, and the Democratic Republic of Congo, there is highly significant (within country) correlation between luminosity and these proxy measures of development (see also Figures
2a − 2d in the main body of the paper for a graphical illustration).

3

Further Sensitivity Checks

We performed various sensitivity checks to explore the robustness of our results.
Outliers In column (1) of Appendix Table 3 we report estimates dropping observations
where the dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile.2 This is useful because there are some
extreme values in the luminosity data (see discussion in Section 2 and the descriptive statistics in
Table 1A). The coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index (0.183) is unchanged compared
to the analogous specification in column (4) of Table 3A (0.177). We also repeated estimation
dropping ethnic areas where capital cities fall. This is an appropriate check because capitals are
likely to be populated by people from several ethnic groups and thus the ethnic-specific index
of jurisdictional hierarchy index may be inappropriate. Moreover, by excluding areas where
capitals fall, we further account for outliers in the dependent variable. The positive and highly
significant correlation between pre-colonial political centralization and regional development
remains intact (column (2)).
2

In the previous drafts of the paper we also estimated specifications excluding also the top 2% or the top
5% of the dependent variable. If anything, the coefficient on the jurisdictional hierarchy index increases and
becomes more accurately estimated.

3

Regional Heterogeneity We also repeated our analysis excluding each time a different African region (using the classification of Nunn (2008)). Doing so allows us to account
for the fact that colonization took different forms across Africa and this may have affected the
role of local institutions during the colonial era and after independence. Appendix Table 3,
columns (3)-(7) report the results. The estimates show that the strong positive association
between pre-colonial ethnic political centralization and regional development is not driven by
a particular African region.
Population Density In Appendix Table 4A we report cross—sectional and withincountry estimates associating pre-colonial ethnic institutions with contemporary population
density at the ethnic-country level. Appendix Table 4B reports analogous specifications at
the pixel level. While urbanization has been linked to the emergence of complex political
institutions before colonization in Africa and thus these estimates may suffer from endogeneity,
it is useful to see whether the complexity of pre-colonial ethnic institutions correlates with
contemporary population density, since the latter may be capturing (to some extent at least) the
level of development. There is a significant and positive correlation between the jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community index and contemporary population density. However,
the estimates indicate that ethnic institutions are less strongly related to population density
as compared to luminosity; for example the standardized "beta" coefficient for the models in
columns (1) and (3) is 0.08 and 0.10; the analogous specifications with log luminosity as the
dependent variable (column (1), Table 2 and column (1) Table 3A) yield beta coefficients of
0.22 and 0.19, respectively. These comparisons suggest that while political centralization does
interact with population density, its relationship with economic development is stronger.
Results with Afrobarometer’s Living Condition Index and Education While
we consider the use of the satellite images at night as a proxy for development part of our
contribution, we also estimated specifications with alternative proxies of regional development
using the Afrobarometer Surveys. Specifically, in Appendix Table 5 we report specifications
associating pre-colonial ethnic institutions with two measures from the 2005 Afrobarometer
Surveys that capture economic well-being, a living conditions index and years of schooling.
The Afrobarometer surveys are based on interviews conducted in a random sample of either
1, 200 or 2, 400 individuals of voting age in 17 Sub-Saharan African countries.3 As a result, the
sample drops significantly not only because the number of countries and ethnicities falls, but
also because in many countries we do not have adequate spatial coverage across all ethnic areas.
3
These countries are: Benin, Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

4

We assign each respondent’s current residence area (Afrobarometer’s enumeration area) to one
of the 834 ethnic homelands in Murdock’s (1959) ethnolinguistic map and then aggregated
the living conditions index and schooling at the ethnic homeland level in each country. We
then estimated our baseline specification (equation (1)) at the ethnic-country homeland level
using the living conditions index and average years of schooling as the dependent variable.4
The results with these alternative proxies of development are in line with our estimates with
luminosity. On average respondents residing in ethnic homelands with centralized pre-colonial
political institutions report better living conditions. Similarly, the average level of education
is higher in ethnic areas of politically centralized societies. Yet it should be noted that due to
the limited number of respondents within each ethnic area, these results should be cautiously
interpreted.
4
The living conditions index reflects respondent’s view of their present living conditions which can be: (i)
very bad, (ii) fairly bad, (iii) neither good nor bad, (iv) fairly good, or (v) very good.
The schooling data in constructed aggregating respondent’s answers on the following categories: (i) no formal
schooling, (ii) informal schooling only, (iii) some primary schooling, (iv) primary school completed, (v) some
secondary school/high school, (vi) secondary school completed/high school, (vii) post-secondary qualifications,
but no university, (viii) some university, (ix) university completed, and (x) post-graduate.

5

4
4.1

Data Appendix
Variables at the ethnicity-country level / pixel level

Light Density at Night: Light Density is the average luminosity across pixels that fall within
the unit of analysis. We use the average of the values in 2007 and 2008. In the regressions at
the ethnic homeland we use Log (0.01 + Average Luminosity) or Log (Average Luminosity).
In the regressions at the pixel level we use as the dependent variable a dummy variable that
takes on the value of one if the area is lit and zero otherwise; we also use the Log (0.01 +
Average Luminosity)
Source: Available at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/global_composites_v2.html.
Population Density: Log (0.01 + population density per sq. km. in 2000). For the
pixel-level analysis we use Log (population density per sq. km. in 2000). Source: Nelson, Andy,
2004. African Population Database Documentation, UNEP GRID Sioux Falls. Available at:
http://na.unep.net/siouxfalls/datasets/datalist.php
Water Area: Log (1 + total area covered by rivers or lakes in sq. km.). For the pixellevel analysis we use an indicator that equals 1 if there is some water body at the pixel. Source:
Constructed using the "Inland water area features" dataset from Global Mapping International,
Colorado Springs, CO, USA. Global Ministry Mapping System.
Elevation: Average elevation in km in each ethnicity-country or in each pixel. Source:
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and U.S. National Geophysical
Data Center, TerrainBase, release 1.0 (CD-ROM), Boulder, Colorado.
http://www.sage.wisc.edu/atlas/data.php?incdataset=Topography
Land Suitability for Agriculture: Average land quality for cultivation within each
ethnicity-country or within each pixel. The index is the product of two components capturing
the climatic and soil suitability for farming. Source: Michalopoulos (2012); Original Source:
Atlas of the Biosphere.
Available at http://www.sage.wisc.edu/iamdata/grid_data_sel.php.
Malaria Stability Index: The index takes into account the prevalence and type of
mosquitoes indigenous to a region, their human biting rate, their daily survival rate, and their
incubation period. We use the average value within each ethnicity-country or within each pixel.
Source: Kiszewski, Mellinger, Spielman, Malaney, Sachs, and Sachs (2004)
Distance to the Capital City: The geodesic distance from the centroid of each ethnic
group in a country or of each pixel to the capital city of the country it belongs to, measured in
1000s of km’s. Source: Calculated using the Haversine formula.
Distance to the Sea Coast: The geodesic distance from the centroid of each ethnic
group in a country or of each pixel to the nearest coastline, measured in 1000s of km’s. Source:
6

Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA. Series name: Global Ministry
Mapping System. Series issue: Version 3.0
Distance to the Border: The geodesic distance from the centroid of each ethnic group
in a country or from each pixel to the nearest border, measured in 1000s of km’s. Source:
Calculated using ArcGis.
Petroleum: Indicator variable that equals one if there is an oil field in the homeland or
pixel of ethnic group i in country c. Source: The Petroleum Dataset v.1.1 contains information
on all known on-shore oil and gas deposits throughout the world.
http://www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Petroleum-Dataset/PetroleumDataset-v11/
Diamond: Indicator variable that equals one if there is a diamond mine in the homeland
or pixel of ethnic group i in country c. Source: Map of Diamond Resources.
www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Diamond-Resources/

4.2

Country-level variables

Rule of Law: The index is "capturing perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement,
property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence."
The standardized index ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with higher values indicating better functioning institutions. We use the value of the index in 2007. Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufman, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2005)). available at:
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp
Income: Log of per capita GDP in PPP in 2007. Source: Penn World Tables.

4.3

Pre-colonial Ethnicity-level variables

Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 0
to 4 indicating the number of jurisdictional levels (political complexity) in each society above
the local level. A 0 indicates stateless societies, 1 and 2 indicate petty and large paramount
chiefdoms (or their equivalent), 3 and 4 indicate large states. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnolinguistic Atlas v33; A revised version of Murdock’s Atlas has been made
available by J. Patrick Gray at:
http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultures.sav.
Centralization Indicator: This binary index takes the value 0 if the Jurisdictional
Hierarchy beyond Local Community variable equals 0 or 1. The index takes on the value 1
if the Jurisdictional Hierarchy Beyond Local Community variable equals 2, 3, and 4. This

7

aggregation follows Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007). Source: Murdock (1967).
Gathering: Binary index that indicates the reliance of the economy on "the collection
of wild plants and small land fauna." The index equals zero when the dependence is between
0% and 5%; the index equals one when dependence is greater than 5% dependence. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v1.
Hunting: Binary index that indicates the intensity in hunting (including trapping and
fowling). The index equals zero when the dependence is between 0% and 5%; the index equals
one when dependence is greater than 5%. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v2.
Fishing: Binary index that indicates the intensity in fishing (including shell fishing and
the pursuit of large aquatic animals). The index equals zero when the dependence is between
0% and 5%; the index equals one when dependence is greater than 5%. Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v3.
Animal Husbandry: 0 − 9 scale index reflecting the percentage of subsistence coming
from animal husbandry for each ethnicity at the time of colonization. The index equals 0 when
there 0% − 5% dependence; 1 when there is 6% − 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16% − 25%
dependence; 3 when there is 26% − 35% dependence; 4 when there is 36% − 45% dependence; 5
when there is 46% − 55% dependence; 6 when there is 56% − 65% dependence; 7 when there is
66%−75% dependence; 8 when there is 76%−85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86%−100%
dependence. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v4.
Milking: Binary index that equals one when "domestic animals are milked more often
that sporadically" and zero when "little or no milking". Source: Murdock (1967); variable code
in the Ethnographic Atlas v41.
Agriculture Dependence: 0 − 9 scale index reflecting the intensity of agriculture.
"It includes penetration of the soil, planting, tending the growing crops, and harvesting but
not subsequent food preparation". The index equals 0 when there 0% − 5% dependence; 1
when there is 6% − 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16% − 25% dependence; 3 when there is
26% − 35% dependence; 4 when there is 36% − 45% dependence; 5 when there is 46% − 55%
dependence; 6 when there is 56% − 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66% − 75% dependence;
8 when there is 76% − 85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86% − 100% dependence. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v5.
Agriculture Type: 0 − 4 scale index reflecting the type of agriculture. The index
equals 0 when there is "no agriculture"; 1 when there is "causal agriculture"; 2 when there is
"extensive or shifting agriculture"; 3 when there is "intensive agriculture"; and 4 when there
is "intensive irrigated agriculture." Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic

8

Atlas v28.
Polygyny: Indicator that equals one when polygyny is practiced and zero otherwise.
Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v8.
Alternative Polygyny: Alternative indicator that equals one when polygyny is practiced and zero otherwise, based on Murdock’s domestic organization variable. The indicator
equals zero when "independent nuclear, monogamous families" are the norm and one when
polygyny is common. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v9; the
construction of the variable follows Fenske (2009).
Clan Communities: Indicator that equals one when Murdock’s community marriage
organization variable indicates that "clan communities or clan barrios" are present and zero
otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v15.
Settlement Pattern: Ordered variable ranging from 1 to 8 quantifying "settlement
pattern of each group". 1 indicates fully nomadic (migratory) groups, 2 indicates semi-nomadic
groups, 3 indicates semi-sedentary groups, 4 identifies groups that live in compact and impermanent settlements, 5 indicates societies those in neighborhoods of dispersed family homes,
6 indicates for groups in separated hamlets forming a single community, 7 indicates societies
living in compact and relatively permanent settlements, and 8 denotes the groups residing in
complex settlements. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v30.
Complex Settlements: Indicator that equals one for ethnicities living in compact and
relatively permanent settlements (v30 = 7) or in complex settlements (v30 = 8), and zero
otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v30.
Jurisdictional Hierarchy of Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 0 to
2 reflecting the hierarchy of local community organization. A zero score indicates the theoretical
minimum of two (e.g., family and band), while a score of 2 indicates the theoretical maximum
of four levels (e.g., nuclear family, extended family, clan barrio, village levels). Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v32.
Patrilineal Descent Type: Indicator that equals one if the society is characterized by
patrilineal descent and zero otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v43.
Class Stratification: Ordered variable ranging from 0 to 4 quantifying "the degree of
class differentiation, excluding purely political and religious statuses". A zero score indicates
"absence of significant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual repute achieved through skill, valor, piety, or wisdom." A score of 1 indicates "the presence
of wealth distinctions, based on possession or distribution of property, which however have not
crystallized into distinct and hereditary social classes." A score of 2 indicates "elite stratification

9

in which an elite class derives its superior status from control over scarce resources, particularly
land, and is thereby differentiated from a property-less proletariat or serf class". A score of 3
indicates a "dual stratification into a hereditary aristocracy and a lower class of ordinary commoners or freemen, where traditionally ascribed noble status is at least as decisive as control
over scarce resources. A score of 4 indicates "complex stratification into social classes correlated in large measure with extensive differentiation of occupational statuses." Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v67.
Class Stratification Indicator: Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) we define a
dummy stratification index that equals zero when Murdock’s variable equals zero indicating
"absence of significant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual repute achieved through skill, valor, piety, or wisdom," and one when Murdock’s class stratification measure equals 1, 2, 3, or 4. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic
Atlas v67.
Elections: Indicator that equals 1 when succession to the office of the local headman is
conducted via "election or other formal consensus, nonhereditary" and zero otherwise. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v72.
Slavery: Indicator that equals one when some type of slavery (hereditary, incipient, or
significant) is present and zero when there it is absent or near absent. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v70; the construction of the index follows Fenske (2009).
Inheritance Rules for Property: Indicator that equals one when some form of inheritance rule of real property (land) is present; the binary indicator equals zero when there is
"absence of individual property rights". Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v74.

4.4

Data for the Cross-Validation Analysis

DHS Composite Wealth Index: The DHS wealth index is composed taking into account
consumer durables, electricity, toilet facilities, source of drinking water, dwelling characteristics
and some country-specific attributes like whether there is a domestic servant, for example. The
measure is derived by the DHS using principal component analysis to assign indicator weights
resulting in a composite standardized index for each country. Source: DHS; available at:
http://www.measuredhs.com

10

References
K, A., A. M

 , A. S  , P. M  , S. E. S,   J. S

(2004): “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5), 486—498.
M  , S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.
M, G. P. (1967): Ethnographic Atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.

11

Appendix Table 1: Satellite Light Density at Night and DHS Measures of Household Wealth, Electrification, and Schooling
Tanzania 2007

Zimbabwe 2005

Nigeria 2008

Congo, DRC 2007

Unconditional
Correlation

Conditional
on PD

Unconditional
Correlation

Conditional
on PD

Unconditional
Correlation

Conditional
on PD

Unconditional
Correlation

Conditional
on PD

Years of Schooling

0.7828
0.7045
0.5575

0.7194
0.6296
0.5035

0.8809
0.8423
0.7171

0.7540
0.7012
0.5191

0.7219
0.6064
0.5603

0.5496
0.4188
0.5385

0.8599
0.7733
0.6344

0.7424
0.6461
0.5378

Enumeration Areas

466

466

398

398

886

886

293

293

DHS Composite Wealth Index
Electrification

The table reports unconditional and conditional on log population density correlations between satellite light density at night (log (0.01 + light density)) and three proxy measures of
development from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) for Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The unit of analysis is the enumeration
area of the Demographic and Health Surveys. As within each enumeration area there are several households, we average household responses across the enumeration area and use
the respective mean values. Light density at night is the average light density in a radius of 10 km from the centroid of the DHS enumeration area. The DHS composite wealth index
is derived using principal component analysis taking into account access of households to electricity, toilet facilities, clean drinking water, dwelling characteristics, etc. Schooling
years denotes average years of schooling of the household’s head. Electrification denotes whether households have access to electricity. All correlations are significant at the 1%
confidence level.

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Control Variables
variable

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

p25

median

p75

min

max

-4.61
0.00
-2.21
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
-2.63
5.07
0.00
0.00

7.43
3.12
6.20
2.18
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.88
1.70
0.62
0.65
9.89
4.00
1.00

Panel A: Ethnic Homeland Sample
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)
Ln (1 + Water Area)
Ln (Surface Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability For Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the National Border
Rule of Law in 2007
Log GDP p.c. in 2007
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Political Centralization

683
683
683
683
683
683
683
683
683
683
683
680
680
683
683

2.90
0.29
2.16
0.63
0.43
0.72
0.08
0.10
0.50
0.59
0.10
-0.88
7.12
1.22
0.36

2.02
0.44
1.60
0.47
0.24
0.33
0.27
0.30
0.39
0.42
0.11
0.53
0.90
0.97
0.48

2.18
0.00
1.14
0.28
0.28
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.24
0.20
0.02
-1.35
6.67
0.00
0.00

3.24
0.12
2.23
0.49
0.45
0.87
0.00
0.00
0.40
0.56
0.06
-0.96
7.10
1.00
0.00

4.20
0.36
3.25
1.00
0.59
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.63
0.92
0.15
-0.42
7.57
2.00
1.00

Panel B: Pixel Sample
Ln (Population Density)
Water Body Indicator
Ln (Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability For Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the National Border
Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Political Centralization

66570
66570
66570
66570
66314
66428
66570
66570
66570
66570
66570
66570
66570

2.37
0.14
5.11
690.65
0.38
0.70
0.03
0.00
507.02
576.12
141.82
1.49
0.50

1.85
0.34
0.27
523.95
0.28
0.41
0.18
0.06
372.43
423.34
124.59
1.03
0.50

1.02
0.00
5.12
293.89
0.16
0.30
0.00
0.00
236.65
200.35
44.65
1.00
0.00

2.48
0.00
5.23
547.61
0.35
1.00
0.00
0.00
403.13
509.78
106.35
1.00
0.00

-2.20
3.72
10.10
0.00
0.00
1.00
3.91
5.25
5.26
1064.89 -219.48 4314.56
0.00
0.57
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.46
667.76
1923.01
0.55
905.03
1701.14
0.67
206.35
755.60
0.00
2.00
4.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

The table reports descriptive statistics for all the control variables employed in the empirical analysis. Panel A reports summary
statistics for all control variables in the country-ethnicity sample. Panel B reports summary statistics for all control variables in
the pixel sample. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.

Appendix Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis at the Ethnic-Country Level
Excluding
Outliers
(1)

Capitals
(2)

North
(3)

South
(4)

0.1825***
(0.0529)

0.1754***
(0.0576)

0.1834***
(0.0526)

0.1676***
(0.0525)

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.64
675

0.657
651

0.609
642

0.656
619

0.697
523

0.689
495

0.669
449

Country Fixed Effects
Location Controls
Geographic Controls
Population Density

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Jurisdictional Hierarchy

Central
(5)
0.1327**
(0.0560)

East
(6)
0.2218***
(0.0703)

West
(7)
0.1655**
(0.0652)

The table reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in
Murdock’s (1967) index of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light
density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In column (1) we exclude from the estimation observations where the
dependent variable exceeds the 99th percentile. In column (2) we exclude observations where capital cities fall. In column (3) we exclude
observations that fall in North Africa. In column (4) we exclude observations that fall in Southern Africa. In column (5) we exclude
observations that fall in Central Africa. In column (6) we exclude observations that fall in East Africa. In column (7) we exclude
observations that fall in West Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2007).
All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for population density,
location and geography. Specifically the set of control variables includes the log (0.01 + population density), the distance of the centroid
of each ethnicity-country area from the respective capital city, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1
+ area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area) land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index,
a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the
estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and
* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 4A: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Population Density
Ethnic Homeland Analysis
Jurisdictional Hierarchy (0-4)
(1)
Ethnic Institutions

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Country Fixed Effects
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

(2)

(3)

Political Centralization (0-1)
(4)

0.1687 0.2854*** 0.2455** 0.2348**
(0.1104) (0.0769) (0.1173) (0.1114)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.2903 0.5689*** 0.3890* 0.4461**
(0.2729) (0.1880) (0.2351) (0.2215)

0.008
683

0.391
683

0.403
682

0.557
682

0.006
683

0.391
683

0.400
682

0.557
682

No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-country OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in log population
density, with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. In columns (1)-(4) we measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions using Murdock’s (1967)
jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. In columns (5)-(8) we use a binary political centralization index that is based
on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community variable. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), this index
takes on the value of zero for stateless societies and ethnic groups that are part of petty chiefdoms and one otherwise (for ethnicities that
are organized as large paramount chiefdoms and ethnicities that are part of large states).
The specifications in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In even-numbered
columns we control for location and geography. The set of control variables includes the distance of the centroid of each ethnicitycountry area from the respective capital city, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under
water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we
report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 4B: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Population Density
Pixel-Level Analysis
Jurisdictional Hierarchy (0-4)
(1)
Ethnic Institutions

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Country Fixed Effects
Controls Pixel Level
Controls Ethnic-Country Level

(2)

(3)

Political Centralization (0-1)
(4)

0.3183*** 0.2425* 0.2107** 0.2105***
(0.1095) (0.1325) (0.1005) (0.0811)

(5)

(6)

0.4487** 0.3315
(0.2275) (0.2426)

(7)

(8)

0.3957**
(0.1939)

0.3985**
(0.1612)

0.031
66570

0.26
66570

0.335
66173

0.345
66173

0.015
66570

0.254
66570

0.334
66173

0.344
66173

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in log population density, with pre-colonial ethnic
institutions. In columns (1)-(4) we measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions using Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the
local community index. In columns (5)-(8) we use a binary political centralization index that is based on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community variable. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), this index takes on the value of zero for stateless
societies and ethnic groups that are part of petty chiefdoms and one otherwise (for ethnicities that are organized as large paramount
chiefdoms and ethnicities that are part of large states). The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12
kilometers).
Specifications in (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (3), (4), (7) and (8) we
control for a set of geographic and location variables at the pixel level. The set of controls includes the distance of the centroid of each
pixel from the respective capital city, the distance of each pixel from the sea coast, the distance of each pixel from the national border, an
indicator for pixels that have water (lakes, rivers, and other streams), an indicator for pixels with diamond mines, an indicator for pixels
with oil fields, pixel’s land suitability for agriculture, pixel’s mean elevation, pixel’s average value of a malaria stability index, and the log
of the pixel’s area. In columns (4) and (8) we also control for location and geographic features at the ethnic-country level. Specifically,
the set of control variables includes the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the respective capital city, the distance
from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area),
land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data
Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard
errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

Appendix Table 5: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries
Results with Afrobarometer Survey Data on Living Conditions and Schooling
Living Conditions Index
(1)

(2)

(3)

Years of Schooling
(4)

Binary Political Centralization 0.0693** 0.0692** 0.0696** 0.0592**
Double-clustered s.e.
(0.0282) (0.0286) (0.0338) (0.0292)
Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Country Fixed Effects
Population Density
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

(5)

(6)

0.1180*
(0.0605)

0.1134*
(0.0665)

(7)

(8)

0.1359** 0.1359**
(0.0621) (0.0621)

0.358
194

0.358
194

0.372
194

0.395
194

0.496
193

0.497
193

0.523
193

0.523
193

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in a living conditions index and years of
schooling, with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. We measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions using a binary political centralization index that
is based on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community variable. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), this
index takes on the value of zero for stateless societies and ethnic groups that are part of petty chiefdoms and one otherwise (for ethnicities
that are organized as large paramount chiefdoms and ethnicities that are part of large states). All specifications include a set of country
fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (1)-(4) the dependent variable is the log of a living conditions index, as reported in the
2005 Afrobarometer Surveys. In columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable is the log of years of schooling, as reported in the 2005
Afrobarometer Surveys.
In columns (2), (3), (4), (6), (7), and (8) we control for log (0.01 + population density). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for
location augmenting the specification with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the respective capital city, distance
from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls in columns (4) and (8) includes log (1 +
area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the
estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 6: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development
Pixel-Level Analysis
Lit/Unlit Pixels
(1)

(2)

0.1000**
(0.0489)

0.0690**
(0.0317)

Adjusted R-squared

0.018

0.269

0.357

0.375

Country Fixed Effects
Population Density
Controls Pixel Level
Controls Ethnic-Country Level
Observations

No
No
No
No
66570

Yes
No
No
No
66570

Yes
Yes
No
No
66570

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
66173

Binary Political Centralization
Double-clustered s.e.

(3)

Ln (0.01 + Luminosity)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.5183*
(0.2723)

0.3524**
(0.1785)

0.379

0.022

0.315

0.416

0.447

0.456

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
66173

No
No
No
No
66570

Yes
No
No
No
66570

Yes
Yes
No
No
66570

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
66173

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
66173

0.0460*** 0.0565*** 0.0486***
(0.0149)
(0.0150)
(0.0122)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.2369*** 0.3094*** 0.2806***
(0.0913)
(0.0903)
(0.0808)

The table reports OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in satellite light density at night, with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. We measure pre-colonial ethnic
institutions using a binary political centralization index that is based on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community variable. Following Gennaioli and
Rainer (2007), this index takes on the value of zero for stateless societies and ethnic groups that are part of petty chiefdoms and one otherwise (for ethnicities that are organized as
large paramount chiefdoms and ethnicities that are part of large states). The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees. In columns (1)-(5) the dependent variable is a
dummy variable that takes on the value of one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. In columns (6)-(10) the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite).
In columns (3)-(5) and (8)-(10) we control for ln (pixel population density). In columns (4), (5), (9) and (10) we control for a set of geographic and location variables at the pixel
level. The set of controls includes the distance of the centroid of each pixel from the respective capital city, the distance of each pixel from the sea coast, the distance of each pixel
from the national border, an indicator for pixels that have water (lakes, rivers, and other streams), an indicator for pixels with diamond mines, an indicator for pixels with oil fields,
pixel’s land suitability for agriculture, pixel’s mean elevation, pixel’s average value of a malaria stability index, and the log of the pixel’s area. In columns (5) and (10) we also control
for location and geographic features at the ethnic-country level. Specifically, the set of control variables includes the the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from
the respective capital city, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area), land
suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

