                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GENERATING A SHARP DISINFLATION:
                            ISRAEL 1985




                           Michael Bruno




                      Working Paper No, 1822




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER1s research program
-in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1822
                                                    January 1986




               Generating a Sharp Disinflation: Israel 1985




                                  ABSTRACT

     On July 1 the Israeli government adopted a comprehensive emergency

program for stabilization and recovery which has had dramatic consequences,

at least in the very short—run. Within a few months inflation was down

to 1—2 percent a month, foreign exchange reserves were rising rapidly and

in spite of rather harsh contractionary fiscal and monetary policy measures

average unemployment did not rise by more than 2 percentage points above

the pre—July level.

     This paper deals with the background to the acute crisis of the

Israeli economy and the conceptual underpinnings of the stabilization plan

and with the first six months of its implementation. Apart from the more

conventional fiscal and monetary policy measures, with partial deindexation,

special emphasis is put on stabilization of the exchange rate, as a central

nominal anchor for the price system, along with a wage policy package.

Further budget restraint as well as wage moderation are considered the

key for continued success of the stabilization effort. Both of these

conditions will be tested in the new fiscal year starting April 1986.


                                                   Iviichael Bruno
                                                   Maurice Falk Institute
                                                   P. Naphtali Building
                                                   The Hebrew University
                                                     of Jerusalem
                                                   Mt. Scopus
                                                   91905 Jerusalem
                                                   ISRAEL
            GENERATING A SHARP DISINFLATION: ISRAEL 1985




By mid—1985 Israel's economic crisis reached a new high. Earlier partial

attempts at stabilization had failed. Israel was losing foreign exchange

reserves very rapidly,.due to capital flight, in spite of a recent im-

provement in the trade balance, and inflation was up to monthly rates of

10—15 percent. On July 1 the government adopted a comprehensive emergency

program for stabilization and recovery which has had dramatic conse-

quences, at least in the very short—run. Within a few months inflation was

down to 1—2 percent a month, foreign exchange reserves were rising rapidly

and in spite of rather harsh contractionary fiscal and monetary policy

measures average unemployment did not rise by more than 2 percentage

points above the pre—July level.'

      This paper deals with the background to the acute crisis of the

Israeli economy and the conceptual underpinnings of the stabili2ation plan

and with the first six months of its implementation. Apart from the more

conventional fiscal and monetary policy measures, with partial deindexa—

tion, special emphasis is put on stabilization of the exchange rate, as a




*   An earlier and abridged Hebrew version of this article appeared i
    Riva'on Lekalkala (Economic Quarterly) in October 1985. I benefited
    from many useful discussions with Eitan Bergias, Nissan Liviatan,
    Stanley Fischer, Mordecai Fraenkel, and Emanuel Sharon, and am also
    grateful to David Brodet, Moshe Kotzer, and Avinoam Ron. Avi Ben—
    Bassat, Daniel Gottlieb, Ruth Lowenthal, Sylvia Piterman, Zalman
    Shiffer and Charles Wyplosz offered helpful comments on earlier drafts
    of this article. Full responsibility for the contents is entirely the
    author's and the paper does not necessarily reflect the views of any
    governmental or other institution.

1. For the developments of key indicators see Table 1.
                                    —2—

central nominal anchor for the price system, along with a wage policy

package. Further budget restraint as well as wage moderation are consi-

dered the key for continued success of the stabilization effort. Both of

these conditions will be tested in the new fiscal year starting April

1986.




1. ThE NATURE OF ECONOMIC CRISES IN THE PAST DECADE


The prolonged economic crisis manifested itself in three major areas:

1.      Stagnation in real growth of product and productivity for almost an

        entire decade.

2.      Rising private and public consumption in face of stagnant output led

        to a reduction in investment, growing dependence on foreign debt, and

        ever increasing balance—of—payments difficulties which recently bor-

        dered on a serious liquidity crisis.

3.      Step—wise acceleration of inflation in which each price shock due to

        external causes or deliberate government action (such as devaluations

        or other government—induced price hikes) translates into a higher

        inflation—rate plateau.

         Figure 1 summarizes the developments in these main areas over the

past twenty years. The middle panel (ib) measures the economy's external

dependence in terms of the civilian external deficit (imports of goods and

services excluding direct defense imports minus exports of goods and

services) as a percentage of gross national product. The upper panel (la)

gives annual inflation (within the year) in terms of the consumer price

index. The lower panel (lc) gives the rate of growth in terms of domestic

product in the business sector. The figures show the sharp transition from
                                 —3—

the period of relative prosperity, 1965—72, to the crisis of 1973—75

 (rising fuel prices and the Yom Kippur war) as a steep decline in the rate

of growth (from an annual average of 8.7 percent in 1965—72 to 2—4 percent

and less in recent years). Finance Minister Rabinowitz's 1975—77 stabili-

zation program brought about a dramatic improvement in the balance of

payments and considerable restraint of inflation in 1977 (point 771 in the

figure refers to January—May 1977), but at the cost of a further slowdown

in growth. Nonetheless, it left behind a persistent structural problem:

the large size of the public sector (its share rose from 20 to 30 percent

of the labour force over the past decade), and in particular the size of

the public—sector deficit relative to GDP (which reached 12—17 percent).2

     Throughout the past decade we observe clear cycles of deterioration

and improvement in the current account of the balance of payments, which

can be related to the policies of respective Finance Ministers: an

improvement during Rabinowitz's term of office (1975—77), deterioration

under Ehrlich (1977—79), temporary improvement with Hurwitz (1979—80),

considerable deterioration and slowdown of growth under Aridor (1981—83),

and a notable correction towards the end of Cohen—Orgad's term of office

and the new National Unity government with finance minister Moda'i (1984

to the present),

     Improvements in the balance of payments were usually accompanied by

an acceleration in the rate of inflation on account of the type of correc-

tive budgetary measures adopted (subsidy cuts and rising indirect taxa-

tion) and the exchange—rate adjustments. The most recent example is a 9



2. For an analysis of the macroeconomic responses to the external shocks
   and the substitutability between growth, balance of payments, and
   inflation, see Bruno (1984).
                                     —4—

percent devaluation and subsidy cuts introduced upon the entry of the

Unity government (note the leap in inflation during the period August—

October 1984 —   Figure   2). We shall say more on these price shocks and

inflationary inertia in the subsequent discussion.

     In the past two years it became evident that balance—of—payments and

foreign reserve difficulties may arise even when the current account

improves, due to problems associated with the capital account. In part, at

least, these problems stem from loss of public confidence in the govern-

ment's ability to control the economic system, leading to massive private

purchases of foreign currency and capital flight.

      Figure 3 presents Israel's official foreign—currency reserves to-

gether with the current repayable debt (which includes short—term credit

and medium— and long—term credit due within a year, less exporters'

credit). The figure also gives the import surplus, excluding direct de-

fense imports.3 Two central points stand out:

1.   The deterioration in the economy's foreign liquidity position started

     while official reserves were still increasing (1980—82); in 1983—84
                                                             4
     the current debt gradually exceeded foreign reserves.

2.   This deterioration persisted in spite of the improvement in the

     current account during 1984 and the first half of 1985, which ex-

     plains the forebodings of imminent crisis just before the new econo-

     mic plan was implemented.



3. The data for 1980—84 are based on Bank of Israel, Annual Report, 1984,
   Table VII—21.
4. This phenomenon, familiar from the experience of several Latin American
   countries, often signals an imminent liquidity crisis.
5. The figure presents the surplus for 1985 as a whole, but an improvement
   had already occurred in the first half of this year while the liquidity
   situation, reflected in the net current debt, worsened.
                                   —5—


 1.1. Theoretical Background: Real and Nominal Factors in the Inflationary

         Process



 A glance at the profile of the inflationary process (see Figure la)

 suggests something close to a step function — a series of jumps in the

inflation rate (1973—74, 197711, 1979, 1983—84) followed by periods of

relatively stable, high inflation, plateaus, the most remarkable of which

is the four year period 1979—83 (the 1983 jump occurred in the last

quarter, after the bank share crisis and large devaluation). In trying to

account for this pattern of inflation two major avenues of theoretical

explanation offer themselves.

    One line of argument puts the emphasis on the series of 'flats' and
asks —   what, in theory, are the components of steady state inflation and
what could make an economy shift from one to another, higher steady state

inflation? Concentrating on that part of the budget deficit which is

financed by the inflationary erosion of the money stock (the inflation

tax), a shift in steady state inflation could occur for any one of the

following reasons:

a. A permanent increase in the government deficit, relative to GDP,

    causing an increase in the required inflation tax, and thus an

    increase in the inflation rate.

b. A permanent reduction in the growth rate of the economy, causing a

    fall in the noninflationary transaction demand for money, thus

    requiring more inflation to acquire the same inflation tax.

c. A fall in the demand for base money due to institutional changes, such

   as the appearance of new, inflation—proof, substitutes for money. As
                                —6—

   the public moves out of money holdings higher inflation is required to

   finance the same given budget deficit.

     Unfortunately, the most common explanation of rising inflation due

to an increase in the government deficit (argument a) can at best account

for a rise in Israel's inflation rate in the early 1970's but not in

subsequent periods. The step—wise leaps in inflation from 30—40 percent in

1973—76 to nearly 500 percent annually in 1984—85 (point 851 in Figure la

refers to January—July 1985) occurred while the budget deficit, though

large, was more or less stable at 12—15% of GDP (see Table 2).6

     However, argument b (the drop in the growth rate) could be invoked to

account for the step rise in inflation after 1972 (see Melnick and

Sokoler, 1984) and argument c could be applied to the large step after

1978, as the financial opening up reform7 introduced a new foreign

exchange—linked money substitute ("PATAM" accounts) the demand for which

increased very rapidly, while the demand for base money plummeted.

     An alternative and somewhat complementary line of argument to that of

the inflation tax explains the step—wise nature of the inflationary pro-

cess in terms of price level shocks (which account for the jumps) coupled

with full monetary accommodation (which explains why a price level shock

translates into a jump in the rate of inflation). The price shocks may be




6. See also note d in Table 2 concerning the inflation correction of
    public lending.

7. In October 1977 a major reform measure ("Mahapach") was undertaken by
    Ehrlich, Finance Minister of the new incoming Likud government. Con-
    trols on capital flows were lifted, a new foreign—exchange—linked,
    highly liquid domestic bank deposit ("PATAM") was introduced, and the
    exchange rate regime moved (temporarily) from a crawling peg to a
    float. All of this was accompanied by a large devaluation at full
    employment and no budget cut.
                                  —7—

 entirely exogenous (e.g. oil and raw material price increases in 1973 and

 1979 or the shock introduced with the October 1977 reform) or may be

 induced by balance of payments difficulties (leading to devaluations and

 price increasing fiscal measures such as subsidy cuts, as in 1974, 1983,
         8
 1984)

     Monetary accommodation has taken the form of automatic linkage of

liquid financial assets (such as the PATAM accounts, guaranteed price on

outstanding government indexed bonds and for a time, up to 1983, also

government supported commercial bank shares). Such accommodation was

further enhanced by an exchange—rate adjustment policy that, more or less,

followed a Purchasing Power Parity rule. With money and exchange rates

closely linked to the price level we are left with the third key nominal

variable for which indexation (COLA) arrangements have been well estab—

lished for a long time. Wages do not appear to have had an autonomous

effect on accelerating inflation —   Israel   has known decades of COLA agree-

ments when inflation was no more than 5—7 percent annually and increases

in wages usually followed price changes rather than vice versa. Nonethe-

less the COLA agreements, and in particular the shortening of the indexa—

don lag ( from a year to 6 months, than to 3 months and most recently to

one month lag only) have contributed to the persistence of high inflation

'flats', after price level shocks. Then, on top of all these components of

inflationary intertia there is the reinforcing role of expectations which

take the accommodating fiscal and monetary policy into account.




8. For an analysis of the relationship between balance—of—payments prob-
    lems and jumps in inflation see Liviatan and Piterman (1984); for a
    general characterization of the inflationary process in 1970—1984 see
    Shiffer (1982), and Bruno and Fischer (1984).
                                 —8—

    Why, under this view, has inflation almost always only gone up and not

down ? one reason may be that positive and negative price shocks are not

symmetric in their effects on the dynamics of inflation. When the general

thrust of fiscal and monetary policy is expansionary and there is a temp—

orary unexpected downward shift in the inflation rate expectations will

not be revised downward. The effect of such asymmetries is to make a

sequence of positive and negative shocks of zero mean impart an upward

thrust to the inflation rate.

     Finally, what is the main role of the government budget under this

'shocks and accommodation' view of the inflationary process? Obviously

the role of the budget deficit is not merely confined to the direct

relationship between the excess domestic aggregate demand that it causes

and the resulting pressures on market prices. In fact, based on the

apparent lack of correlation of the size of deficit with the accelerating

inflation 'steps' one could argue (and this has sometimes led to a wrong

diagnosis) that this relationship is of no importance whatsoever. The

principal mechanisms are more indirect —   first,   a budget deficit contri-

butes directly to a deficit in the balance of payments, as the govern-

ment's negative savings widen the gap between savings and investment,

which is the obverse of the deficit in the current account of the balance

of payments. The need to respond to a deterioration in the balance of pay-

ments and an increase in foreign debt requires measures that by their very




9. For a formal representation of the inflationary dynamics see Bruno and
    Fischer, 1985. The asymmetry argument could be applied to the failure
    of Finance Minister Aridor's attempt to extricate the economy from
    inflation by reducing the cost of imports and slowing down the rate of
    devaluation; the worsening balance of payments situation ultimately
    led to a large devaluation and another price jump in October 1983.
                                     —9—

 nature tend to raise prices [this is the main argument raised by Liviatan

 and Piterman (1984)].

      The other indirect effect of a deficit is reflected in the large

internal national debt stemming from sizable deficits accumulated over

time. The need to recycle this debt, which is among the highest in the

world in relative terms (a ratio of 1.4—1.5 to product), and especially

the liquid part of that debt, has limited the government's freedom of

action in both fiscal and monetary policy. Hence, the prevention of an

increase in the internal and external debt had to constitute a key element

in a program designed to stabilize the economy.

     To sum up —   the   various arguments all converge to the view that the

inflationary process and the balance—of—payments difficulties originated

from two major sources:

1. A large real government deficit that persistently increased the inter-

    nal and external debt.

2. Loss of monetary anchor by a system that accommodated to inflation

    mainly by the automatic supply of linked liquid assets and almost

    automatic adjustment of the exchange rate. Since, however, the various

    nominal magnitudes (money, exchange rates as well as wages) are never

    perfectly synchronized asymmetries in adjustment to price shocks will

    impart an upward bias to the inflationary outcome.

     Broadly speaking, then, the inflationary process stems from a primary

real cause (the large budget deficit) and from a nominal problem, the

absence of a "nominal anchor". According to this view, it does not suffice

to deal with only one of these two major causes — a necessary condition

for achieving economic stability is to tackle both issues simultaneously.

Adherents of a standard economic approach to inflation would have no
                                  - 10   -



difficulty   in believing that a drastic reduction in the budget deficit is

necessary for stabilization (though here, too, some dissenting voices have

recently been heard in Israel, owing to the apparent lack of correlation

mentioned above). It is harder to convince followers of the conservative

approach that the inflation of the past decade also incorporated a very

powerful nominal inertia component —     the need to synchronize wages,
prices, credit, and exchange rates across various economic sectors. It is

entirely conceivable that the real budget deficit could be substantially

reduced by some drastic government action, while inflation persists by

sheer inertia because the nominal aggregates in the economy are not prop-

erly synchronized. A stabilization program that fails to come to grips

with this problem of synchronization is bound to fail, at least in com-

bating inflation. Our argument is that such failure will rapidly manifest

itself also in real terms, because unsynchronized changes in nominal

magnitudes will bring about serious changes in relative prices (real

wages, real credit, real exchange rates) which lead to deep unemployment,

or a drain on foreign reserves, or both.

     Another question related to these issues, and one that has occupied

economists in Israel in recent years, is whether it is possible to extri-

cate the economy from such inflation gradually. Adherents of the gradual-

ist approach could find support in the claim that before attempting stabi—

lization one should cut the budget, and that this step should precede the

implementation of any social contract ("package deal" in local parlance)

designed to cope with incomes policy and the synchronization problem. As

for the gradual synchronization of rates of change —    this   appears at first

glance to be more palatable from a socio—political point of view. The

counterargument maintains that the inflationary process is a vicious
                                  — 11 —


circle   in which the budget deficit, inflation, and cessation of growth

reinforce one another (see, e.g., the breakdowm of the tax system in 1984

and the decline in productivity throughout the past decade). Moreover, a

gradual, perfectly synchronized reduction in inflation is a practical

impossibility because of inertia, natural leads and lags, etc.'°

     There is no doubt that synchronization around a "zero" rate (i.e., a

complete freeze on exchange rates, credit, wages, and prices) is far

simpler for the public to grasp; consumers may monitor increases in price

levels of goods but are less inclined to compute rates of change. But the

clinching argument agai'st gradualism and in favour of drastic action is a

political—economy consideration. Even a strong government is not likely to

be capable of more than one determined effort centering on an "emergency"

plan. One may add considerations related to public confidence and govern-

ment credibility and reputation, and these too are more in tune with the

case for a sharp and comprehensive program for ridding the economy of

inflation in which the Prime Minister and Finance Minister mobilize the

political system and the public for a concerted effort to restore control

over the economic system. Strange as it may seem at first glance, even the

avoidance of deep, persistent unemployment would appear to have a better

chance of success under a program that attempts to eradicate inflation

sharply and decisively with a strong impact on the public's expectations.

In this manner the strict limitations on credit and demand need not be



10. It is not quite clear whether the "Aridor Experiment" of 1982—83 is a
    good example: on the one hand, the reduced pace of devaluations was
    not accompanied by a similar slowdown in the rate of wage and price
    increases; but on the other hand, there was also no monetary rest-
    raint. At any rate, the second and third "package deals" of early 1985
    attest to the difficulty entailed in attempting to synchronize rates
    of change, quite apart from the lack of accompanying budget cuts.
                                     — 12 —


expected to last more than six to twelve months.
      As matters turned out, the debate between these conflicting approa-

ches could not be given a chance to be settled on a theoretical level; the

pace of events in the first half of 1985 in both inflation and foreign

currency movements thwarted the gradualist line and eventually dictated a

drastic move."




2 •   FORMATION AND MAIN POINTS OF THE ECONOMIC PROGRAM




Although   the   broad terms of reference of the economic program were laid

out in earlier discussions and deliberations, its detailed preparation

started only in the beginning of June 1985. The professional team'2

appointed jointly by the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister was

given three weeks in which to submit the program to the government on June



11. The formulation of a combined real—nominal approach as well as alter-
    native ways out of the inflationary process were discussed in a series
    of staff seminars held at the Hebrew University Department of Econo-
    mics at the end of 1983 and throughout 1984, as well as in various
    studies prepared at the Bank of Israel Research Department. An article
    by Liviatan (1984) on the dollarization plan and a memorandum by the
    present author with an alternative proposal for monetary reform (1984)
    represented two suggestions for drastic action. [My own views on the
    special nature of the high inflation process and the need for a sharp
    exit were expressed in an interview in a local monthly ("Migvan")
    already in 1981.Learning the experience of the great European hyper—
    inflations (see Sargent, 1982), and in particular that of Germany in
    1923, was very helpful.] A study by Sokoler, Piterman and Fraenkel
    (1984), detailing a plan prepared by the Bank of Israel, also presen-
    ted a combined real—nominal approach, but preferred implementation in
    stages.

12. The team, headed by Emanuel Sharon, Director General of the Finance
    Ministry, included Eitan Berglas (Tel Aviv University), Michael Bruno
    (The Hebrew University of Jerusalem), Mordecai Fraenkel (Head of the
    Bank of Israel's Research Department) and Amnon Neubach (the Prime
                                 — 13 —


30, 1985. The team relied mainly on studies conducted at the Ministry of
Finance, the Bank of Israel, and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

     The team's work proceeded against a background of a growing crisis in

foreign currency outflow and loss of control over the inflationary pro-

cess. An attempt was made to learn the lessons of various tripartite

package—deal agreements that formed the basis of stabilization policy

during the period October 1984 — May 1985. Ostensibly, both the planned

budget for 1985/6 and the current account of the balance of payments were

conducive to further stabilization measures. But inflation was getting out

of hand. On the eve of the new program there were sizable deviations from

the new budget that had just been approved, especially on account of com-

modity subsidies and submission to pressure from the expenditure side. The

continued improvement in the external trade account (which had already

begun in 1984) was nullified by considerable foreign currency outflow. As

for the inflation process itself, a 3—month tripartite agreement on a

wage—price freeze (the first "package deal," started November 1984) seemed

to signify a considerable political—social success in rapidly (if only

temporarily) stemming price increases. The main drawbacks were the lack of

its incorporation into a more comprehensive stabilization program —   the
absence of an accompanying cut in the budget, the continuation of

(delayed) COLA adjustments in wages (thus raising real wages), and in

particular the continuation of devaluations. Higher import prices made it



   Minister's Economic Advisor). Nissan Liviatan (The Hebrew University)
   was an active participant in various internal discussions prior to the
   team' s appointment.
     An earlier team which included, in addition to Bergias and Bruno
  (and Neubach as secretary), Yoram Ben—Porath, Haim Ben—Shahar, and
  David Golan, submitted the broad outline of a very similar plan to the
  Prime Minister in July 1984.
                                 — 14 —


necessary to introduce a one—time price level correction ("seamt'   in   local

parlance) between this agreement and the next, in effect 'blowing up' the

package deal in January 1985. The main shortcomings of the next two

package deals were largely related to the inability to control rates of

price increases rather than freezing the price level (as was done in the

first package deal).

     To sum up, as far as the budget, the balance of payments, and cer-

tainly the inflationary process were concerned, the period immediately

preceding the new economic plan was ripe both in terms of background

conditions and in terms of the need felt for a drastic new tack.

     The aim of the new economic stabilization program was to reduce

inflation at once from a monthly rate of around 15—20 percent to virtually

nil. Given some inertia and tail—end effects, this would in effect imply a

reduction of inflation at first to no more than 2—3 percent a month and,

within a few months, to even lower rates. The program was also designed to

permit a significant improvement in the balance of payments. Tackling both

inflation and the balance of payments simultaneously would also lay the

foundations for subsequent renewed growth and structural change in the

economy.

     In line with our analysis of the origins of the crisis such program

would have to be comprehensive and drastic in its effects on public expec-

tations and confidence. It would have to tackle simultaneouly both the

real source of difficulty, namely the government budget, as well as estab-

lish a nominal anchor or, rather, several synchronized nominal anchors.

    A central feature of the program was the announced reduction of the

budget deficit by $1.5 billion (7.5 percent of GDP) below the 1984 budget.

Simultaneously, the Israel shekel was devalued by about 20 percent to
                                   — 15 —


ISh.1,500/$1 together with partial reduction of existing import duties and
export subsidies.

     At the time the program was announced the government declared its

intention to freeze all shekel—denominated aggregates — wages, prices,

exchange rates, and credit (after an initial adjustment) —     with   the freeze

on exchange rates dependent on preserving the required level of nominal

wages. The latter, including the temporary cessation of the COLA agree-

ment, remained to be determined through negotiations with the Federation

of Labor and the employers. The Bank of Israel undertook to restrict the

nominal size of bank credit, and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry

remained responsible for price controls. The government also announced its

intention to limit the nominal budget level planned for the quarter July—

September 1985.

     As for the capital market, the operative principle here was to

clearly ensure the preservation of long—term (indexed) saving while at the

same time reducing the liquidity of linked assets, in a clear departure

from the previous regime. Current PATAN (dollar—linked) deposits would

henceforth be "one—way" only —   withdrawals   were permitted, but deposits

would be accepted only for periods exceeding one year. Furthermore, the

government would gradually make all its bonds fully tradable (with the

exception of pension funds), so as to widen the base for open market

operations.

     The time span set for the stabilization program was one year, whose

first three months were declared as an economic emergency period.

     In what follows I shall dwell in greater detail on several elements

of the program.
                                    — 16 —


2.1.    Pruning the Public Sector

At the core of the "real" part of the program, initially, was the desire

to reduce the budget deficit up to the point at which "the government's

internal and external debt would no longer grow in absolute real magni-

tude" (with subsequent GDP growth this would entail a gradual slow fall in

the debt/GDP ratio). This would have required a cut of $2.0—2.5 billion

(10 percent of GJJP) in the budget compared with 1984. A top—level decision

barring substantial cuts in (among other things) defense expenditures

brought the planned reduction of the deficit to $1.5 billion in the hope

that the complementary cut would be introduced in the 1986 budget. The

reductions included a cut in subsidies to basic commodities and additional

direct and indirect taxes with only 20 percent of the total cut coming

from reduced real government activity. The limited size of reduction in

expenditures introduces a constraint on another central aspect of the

program, namely, the ability to moderate the erosion of net wages by tax

concessions (see below).

       As we shall see, the government's real excess demand in 1985 dropped

by more than the planned cut, and it is very likely that the government's

internal and external debt will not have grown in the budget year ending

March 1986. Remember, too, that the emergency aid from the US government

of $750 million (3.0—3.5 percent of GDP) in each of the years 1985—1986

will help bridge over the stabilization period without having to effect

the full budget cuts required in order to achieve long—term balance (the

domestic deficit including interest payments and subsidies to credit in

1984 was $3.6 billion, or about 16 percent of GNP).

       A second important element in reducing the size of the public sector

was the decision to cut its manpower by 3 percent (some 10,000 persons,
                                    - 17   -


 counting   also local government and other publicly—financed institutions).

 This step was not, in itself, of any immediate major budgetary signifi-

 cance (as it calls for expenditures on severance pay, etc.); its impor-

 tance lay mainly in signaling the government's intentions concerning the

structural change required in the economy.




2.2. Devaluation


The Israel shekel was devalued by 18.8 percent on the day the program was

introduced (in addition to a devaluation of about 6 percent towards the

end of June 1985), and set at ISh.1,50013 per dollar. As part of the

partial unification of effective exchange rates in the trade accounts VAT

was reduced by 2 percent, the excise on fuel was reduced, and import

deposits were lowered. Subsidized shekel credit for exports was abol-

ished, as was the special subsidy for preserving the profitability of

exports; the existing export exchange—rate insurance was replaced by an

equivalent arrangement guaranteeing an effective 11 percent subsidy for

value added in exports. This arrangement no longer depends on changes in

the consumer price index in relation to the exchange rate (which was an

integral part of the insurance scheme), and thus eliminates a distortion

that had increased inflationary pressures in recent years.

    The exchange rate was set at less than the level required to permit




13. In a pure change of numeraire, a shift from Old Shekels to New Shekels
    (1 New Shekel = 1,000 Old Shekels) was announced in August 1985 and
    fully implemented on January 1, 1986, when the exchange rate became
    INSh.1.5 = $1.
                                  — 18 —


the   total abolition of export subsidization'4 so as to limit the size of

the price shock immediately upon implementation of the program. A price

shock of at least 15 percent was inevitable, due to the devaluation, the

subsidy cuts, and the partial increase in controlled price ceilings and it

was considered too dangerous to go beyond that, mainly on account of the

implied size of real wage erosion.




2.3. Stabilization of the Exchange Rate and the Setting of Nominal Anchors


As we have seen, an important part of the plan to achieve rapid price

stabilization is the determination of one or more nominal anchors and the

need to secure them in social agreements and appropriate policy measures.

The quantity of money (M1 or M2) often serves as such an anchor, and its

preservation by the central bank ensures stable prices. Under conditions

of rapid inflation, and especially in the transition to disinflation, the

demand for means of payment is extremely unstable (the demand for money

can be expected to increase substantially, but one cannot tell by how

much) and therefore cannot serve as an anchor. It is thus preferable to

rely in the monetary field on the overall volume of bank credit, which is

closely related to nominal GDP. However, control over the level of credit

in Israel is indirect (in the recent past the Bank of Israel controlled

the price of credit rather than its quantity), and it would have been

hazardous to rely solely on credit for this purpose. Given the importance



14. Such abolition, combined with a desire to preserve the profitability
    of exports, would have required a devaluation of around 30 percent.
    The smaller size of devaluation therefore substantially limited the
    scope of effective exchange—rate unification in both imports and
    exports.
                                  — 19 —


of   the cost side in the inflationary process of recent years, the best

combination of central nominal anchors appeared to be the dollar exchange

rate and the nominal wage. The dollar exchange rate has for a long time

served as a widely quoted price index, at a time in which the regular CPI

index was published only monthly and at a considerable time lag.15 Setting

the exchange rate in dollar terms'6 in the early stages of stabilization

was therefore deemed extremely important. On the other hand, the program

did not call for reliance on continued real appreciation. Specifically, it

would have been inconceivable that the exchange rate be set for prolonged

periods unless nominal wages were also frozen, because the dollar wage

(the nominal wage divided by the exchange rate) is a central factor in

determining the cost and profitability of exports. Hence the publicly

announced guiding principle of the program — a freeze in the exchange rate

was made conditional upon a freeze in nominal wage costs (beyond an ini-

tial compensation — see below),17 with the combined freeze of both

guaranteeing that production costs for both exports and the domestic

market do not rise.

      Price controls permitted the completion of the system of nominal

anchors for the duration of the stabilization period (besides, it was


15. One could ask for no better example than the index for July 1985,
    announced on August 15; most of the price increase represented by
    this index (27.5 percent) had taken place some six weeks earlier,
    when the new program was introduced.

16. Foreign trade stability would call for linking the shekel to a basket
    of currencies reflecting the composition of Israel's trade. Once the
    first stabilization phase is over, it will therefore make sense to
    link the (new) shekel to such a basket.

17. The bilateral monopoly of a labour federation fixing the nominal wage
    and the government fixing the exchange rate, with each made conditio-
    nal on the other, raises some interesting game—theoretic credibility
    considerations, recently discussed by Horn and Persson (1985)
                                 — 20 —


always one of the conditions stipulated by the federation of labour unions
                                               18
for entering into a package—deal agreement).        After several months have

elapsed, gradual decontrol was to be considered (this process in fact

commenced in January 1986, six months after the start of the program, and

was expected to end by June 1986).



2.4. Wage and Incomes Policy


Formal wage indexation (COLA) agreements are ht.lpful in avoiding undue

erosion of real wages during high inflation processes, but are anathema to

a sharp disinflation effort. Even with a minimal wage adjustment lag of

one month (which has been the case in Israel in the recent past) a sharp

deceleration in inflation will be thwarted by the immediate steep rise in

the real wage in the first month or two of stabilization. There is no

escape, therefore, from a temporary suspension of the COLA agreement and

at least a temporary reduction in the real wage. On the assumption that

the net real take home pay prior to the program had already been eroded to

the 'right' level all that the plan had stipulated is that the further

reduction In the net real wage be temporary (though not in wage costs to

the employer — see below) and could be corrected by the end of the 1985



18. Theory has it that overall general equilibrium determines relative
    prices in the economy. Anchoring one of the nominal variables (such as
    the exchange rate, wages, credit, or prices) would then suffice to
    determine the nominal levels of all other variables under equilibrium.
    But what we have here is a disequilibrium situation. The notion of
    "multiple anchors" is suggested by analogy, securing a ship with seve-
    ral lines so as to distribute the strain in case of rough weather,
    with at least one of the lines taking the pressure at any point in
    time, Should one of the lines fail, the others can take up the strain,
    but it is nonetheless important to coordinate the lengths of the
    different lines ahead of time. (The analogy is based on a discussion
    with Mordecai Fraenkel some two years ago.)
                                     — 21 —


budget year (March 1986). Given the relatively strong position of the

trade union federation (Histadrut) in the wage bargaining process and the

relatively weak starting point of a government that has to deliver price

stability from a base of rather poor past performance it was clear that

the workers would ask for initial compensation as well as some kind of

additional insurance in return for the temporary suspension of the COLA

agreement.

       The initial price   impact of the program was calculated by the plan-
ning team    as well as the level of wage compensation that would be required

as   a substitute   for suspending the COLA agreement for three months. The

immediate    compensation was set at 14 percent of the gross wage. One   pro-

posal considered was to grant additional compensation to net wages by

bringing forward the adjustment of tax brackets set for October and giving

some additional compensation at a later stage. Finally, on July 15, after

some tough bargaining, a wage agreement was signed between workers and

employers in the private sector'9 that included the following items:

1.    Compensation of 14 percent of the July wage, payable on August 1.

2.    A one—time 12 percent increase on September 1.

3.    Projected wage increases of 4, 4, and 3.5 percent on January 1,

      February 1, and March 1, respectively. Employers in the industrial

      sector undertook to absorb these increments within the existing price

      ceilings and the agreed--upon export subsidies.




19. In Israel the government is formally not a partner to the COLA agree-
     ment, which is traditionally signed by the employers' association and
     the Histadrut and then adopted by the government in the public
     sector. This may explain why the contract had some obvious drawbacks
     for stabilization policy (see below).
                                    — 22   —




4.   The COLA arrangement (80 percent of last month's rise in the consumer

     price index) would be renewed on December 1 (November's wage) accor-

     ding to the price rise in October, with a minimum inflation threshold

     of 4 percent (instead of the 12 percent threshold before the stabili-

     zation period).

          The extension of this arrangement to the public sector was even-

tually secured by the Histadrut from the government during September in

return    for the postponement of certain agreed—upon wage increases due in
October 1985 (for engineers, teachers, and some other groups in the public
sector)   until after March 1986.

     Clearly the succession of projected monthly wage increases, at the

end of six months (item 3) and, in particular, renewal of monthly COLA

adjustment with a very low threshold (item 4) seemed very problematic but

were, presumably, the insurance costs required for achievement of the

crucial temporary suspension. The impact of these arrangements on real

wage behaviour will be discussed below (see also Figure 5 and Table 5).

     The public debate over wage policy brought up many issues pertaining

to social justice and the sharing of the burden. The main declared objec-

tive of the stabilization program was the elimination of the most serious

economic, as well as social, distortion in the economy —   inflation.
(Inflation, for example, eroded the tax paid by the self—employed more

than that paid by wage earners and thus had a relatively more damaging

effect on the disposable income of wage earners, in addition to the prob—

lem of tax evasion). Beyond that, the program did not propose to improve

the income distribution. It attempted to reduce as a much as possible the

impact of price increases of basic commodities on low income brackets

through compensation via the social security system. It also included a
                                      — 23 —


 tax   on luxury housing (to be collected by the local authorities) in addi-

tion to an extra property tax on vehicles and equipment imposed earlier.20

But here, too, as in the case of distortions caused by multiple exchange

rates, the basic idea was to abolish inflation first, and only then turn

to renewed growth and to an attempt to rectify other distortions in the

economy, including social ones.

        With regard to unemployment —   which will be mentioned again later —
it    seemed clear from the outset that the stabilization program would cause

a rise thereof, at least temporarily, and the main problem was to prevent

unemployment from exceeding a level of 8—9 percent (on the eve of the

program unemployment had declined from 6 to approximately 5 percent).




3 •    DEVELOPMENTS   IN THE FIRST THREE MONTHS



Six    months may be too short a period for evaluation of a disinflation
program merely on the basis of immediate actual price performance but a

glance at the key price indicators in Table 1 already shows a considerable

measure of success even on this score, with consumer price inflation down

from 14—15 percent to an average monthly rate of 2.6 percent (and whole-

sale prices to a rate of 2 percent). Once special seasonal elements are

taken account of (in particular, prices of fruits and vegetables and




20. One major proposal on a general capital levy (including financial
     capital) had to be shelved early on because of a Law for the Protec-
     tion of Savings that the Knesset had adopted prior to the July 1984
     elections, a law that could only be revoked by a 2/3 majority.
                                 — 24 —


seasonal change in clothing) the monthly rate was more like 1—2 percent,

which, in fact, was the case at the end of 1986. This was the rate also

projected into the early months of 1986. However, a longer period has to

elapse before one knows whether the sharp deceleration in inflation will

indeed persist. At this stage one has to make do with an evaluation of the

key background variables that should support the sharp disinflation effort

and the conditions for their sustenance into the future.

     A central ingredient determining the success of a stabilization

program is the public's attitude toward it. This attitude can be measured

by opinion polls, which indicated an improvement from the beginning of

July into August.21 The first weeks of July were marked by considerable

confusion. The vehement debates between the Histadrut and the government,

the strikes, and the lack of clarity as to the government's intentions

cast the very beginning of the program in doubt. The wage agreement even-

tually signed in the private sector on July 15 served as an important

signal in the process of creating a nominal anchor for the price system.

Public debates, grassroots pressure on the trade unions, and a general

perception that with all the skepticism (fed by past failures) the Unity

Government should be given another chance, may all have helped to bring

the wage agreement about. The fact that the exchange rate remained stable

during the early weeks of the program (as did the black market rate — see

Table 1) and that foreign exchange reserves started rising are not surpri-

sing, as both were expected immediately after a sizable devaluation and a



21. A poll taken by "Dahaf" for the "Yedi'ot Aharonot" newspaper shows an
     increase in the number of respondents in favour of the program from
     45 percent in the beginning of July to 64 percent in the beginning of
     August, whereas the number of those opposing it declined from 51 to
     31 percent in the same period ("Yedi'ot Aharonot," August 9, 1985).
                                     — 25 —


price   freeze, but that, too, helped.

     An interesting measure of public confidence is represented by expect-

ations of inflation as indicated by the public's behaviour in the indexed

bond market —   this   indicator revealed a gradual decline in expected infla-

tion. For example, according to these calculations, the monthly price

increase forecast three months ahead dropped from about 18 percent in June

to 11—12 percent in July—August and gradually declined in the course of

the following months to 1.7 percent by the end of 1986 [see Table 4,

column (8)].22 Hence, the credibility of the program grew in its first

months of operation.

     We now turn to some more "real" aspects —    first   and foremost the im-

plementation of the budget. Figure 4 shows data on the government's reve-

nues and expenditures, in constant prices,23 from the first quarter of 1983

to the fourth quarter of 1985. Note the decline in real spending (includ-

ing subsidies) in the more recent period and the systematic decrease in

excess demand until it turns into a slight surplus by the 85:3 quarter.

     Table 2 presents annual data (including interest) as percentages of

GDP. The deficit in the first eight months of the 1985 budget year was

smaller than expected. In fact, if the first 2/3 of the budget year 1985

were representative of the year as a whole, the reduction of the deficit

(including interest payments) compared with 1984 would reach $1.8 billion



22. This series does not change much when the time horizon is taken to be
     6 or 12 months instead of 3 [see Yariv (1985)], probably because at a
     given point in time the public evaluates the program's overall
     chances of success in reducing inflation rather than a changing
     profile of inflation over time. 1.7 was the end—of—December figure.

23. For comparison, the monthly data in Figure 4 can be translated into
     dollars at ISh.610/$1. These data, unlike the annual data of Table 2,
     do not include interest payments.
                                  — 26 —


instead   of the planned $1.5 billion. This would mean that the deficit as a

share of GNP dropped from 15 percent in 1984 (or around 10—12 percent on a

longer—term average) to only 6 percent in 1985 (4 percent in the months

July—December). Returning to Figure 4, and comparing the developments so

far in the budget year 1985 with the corresponding quarters of 1984, we

see that the improvement in April—June (85:2 as against 84:2) was due

entirely to an increase in taxes and not to a reduction in spending,

whereas the further improvement since the implementation of the program

(July—September) stems in increasing part from the expenditure side. This

reduction was brought about mainly through subsidy cuts and only in small

part by cutbacks in real government activity; it is also too early to tell

whether the government will manage to reduce its activity during the rest

of the budget year and in the next (1986) budget. At any rate one should

emphasize that so far, at least, budgetary restraint did support the

attempt to effect rapid stabilization of prices and exchange rates.

     This brings me to the second facet of the real system —   the   balance

of payments. Here, no less than for the budget, the picture for 1985 as a

whole shows substantial improvement, and not only in terms of the import

surplus. The current account as a whole (including unilateral transfers)

got "into the black" for the first time since many years.24 The

improvement in liquidity for the end of 1985 can be observed in Figure 3 —

reserves rose considerably while the current debt leveled off. This



24. The preliminary estimates for 1985 put the net current account
     (including unilateral transfers) at a surplus of close to $600 mil-
     lion in 1985 compared with deficits of $1,500 million and $2,300
     million in 1984 and 1983, respectively. Even without the unilateral
     transfers this would constitute a further improvement of over a
     billion dollars in 1985.
                                  — 27 —


improvement is related to the continued decline in imports, a further

(though not dramatic) increase in exports, and the $750 million emergency

grant from the U.S. government.

     The import surplus developments clearly continue trends that started

before the emergency plan was implemented. The program can, in the short

run, reinforce these trends, especially in restraining imports, but its

major immediate effect has been on the capital account —   in   arresting the

wave of speculative foreign currency purchases (in July—August the private

sector even started selling foreign currency; overall repatriation of

private capital in the second half of 1985 may have been of the order $500

million). The main point is that the balance—of—payment developments

strongly support the possibility of continued exchange—rate stabilization.

     Finally, Table 3 indicates a high real exchange rate (in terms of

relative wholesale prices) not only relative to the dollar but also vis—a—

vis a basket of European currencies, in a process that has been going on

for over a year. (With the shekel/dollar rate kept stable there followed,

in the second half of 1985, an effective devaluation of about 1 percent a

month against the basket.) The average index of the real exchange rate vis

a vis a basket of five major countries for the third and fourth quarters

of 1985 was close to the highest levels ever achieved since 1972. Natur-

ally, this index may suffer a setback if the price level in Israel con-

tinues to rise relative to the rate of inflation in competing countries

while the nominal exchange rate remains unchanged. But considerable

"breathing space" has been gained, which makes it possible to place the

main emphasis in exchange—rate policy on stabilization of the price level

— provided, of course, that the restraining budget, credit, and wage

policies persevere.
                                  — 28 —


     Let   us now turn to monetary considerations. The shift from rapid

inflation (including a high rate of devaluation) to a stable exchange rate

is very dramatic and usually fraught with great difficulties, especially

in an economy that has widely used dollar—linked along with nominal and

real shekel assets. The effective monthly rate of interest on dollar

assets was 17 percent (in shekel terms) just before the program was intro-

duced, dropping the following day to 3 percent; the monthly shekel bor-

rowing rate was 18—20 percent, and 11—14 percent on time deposits [see

Table 4, columns (9) and (10)]. A sharp change in inflationary expecta-

tions causes the real rate of interest to leap upward. Concern was voiced

in public about "the danger of a monetary flood that would sweep away the

economic program" owing to the different liquidity ratios applying to

dollar as against shekel deposits in commercial banks.

     The data presented in Table 4 reveal that the monetary system stood

firm throughout the first six months of stabilization. As expected, there

was an immediate steep drop in PATAN deposits (which has moderated since

August) and a dramatic increase in short—term shekel deposits and the

quantity of money; total liquid assets declined by 11 percent in real

terms in July, remained more or less stable in August, and dropped again

in September [compare columns (4)—(6) in Table 4 with column (7)]. The

slowdown in nominal credit, both "directed" and free [columns (1)—(3)] was

in line with the aims of the stabilization program. Total bank credit in

the economy decreased in real terms by 9 percent in July, rose slightly in

August, and did not changed much in September—December. Without data on

credit in the "gro.y" market (which is claimed to have dropped sharply) not

too much can be said on this matter, but there were no evident excesses in

credit issues in spite of the lowering of interest rates. During the first
                                      — 29 —


six   months of the program the marginal borrowing rate declined in stages,

reaching 5 percent in December, while the deposit rate sank to 2 percent

per month. Even with inflationary expectations of 1—2 percent a month the

real borrowing interest rate remained substantially higher than the level

that would encourage production and employment. But the speed at which

this pressure is relieved must take into account considerations that have

to do with the continued effort to stabilize the exchange rate. 25

      Finally, one should mention the problem of real wage erosion that

elicited considerable debate when the stabilization program was announced.

Table 5 (see also Figure 5) summarizes the gross and net wage data in con-

stant prices over the budget years 1980 to 1984, and includes a forecast

for the end of the 1985 budget year (April 1986). Several facts stand out:

1.    In 1984 real gross wages were about 16 percent higher than in 1980

      although product per employee had not risen and may even have dec-

      lined.

2.    Immediately before the program was put into effect (June 1985) gross

      wages had already been eroded slightly compared with the average for
              26
      1984.        The average erosion of another 15 percent in 1985 should

      have restored real gross wages in the economy as a whole to approxi-

      mately their 1980 level, which is believed to accord with the eco-

      nomy's equilibrium conditions with respect to both productivity and



25. Extremely high real interest rates in the early stages of stabiliza-
     tion are a familiar phenomenon encountered in the historical exper-
     ience of many countries {see, for example, the developments in
     Germany in 1923 as described in Dornbusch (1985) and similar events
     in present—day Argentina].

26. At the time of preparation of the program the wage index for June was
     estimated at 101 (1980 = 100), an estimate that has since been cor-
     rected by over 10 percent!
                                    — 30 —


     the   trade balance.

3.   Erosion of gross wages in the course of the stabilization program was

     compensated for by inflation adjustment of the tax brackets (and the

     sharp slowdown in inflation) so that by the end of the budget year

     net wages are expected to have regained their pre—stabilization level

     —   i.e.,   10 percent higher than in 1980. Note that the real erosion

     between June and October (and onward) is smaller because we are

     comparing a high—inflation month (June), when wages were eroded, to

     low—inflation months.27




4. PROBLEMS AND OPEN QUESTIONS


The developments in the first six months after implementation of the stab-

ilization program appear to support the continuation of the stabilization

effort in the coming months and may contribute to the achievement of its

major objectives. But one should also emphasize the difficulties and

dangers ahead. First, the danger of deviations from the budget. Subsidies

have indeed been cut, but the scope of reduction in real government acti-

vity is as yet not clear. Demands for expansion of the budget by minis-

tries that fail to carry out the cuts required and firms in financial

straits seeking government assistance are not likely to decrease. The same



27. This is a "tail—end effect" — calculation of real wages by dividing
     nominal wages by average monthly prices although wages are paid at
     the end of the month. This effect reduces the erosion of real wages
     (or overstates its increase) in times of accelerated inflation and
     exaggerates it during the transition to stability. Correcting for
     this bias reduces the wage erosion relative to the inflationary base
     period by 5—8 percent (estimates by S. Amir, Bank of Israel).
                                   — 31 —


 applies   to the planned framework for the 1986 budget, over which a fierce

 internal debate has taken place. It is too early to say whether it will

 sustain a permanent reduction in the rate of inflation, which requires a

 sizable further reduction in government expenditures.

      A potentially serious problem could arise in connection with growing

unemployment. The rate of unemployment by the eve of the year was esti—

mated at 7—8 percent. A rise in unemployment is inevitable in a stabili-

zation program of the sort presented here but could take on proportions

leading in the case of Israel (with a long high employment tradition) to a

social and political reaction that might thwart the successful completion

of the program. The sooner it is felt that the economy has really moved

onto a new path of relative price stability, the easier it is to relax the

constraints and to permit a gradual revival of economic activity.

     The question of agreed—upon wage increases that were anticipated at

the beginning of 1986 is also relevant in this context. Although the

employers undertook to absorb the wage increases, the very fact that wages

were to increase by 4 percent a month during three consecutive months (on

top of the COL allowance for October, which was paid on December 1, when

the October index fortuitously exceeded the 4 percent threshold) could

bear with it the seeds of renewed inflation. The renewal of wage contract

negotiations towards April 1986 and the government's ability to throw

further tax concessions into the bargain seemed critical. Once again, this

highlights the paramount importance of a further reduction in government

expenditure.

    The system still lacks the robustness that can prevent the future

translation of price level shocks into renewed accelerated inflation. One

important further step in this connection could be the total abolition of
                                     — 32 —


all   subsidies for basic commodities, and their substitution by a system of

direct agricultural support. This could immunize the system against gov-

ernment induced price shocks of the type that characterized the infla-

tionary process in the past.

      Since the inflationary process was deeply rooted, the process of

price increases could also be renewed as a result of errors in judgement

on the part of some sector or other, or a fortuitous price increase that

exceeds the 4—percent threshold for COL allowances. For this reason it was

considered important to exercise caution and discretion in the gradual

removal of price controls. While the prices of many tradable goods can, in

principle, be controlled via the market — by exposure to competing imports

—   this   is not true in the case of nontradable goods and services,

especially when markets are far from competitive. At the time of writing,

in January 1986, the removal of price controls was commenced in a process

due to end by June 1986.

      Another issue that requires a great deal of discretion is the easing

of credit restrictions and reductions in interest rates. A high rate of

interest may affect output and employment. On the other hand, it helps

maintain the stability of exchange rates. The rate of reduction of inter-

est depends on how rapidly inflationary expectations decline which, in

turn, depends on budget and wage developments. The greater the restraint

in government spending, the easier it is to relax restrictive mone-

tary policies. At the time of writing real interest rates on borrowing

still remained quite high.28



28. Both these last two issues (price decontrol and monetary policy) are
     examples that throw light on the importance of the close monitoring
     of a stabilization program on an almost day—by—day (or week—by—week)
                                     — 33 —


     Finally    there is the longer term issue — when will the economy start

growing again? Price stabilization is a necessary precondition for renewed

growth and here, too, the sooner the price system stabilizes the sooner it

will be possible to shift the major effort to the program's third objec—

tive — renewed economic growth. In returning to renewed growth there may

be several years in which the import surplus will rise again owing to the

need for greater investment. Such a temporary increase in external depen-

dence, from a position of strength, designed to finance productive invest-

ment, differs entirely from the state of disinvestment that has plagued

the economy for close to ten years. At the time of writing, however, the

main hurdle —   extricating   the economy from the vicious circle of inflation

and balance—of—payments crises — was still demanding the major attention.

Restoration of control over economic policy enables greater leeway, but

does not, in itself, guarantee safe passage to journey's end.




    basis. An important institutional tool in this connection has been a
    follow—up committee of experts (headed by E. Sharon, who also led the
    original planning team). This has been meeting weekly ever since July
    1985, monitoring the program on a regular basis and reporting
    directly to the Minister of Finance and to the Prime Minister.
                                     — 34 —


Table 1. Key Indicators, 1980—84 and 1985, Before and After Stabilization

                             (Monthly rates of change)

                                    Mean        1984                  1985
                                  1980—84      (During
                                                year)      January—        August—
                                                             July         December


a. Prices, exchange
    rates and wages

     Consumer prices                 8.7        15.2          14.0              2.6

     Wholesale prices
     (manufacturing)                 8.9        13.3          12.4              2.0

     $ exchange rate (official)      8.8        15.9          13.6              0.0

     Black market $   rate                      16.1          13.3              0.0

     Nominal wage                    9.0        16.5          11.0              2.1

     Interest rate (end—
     of—period level)                           16.1          20.3              5.4

b. Relative prices

     Real exchange rate
     (basket)a                      —0.5         0.1           2.8             —0.6

     Real wage (gross)               0.3         1.1          —2.7             —0.5
                                                                    b                   b
                                                             (—0.3)            (—3.1)

     Real wage (after tax)           0.2         0.8          —1.8              0.8
                                                              (04)b            (14)b
c. Money and credit

     Means of payment (M1)           8.0        13 •   4      10.6             11.9

     Quasi—money (M3)C              10.7        15.9          13.0              3.0

     Total bank credit               9.1        16.8          13.9              3.9

d. Budget deficit (Z of GDP)                    15.0         (120)b

e. Unemployment rate ()               9d         5.9           6.0              7.5

f.   Balance—of—payments
     basic balance (m.$)                        —480                    +340

Notes on following page.
                                 — 35 —


a.   Relative wholesale price of major trading partners (basket of 5 — see

     Table 3).

b. Figures in brackets refer to the periods January—June, June—December,

     respectively.

c. Money and liquid assets, including PATAM (see Table 4).

d. 1980—83 average.
                                             — 36


Table 2. Government Expenditure and Revenues, Domestic Deficit, and its
           Finance, 1977—1985

                                                     (Fiscal years,* percentage of GDP)

            Domestic     Reve—       Deficit        Deficit             Deficit finance
            expendi—     nues        (1)—(2)        mci.
            ture                                    interest   Change       Net      Foreign
                                                               in           debt     exchange
                                                               money      increase   sales
                                                               base
              (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)

1977          45          38             7            13
1978          40          36            4             8
1979          43          38            4             9
1980          40          35            5             9             2         6             1

1981          45          35            9             14            2         8            3
1982          44          40            4             9             2         5            2
1983          43          39            4             9             2         1            6
1984          43          36            8            15             3         4            8
1984
April to
November      42          34            8            15             4         2            9

1985
April to
November      39          38            1             6         11           —7            3

* The    fiscal year extends from April 1 to March 31.

Source: Columns (1), (3), (5), (6) and (7) — Bank of Israel, Research
         Department, and the Accountant General1s Office.
         Col. (2) — Internal Revenue Administration and calculations of
         the Bank of Israel Research Department.

Notes:

a. Domestic expenditure —        civilian      and defense expenditure, transfers and

    subsidies, investment, miscellaneous expenditures and reserves.

                                                                                     (cont.)
                                  — 37 -


b.   Interest payments — budget division estimates of domestic interest

     excluding interest paid to the Bank of Israel and social security.


c. Forecast for 1985/6 was made on basis of rates of change of respective

     items in published budget.


d. The expenditure and deficit estimates are not corrected for the infla—

     tionary erosion of unindexed loans to the private sector — these

     amounted to an additional 5—8 percent of GDP in the years 1978—82 and

     fell to 1—2 percent in 1983—84.
                                       — 38 —


Table 3. Relative Wholesale Prices of Selected Trading Partners,
             1977—1985 (indices, 1972 = 100)


                              U.S.A.            European     Basket
                                                 basket       of 5
                                                           currencies


Annual average

1977                            91                 96           94

1978                           106                121           116

1979                            98                118           111

1980                           101                122           114

1981                           107                105           106

1982                           105                 95           99

1983                           101                 86           81

1984                           108                 84           93

1985                           123                 97          106


Quarterly

1984 1                         106                 87           93
         2                     107                 87           94
         3                     108                 82           91
         4                     111                 81           92

1985     1                     120                 83           96
         2                     124                 94          104
         3                     128                106          114
         4                     119                106          111




Notes:

Data refer to manufacturing wholesale prices relative to Israeli index
multiplied by representative exchange rate. The "Basket of 5" refers to
the U.S., U.K., Germany, France, and the Netherlands weighted by Israel's
trade with these countries.


Source: Bank of Israel Research Department.
Table 4.    Bank Credit, Liquid Assets, and Interest Rates: April—December 1985


                                                                       (Monthly rates of change)
                  Credit           Means     PATAM   Total      Inflation          Interest rate
                                   of pay—   (in     liquid        rate              (monthly)
           Free   Dir—     Total   ment &     $)     assets
                  ected            shekel                     Actual Expe—        Bank     Time
                                    time                              ted         lending deposits
                                   depo—
                                   sits
           (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)         (9)      (10)
Relative
weight,
end of
1984     (49)     (51)     (100)   (18)      (82)    (100)

April      11      17        14     20        —2       11     19.4      11.3       18.4     11.1
May        17       8        13      4        —0        9      6.8      10.3       18.8     11.3
June       18      16        17      7        —1       16     14.9      18.1       20.4     14.4

July       13      23        18    64        —14       17     27.5      10.9       20.3     11.2
August     13       1        8      14        —3        4      3.9      11.7       15.7      6.7
Sept.      10     —1         5      14        —2        4      3.0       7.9       12.2      4.9

Oct.       4        2        3       9        —4        2      4.7       6.0        9.2      3.9
Nov.        2     —1          1     11        —2        4      0.5       3.9        6.9      2.7
Dec.       5      —1         3     —0         —2      —1       1.3       2.2        5.4      2.3

a.  Excluding fuel, shipping and aircraft, and savings accounts.
b.  Yariv (1985), average expected inflation over next three months, based on the market for
    indexed bonds.
Source: Bank of Israel Research Department.
                                    - '$0 —


Table 5. Product per Employee, Gross and Net Real Wage, 1980—1985
             (fiscal years, 1980 = 100)


                      Product             Real gross wage           Total
                      per emp                                        net
                      loyee     Business       Public       Total    real
                                 sector        sector                wage

1980                   100        100           100         100      100

1981                   101        111           108         110      113

1982                   101        113           107         111      114

1983                    99        112           107         110      110

1984                    99        116           116         116      112

1985                    99        103           91          100      104


Selected months, 1985/6

June 1985                         113          114          114      112

July 1985                          98           93           96       96

October 1985                       92           81           89       96

December 1985                      99           83           94      101

February* 1986                    104           88           99      108

March* 1986                       107           92          103      110



*   Forecast,   assuming 1.5 percent monthly inflation during January—April
    1986.

Source: Economic Advisor, Ministry of Finance, based on National

            Insurance Institute data.
Figure 1. Inflation, External Dependence, and Growth

500
 C
 0                                                                 I


400                                  INFLATION

                                1=   1st half of year
300
                            II = 2nd half of year


200



100
                           II
                                                             II

     0
%
20



16



12



 8



 4




 8




 6



 4



 2




 0


         Avg.    73   75        77       79       81    83    85
         65-72
                                  - 42   -




 Figure 2. Monthly Inflation Rates, 1983-1985



Percent
 28




 20




          1     7         1        7            1    7

              1983                1984              1985
                C)   L)   C)                  LX.)        0                  C)        C)           C)        C)   C)   r-)           C.)             C.)
                                                                      C-C.
         C-C.
                                    000




                                                          .
                                        L
suortq                         .
$                                                                                                                                                           I
                               ..
                                              .                                        ...                    :.



                                       ....
                                                  pr.     ————
                                                               k                       ....
                                                                                              ...
                                                                                                                                                            I
                               s....                                                                                                                        I
                                                     ..                                                                                                         -

                               ..                         ..
                                                                                                    V                                                 r         43
                                                                                                                                                                -




                                                                                                                                     V        I.




                                                                                                         C)

                                                                                                                                     ,,-'> LU—4




                                                                 $-4 C)                                  4)             ><     -
                                                                                  .0                                    C.)    C.)


                                                              C)4)                                                      C-C.
                                                                                                                               0            bC.C),—
                (I
                                   - t7   -




                               \NN
 C
                           .                         ......
                                                                  U)j    C)


                                                                         C)
 P
                                                                         C)
 C

 C)
                                                                  0
 r
 U)
 C
 0
      c_-i

 U)
      —
 U)
 C)
 n    o                                             ,___
                                                                         C)
C)-




U)
C)

m
C)
  -

      —
      1
        -                                           /,___
                                                                         Cr



<
C)    r
      C)


      P
  -                    :

OC
               :




r
                                              ..
        —
      fr



                                                        \
-• o
c     C)
      o            I   .                            zcz                 I
x
—
P
      —                                                           (     c-U)
C)                                                                      PC)
                                                              7
                                                                  CA)

C)
1
              9                9               9              0
              0
              C)               .
                               0
             prices) 1984 (constant
                                               0
                                               ND



             month per billions I.St.
                                           - 45     -




Figure 5. Gross and Net Real Wage Movements, 1980/1-1986/I
              (Indices: 1980 = 100)



130




120




110




100


                                      S GROSS

                             o—--——o NET
90

               IV            IV            IV            IV                IV       IV
                    I             I                           I   i             I   I
                                                                                85 A
          I     I                               I



       1980             81            82            83                84
                                                                                        86.1
                                                                                forecast
                                       — 46


                                   REFERENCES



Bruno, M. (1984). "External Shocks and Domestic Response: Israel's Macro-

         economic Performance, 1965—1982," Jerusalem: Falk Institute

         Discussion Paper No. 84.01.

         (1984). "An Anchor for Economic Stability," unpublished memo,

         October.

         arid S. Fischer (1984). "The Inflationary Process in Israel: Shocks

         and Accommodation," Jerusalem: Falk Institute Discussion Paper No.

         84.06.

Dornbusch, R. (1986). "Stopping Hyperinflation: Lessons from the German

         Experience in the          forthcoming in J.Bossons and S.Fischer

         eds.), Essays in Honour of Franco Modigliani, M.I.T.

Fraenkel, M., M. Sokoler, and S. Piterman (1984). "Principles of a Plan

         for Rapid Disinflation," Riva'on Lekalkala (Economic Quarterly),

         123, December (Hebrew).

Horn, H., and T. Persson (1985). "Exchange Rate Policy, Wage Formation and

         Credibility," Stockholm: Institute for International Economic

         Studies, Seminar Paper No. 325, April.

Litwin, U.,, L. Meridor, and A. Spivak (1984). "Inflation and Money Forma-

         tion in Israel," Jerusalem: Bank of Israel Research Department

         Discussion Paper No. 84.04, March (Hebrew).

Liviatan, N. (1984). "The Dollarization Plan," Riva'on Lekalkala (Economic

         Quarterly), 119, January (Hebrew).

     ,    and S. Piterman (1984). "Acceleration of Inflation and Balance of

         Payments Crises: Israel 1973—1984," Jerusalem: Bank of Israel

         Research Department, Discussion Paper No. 84.04, March.
                                  — 47 —


Melnick,   R., and M. Sokoler (1984). "The Government's Revenue from Money

      Creation and the Inflationary Effects of a Decline in the Rate of

      Growth of GNP," Journal of Monetary Economics, 13 (No. 2, March):

      225—236.

Sargent, T. (1982). "The Ends of Four Big Inflations", in R. E. Hall

      (ed.), Inflation: Causes and Effects, University of Chicago Press.

Shiffer, Z. F. (1982). "Money and Inflation in Israel: The Transition of

      an Economy to High Inflation," Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of

      St. Louis, 65 (No. 7, August—September), 28—40.

Sussman, Z. (1982). "Is Growth Possible?" Riva'on Lekalkala (Economic

      Quarterly), 113 (June), Hebrew.

Yariv, D. (1985). "Estimates of Inflationary Expectations, 1984—85," Jeru-

      salem: Bank of Israel Research Department, August (Hebrew draft).
