                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE SPREAD OF MANUFACTURING TO THE POOR PERIPHERY 1870--2007

                                         Agustín S. Bénétrix
                                         Kevin H. O'Rourke
                                        Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                        Working Paper 18221
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18221


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement no.
249546. For help with collecting the data, we are grateful to Alberto Baffigi, Ivan Berend, Luis Bértola,
Steve Broadberry, Albert Carreras, Myung So Cha, Roberto Cortés Conde, Alan de Bromhead, Niamh
Devitt, Rafa Dobado, Giovanni Federico, David Greasley, Ola Grytten, Gregg Huff, Elise Huillery,
Martin Ivanov, Isao Kamata, Duol Kim, John Komlos, Toru Kubo, Pedro Lains, John Lampe, Sibylle
Lehmann, Carol Leonard, Debin Ma, Graciela Marquéz, Matthias Morys, Aldo Musacchio, Noel Maurer,
Ian McLean, Branko Milanovic, Steve Morgan, José Antonio Ocampo, Roger Owen, Les Oxley, Sevket
Pamuk, Dwight Perkins, Guido Porto, Leandro Prados de la Escosura, Tom Rawski, Jim Robinson,
Max Schulze, Martin Shanahan, Alan Taylor, Pierre van der Eng, Ulrich Woitek, and Vera Zamagni.
We are also grateful for the comments from Michael Clemens, and participants at the the UW Development
Seminar (May 10 2012), the Trade and History conference (Madrid May 17, 2012), the WEHC session
on Industrialization (Stellenbosch July 11 2012), and the Arndt-Corden Seminar (ANU December
11 2012). The usual disclaimer applies.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Agustín S. Bénétrix, Kevin H. O'Rourke, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Spread of Manufacturing to the Poor Periphery 1870--2007
Agustín S. Bénétrix, Kevin H. O'Rourke, and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 18221
July 2012, Revised August 2013
JEL No. F1,N7,O2

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper documents industrial output growth around the poor periphery (Latin America, the European
periphery, the Middle East and North Africa, Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa) between 1870 and 2007.
We find that although the roots of rapid peripheral industrialization stretch into the late 19th century,
the high point of peripheral industrialization was the 1950-1973 period, which saw widespread import-
substituting industrialization. This period was also the high point of unconditional industrial catching
up, defined as the tendency of less industrialized countries to post higher per capita manufacturing
growth rates, and which occurred between 1920 and 1990.


Agustín S. Bénétrix                                 Jeffrey G. Williamson
Department of Economics and IIIS                    350 South Hamilton Street #1002
Trinity College                                     Madison, WI 53703
Dublin                                              and Harvard University and CEPR
abenetrix@gmail.com                                 and also NBER
                                                    jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu
Kevin H. O'Rourke
All Souls College
Oxford University
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
1.	  Introduction	  
	  
	        Ever	  since	  the	  British	  Industrial	  Revolution,	  the	  transition	  to	  modern	  
economic	  growth	  has	  been	  associated	  with	  industrialisation.	  New	  labour-­‐saving	  
and	  energy-­‐using	  technologies	  first	  originated	  in	  Britain,	  and	  then	  spread	  with	  a	  
lag	  to	  countries	  such	  as	  Belgium	  and	  France	  in	  continental	  Europe	  and	  North	  
America	  (Allen	  2009).	  The	  initial	  impact	  was	  a	  Great	  Divergence	  in	  living	  
standards	  between	  Western	  Europe	  and	  its	  New	  World	  offshoots,	  on	  the	  one	  
hand,	  and	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world	  on	  the	  other.	  This	  divergence	  is	  now	  being	  eroded	  
as	  developing	  economies	  rapidly	  industrialise	  (Maddison	  2010).	  But	  when	  did	  
modern	  manufacturing	  first	  begin	  to	  spread	  to	  various	  regions	  in	  the	  developing	  
world?	  Was	  it	  only	  during	  the	  “second	  globalization”	  of	  the	  1990s	  and	  2000s,	  or	  
can	  we	  also	  find	  traces	  of	  it	  during	  the	  “first	  globalization”	  of	  the	  late	  19th	  
century?	  In	  both	  periods	  international	  economic	  integration	  may	  have	  helped	  
developing	  countries	  import	  new	  technologies,	  exploit	  their	  lower	  labour	  costs,	  
and	  import	  those	  raw	  materials	  with	  which	  they	  were	  poorly	  endowed	  (Wright	  
1990).	  Or	  are	  the	  roots	  of	  developing	  world	  industrialisation	  to	  be	  found	  in	  the	  
long	  period	  of	  world	  deglobalization	  which	  began	  in	  1914,	  and	  saw	  two	  world	  
wars,	  the	  Great	  Depression,	  the	  breakdown	  of	  formal	  and	  informal	  empires,	  and	  
import-­‐substituting	  industrialization	  (ISI)?	  Trade	  may	  have	  made	  it	  difficult	  for	  
developing	  countries	  to	  compete	  with	  established	  industries	  in	  richer	  countries	  
(Williamson	  2011a),	  and	  the	  breakdown	  of	  the	  19th	  century	  international	  
division	  of	  labour,	  which	  saw	  the	  industrial	  core	  economies	  export	  manufactures	  
and	  import	  food	  and	  raw	  materials	  (Robertson	  1938,	  Lewis	  1978),	  may	  have	  
favoured	  developing	  world	  industrialization.	  
           This	  paper	  documents	  the	  historical	  origins	  of	  developing	  world	  
industrialisation,	  drawing	  on	  a	  vast	  amount	  of	  work	  by	  economic	  historians	  in	  
recent	  decades.	  It	  finds	  that	  the	  roots	  of	  this	  industrialisation	  stretch	  surprisingly	  
far	  back	  into	  the	  past,	  before	  1890	  in	  several	  cases.	  By	  the	  interwar	  period	  rapid	  
industrialization	  can	  be	  found	  in	  all	  major	  regions	  of	  the	  developing	  world,	  and	  
this	  continued	  into	  the	  post-­‐war	  ISI	  period.	  Indeed,	  industrial	  growth	  between	  
1920	  and	  1990	  was	  faster	  in	  developing	  countries	  than	  in	  the	  leading	  industrial	  




	                                                                  2	  
economies,	  implying	  that	  poor	  countries	  were	  increasing	  their	  share	  of	  world	  
manufacturing	  output	  throughout	  the	  period.	  
                                                            The	  paper	  also	  documents	  per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  in	  the	  
developing	  world,	  which	  can	  be	  compared	  with	  per	  capita	  growth	  rates	  in	  the	  
leading	  industrial	  economies	  in	  order	  to	  see	  when	  peripheral	  “industrial	  catching	  
up”	  on	  the	  core	  economies	  first	  began.1	  It	  is	  important	  to	  stress	  that	  these	  per	  
capita	  growth	  rates	  reflect	  both	  manufacturing	  productivity	  growth	  and	  
structural	  change	  (i.e.	  changes	  in	  the	  share	  of	  the	  labour	  force	  employed	  in	  
manufacturing).2	  The	  “industrial	  catching	  up”	  which	  we	  document	  is	  thus	  not	  
comparable	  with	  the	  manufacturing	  productivity	  convergence	  which	  is	  the	  focus	  
of	  Rodrik	  (2013a),	  or	  with	  the	  aggregate	  productivity	  convergence	  which	  has	  
been	  the	  focus	  of	  many	  other	  studies.	  Whether	  or	  not	  developing	  countries	  were	  
experiencing	  industrial	  catching	  up	  as	  we	  have	  defined	  it	  is	  nonetheless	  
important,	  since	  shifting	  resources	  into	  manufacturing,	  and	  increasing	  
manufacturing	  productivity,	  were	  both	  key	  components	  of	  industrialization,	  and	  
have	  been	  ever	  since	  the	  British	  Industrial	  Revolution	  (Crafts	  1985).	  Indeed,	  
structural	  change	  has	  at	  times	  been	  an	  extremely	  important	  driver	  of	  overall	  
living	  standards	  (Temin	  2002,	  Rodrik	  2013b).	  We	  are	  thus	  interested	  in	  
documenting	  when	  industrial	  catching	  up	  occurred,	  since	  this	  was	  an	  important	  
potential	  contributor	  to	  aggregate	  productivity	  and	  living	  standards	  
convergence.	  We	  find	  surprisingly	  early	  evidence	  of	  industrial	  catching	  up,	  
particularly	  between	  1920	  and	  1990.	  	  
	                                                          	  
2.	  The	  Industrial	  Output	  Data	  
	  
            We	  have	  collected	  manufacturing	  and	  industrial	  output	  data	  for	  as	  many	  
countries	  between	  1870	  and	  2007	  as	  the	  historical	  records	  permit.	  We	  have	  
preferred	  manufacturing	  to	  industrial	  output	  whenever	  possible.	  We	  have	  also	  
preferred	  value	  added	  to	  gross	  output	  whenever	  possible.	  The	  latter	  choice	  was	  
driven	  entirely	  by	  the	  need	  for	  consistency:	  since	  Paul	  Bairoch’s	  (1982)	  
pioneering	  work,	  scholars	  across	  the	  world	  have	  been	  building	  historical	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
1	  	  As	  will	  become	  clear	  below,	  we	  use	  manufacturing	  data	  whenever	  possible,	  but	  in	  some	  cases	  

are	  obliged	  to	  use	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  instead.	  
2	  	  Indeed,	  since	  these	  are	  per	  capita	  rather	  than	  per	  worker	  growth	  rates,	  they	  also	  reflect	  

changes	  in	  the	  labour	  force	  participation	  rate.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3	  
national	  accounts	  that	  have	  pushed	  back	  our	  quantitative	  knowledge	  of	  
periphery-­‐country	  GDP	  and	  its	  components	  into	  the	  interwar	  or	  even	  pre-­‐1914	  
period.	  Where	  these	  national	  accounts	  have	  been	  reconstructed	  using	  the	  output	  
approach,	  the	  results	  have	  yielded	  value	  added	  in	  constant	  prices	  for	  the	  
manufacturing	  (or	  industrial)	  sector.	  For	  this	  reason,	  we	  start	  with	  the	  
manufacturing	  value	  added	  data	  provided	  by	  the	  World	  Bank’s	  World	  
Development	  Indicators,	  supplemented	  by	  the	  United	  Nation’s	  Industrial	  
Statistics	  Database.3	  Other	  frequently	  used	  sources	  include	  Smits,	  Woltjer	  and	  
Ma	  (2009),	  the	  Montevideo-­‐Oxford	  Latin	  American	  Economic	  History	  Database,	  
and	  the	  United	  Nation’s	  historical	  trade	  statistics	  database.4	  As	  we	  went	  further	  
back	  in	  time,	  we	  relied	  increasingly	  on	  individual	  country	  sources,	  and	  on	  recent	  
and	  ongoing	  work	  by	  many	  generous	  colleagues.5	  A	  data	  appendix	  details	  the	  
sources	  used	  for	  each	  country	  and	  time	  period.	  The	  underlying	  data	  are	  available	  
on	  request.	  
                                                            We	  focus	  on	  eight	  periods,	  each	  with	  distinctive	  characteristics.	  The	  years	  
before	  World	  War	  1	  are	  divided	  into	  two	  sub-­‐periods,	  before	  and	  after	  1890,	  
both	  of	  which	  made	  up	  the	  crescendo	  of	  the	  first	  global	  century	  with	  trade	  
booms,	  liberal	  commercial	  policy,	  fixed	  exchange	  rates,	  and	  falling	  transport	  
costs.	  The	  years	  from	  1913	  to	  1920	  saw	  the	  First	  World	  War,	  blockades	  and	  
submarine	  warfare,	  the	  withdrawal	  of	  European	  manufacturers	  from	  many	  
peripheral	  markets,	  and	  economic	  chaos	  in	  the	  immediate	  aftermath	  of	  the	  
fighting.	  The	  interwar	  period	  from	  1920	  to	  1938	  saw	  a	  Great	  Depression,	  a	  
collapse	  of	  world	  trade,	  and	  anti-­‐global	  restrictions.	  The	  years	  between	  1938	  and	  
1950	  saw	  another	  world	  war,	  leading	  yet	  again	  to	  a	  complete	  disruption	  of	  
normal	  trade	  patterns	  and	  a	  reorientation	  of	  industry	  first	  towards,	  and	  then	  
away	  from,	  the	  needs	  of	  a	  wartime	  economy.	  The	  years	  from	  1950	  to	  1973	  saw	  
post-­‐war	  reconstruction	  in	  the	  former	  belligerents,	  and	  decolonisation	  and	  ISI	  
policies	  in	  the	  periphery.	  The	  period	  following	  the	  oil	  crises	  from	  1973	  to	  1990	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
3	  	  Available	  on	  CD	  from	  the	  United	  Nations.	  
4	  	  Available	  at	  http://www.rug.nl/feb/onderzoek/onderzoekscentra/ggdc/data/hna,	  

http://oxlad.qeh.ox.ac.uk/	  and	  http://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/imts/historical_data.htm	  
respectively.	  
5	  	  These	  are	  listed	  in	  the	  acknowledgments.	  For	  some	  countries	  and	  time	  periods	  we	  relied	  on	  the	  

same	  sources	  as	  Williamson	  (2010,	  2011b),	  but	  the	  present	  dataset	  is	  sufficiently	  different	  that	  
the	  data	  appendix	  here	  is	  self-­‐contained.	  	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4	  
can	  be	  viewed	  as	  a	  period	  of	  policy	  transition	  for	  the	  poor	  periphery,	  which	  
ended	  with	  the	  second	  period	  of	  globalization	  between	  1990	  and	  2007.	  	  
                                                            There	  are	  163	  countries	  in	  the	  1990-­‐2007	  sample.	  Naturally,	  the	  farther	  
back	  into	  the	  past	  we	  go,	  the	  fewer	  are	  the	  countries	  whose	  manufacturing	  
growth	  we	  can	  document,	  and	  the	  smaller	  are	  the	  samples.	  	  Thus,	  our	  sample	  
falls	  to	  131	  countries	  in	  1973-­‐1990,	  and	  to	  91	  in	  1950-­‐1973.	  	  We	  have	  
information	  for	  49	  countries	  in	  the	  World	  War	  2	  period	  (1938-­‐1950),	  45	  
countries	  in	  the	  interwar	  period	  (1920-­‐1938),	  35	  countries	  in	  the	  World	  War	  1	  
period	  (1913-­‐1920),	  31	  in	  the	  1890-­‐1913	  period,	  and	  21	  countries	  in	  the	  1870-­‐
1890	  period.	  6	  The	  empirical	  analysis	  that	  follows	  will	  make	  an	  effort	  to	  deal	  with	  
the	  issue	  of	  changing	  sample	  size	  over	  time,	  by	  using	  both	  constant	  and	  variable	  
samples.	  	  
                                                            Before	  1890	  many	  of	  our	  developing	  country	  data	  come	  from	  the	  
European	  periphery,	  but	  even	  for	  this	  period	  we	  also	  have	  data	  for	  Japan,	  British	  
India	  (including	  present-­‐day	  Pakistan	  and	  Bangladesh),	  Dutch	  Indonesia,	  Siam	  
(Thailand),	  Argentina,	  Brazil,	  Chile,	  Uruguay	  and	  Ottoman	  Turkey.	  After	  1890,	  we	  
can	  add	  China,	  Korea,	  Burma,	  the	  Philippines,	  Taiwan,	  Colombia,	  Mexico	  and	  
Peru	  to	  this	  list.	  And	  by	  the	  interwar	  period,	  we	  have	  information	  for	  six	  
additional	  Latin	  American	  countries,	  as	  well	  as	  for	  Egypt,	  what	  was	  then	  known	  
as	  the	  Belgian	  Congo,	  and	  South	  Africa.	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  other	  countries	  were	  
experiencing	  modern	  industrialization	  before	  they	  started	  to	  collect	  industrial	  
statistics,	  what	  we	  are	  documenting	  here	  understates	  the	  early	  spread	  of	  modern	  
manufacturing.	  	  
                                                            Although	  the	  econometric	  analysis	  in	  Section	  6	  uses	  country/time	  
observations,	  the	  tables	  and	  figures	  below	  typically	  report	  the	  evidence	  by	  six	  
regions.	  The	  first	  “region”	  includes	  the	  three	  traditional	  industrial	  leaders:	  the	  
United	  Kingdom	  (UK),	  Germany	  and	  the	  US.	  The	  second	  includes	  those	  in	  the	  
poor	  European	  periphery	  to	  the	  south	  and	  east.	  The	  remaining	  four	  poor	  
periphery	  groups	  are	  the	  Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa	  (MENA),	  Asia,	  sub-­‐
Saharan	  Africa,	  and	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  (hereafter	  simply	  Latin	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
6	  	  We	  exclude	  countries	  with	  only	  two	  or	  three	  data	  points	  in	  a	  period,	  since	  we	  could	  not	  

meaningfully	  estimate	  growth	  rates	  for	  these.	  In	  an	  earlier	  draft,	  we	  used	  all	  available	  
observations,	  which	  increased	  the	  sample	  sizes	  somewhat,	  but	  the	  results	  were	  the	  same.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5	  
America).7	  We	  will	  occasionally	  refer	  to	  these	  last	  four	  regions	  and	  the	  European	  
periphery	  as	  “the	  poor	  periphery”,	  or	  as	  “followers”,	  contrasting	  the	  experience	  
of	  these	  five	  regions	  with	  those	  of	  the	  industrial	  leaders,	  referred	  to	  as	  “the	  core”,	  
or	  as	  “leaders”.	  
	  
3.	  When	  and	  where	  did	  growth	  begin?	  
	  
         When	  did	  individual	  countries	  and	  entire	  regions	  start	  recording	  rapid	  
manufacturing	  output	  growth?	  Tables	  1	  and	  2	  provide	  some	  answers.	  The	  
growth	  rates	  reported	  there	  are	  computed	  by	  regressing	  the	  log	  of	  real	  
manufacturing	  output	  during	  the	  period	  in	  question	  on	  a	  time	  trend.	  Appendix	  
Table	  A.1	  supplies	  the	  details	  for	  each	  country,	  but	  Tables	  1-­‐2	  summarize	  this	  
information	  in	  a	  more	  digestible	  fashion.	  Table	  1	  reports	  average	  annual	  growth	  
rates	  of	  industrial	  output	  in	  our	  six	  regions	  and	  eight	  time	  periods	  between	  1870	  
and	  2007.	  In	  each	  case,	  the	  regional	  growth	  rate	  is	  a	  simple	  unweighted	  average	  
of	  individual	  country	  growth	  rates.	  
                                                            Since	  the	  country	  samples	  change	  over	  time,	  Table	  1	  should	  be	  used	  only	  
for	  growth	  rate	  comparisons	  between	  regions	  in	  any	  given	  period.	  Of	  course,	  we	  
can	  only	  compute	  growth	  rates	  where	  output	  data	  are	  available,	  and	  one	  can	  
surmise	  that	  where	  output	  data	  are	  missing	  for	  the	  earlier	  periods,	  there	  was	  
probably	  not	  much	  modern	  manufacturing	  to	  measure.	  For	  example,	  according	  
to	  Table	  1,	  there	  was	  an	  unweighted	  average	  manufacturing	  growth	  rate	  of	  4.2	  
per	  cent	  per	  annum	  in	  Asia	  between	  1890	  and	  1913.	  This	  figure	  represents	  an	  
average	  of	  Japan,	  China,	  British	  India,	  Indonesia,	  Korea,	  Burma,	  the	  Philippines,	  
Taiwan	  and	  Thailand.	  	  These	  nine	  countries	  account	  for	  a	  very	  large	  share	  of	  the	  
late	  nineteenth	  century	  Asian	  economy,	  but	  it	  might	  be	  reasonable	  to	  assume	  
that	  the	  average	  Asian	  industrial	  growth	  rate	  was	  in	  fact	  lower	  than	  4.2	  per	  cent	  
during	  this	  period,	  reflecting	  lower	  rates	  in	  those	  countries	  for	  which	  we	  do	  not	  
have	  data.	  Table	  1	  tells	  us	  for	  each	  region	  and	  each	  period	  that	  there	  were	  
countries	  there	  growing,	  on	  average,	  at	  the	  stated	  rate:	  in	  other	  words,	  that	  
industrial	  growth	  was	  taking	  place	  somewhere	  in	  that	  region	  at	  this	  rate	  during	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
7	  These	  five	  periphery	  regions	  certainly	  deserved	  the	  label	  “poor”.	  In	  1913,	  their	  per	  capita	  

incomes	  relative	  to	  the	  three	  leaders	  (100)	  were:	  Eastern	  Europe	  34.4	  and	  Southern	  Europe	  42.3;	  
Latin	  America	  32.3;	  Middle	  East	  22.5;	  Asia	  16.3;	  and	  Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  13.8	  (Maddison	  2010).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6	  
this	  particular	  time	  period.	  Which	  countries	  were	  involved,	  and	  how	  typical	  their	  
experience	  might	  have	  been	  of	  the	  region	  as	  a	  whole,	  is	  an	  issue	  to	  which	  we	  will	  
return	  below.	  	  
           Table	  2	  focuses	  instead	  on	  comparisons	  between	  periods.	  For	  each	  region	  
and	  pair	  of	  contiguous	  periods,	  we	  take	  the	  largest	  sample	  of	  countries	  for	  which	  
we	  have	  data	  for	  both	  periods,	  and	  then	  compute	  the	  change	  in	  average	  growth	  
rates	  between	  them.	  The	  two	  war	  epochs	  were	  so	  atypical	  that	  we	  exclude	  them	  
from	  the	  table:	  it	  is	  more	  meaningful	  in	  our	  view	  to	  compare	  the	  1890-­‐1913	  and	  
1920-­‐38	  periods,	  for	  example,	  than	  to	  compare	  either	  or	  these	  periods	  with	  
World	  War	  1.	  For	  example,	  we	  have	  data	  for	  four	  Asian	  countries	  in	  both	  1870-­‐
90	  and	  1890-­‐1913	  (Japan,	  India,	  Indonesia	  and	  Thailand).	  The	  average	  growth	  
rate	  for	  those	  four	  countries	  was	  1.2	  percentage	  points	  higher	  after	  1890	  than	  
before.	  These	  comparisons	  are	  meaningful,	  being	  based	  on	  consistent	  samples	  in	  
contiguous	  periods.	  Since	  we	  have	  data	  for	  more	  countries	  in	  later	  periods,	  the	  
sample	  size	  of	  the	  constant-­‐sample	  pairs	  used	  in	  these	  comparisons	  increases	  
over	  time.	  Appendix	  Table	  A.2	  reports	  comparisons	  based	  on	  sample	  sizes	  which	  
remain	  constant	  over	  time.	  Broadly	  speaking,	  the	  same	  stylized	  facts	  emerge	  
from	  the	  appendix	  table	  as	  do	  from	  Table	  2,	  which	  uses	  as	  much	  information	  as	  
possible.	  
                                 Table	  1:	  Average	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  




                                                                                                                               	  
Note:	  The	  table	  reports	  unweighted	  average	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  by	  region.	  
Individual	  country	  growth	  rates	  are	  computed	  as	  the	  β	  coefficient	  of	  the	  following	  
regression:	  Y=α+βt	  where	  Y	  is	  the	  natural	  logarithm	  of	  industrial	  production	  and	  t	  is	  a	  
linear	  time	  trend.	  Regressions	  are	  performed	  only	  where	  at	  least	  four	  observations	  are	  
present.	  Leaders	  are	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  while	  Leaders*	  are	  US	  and	  Germany,	  plus	  UK	  
before	  1939,	  Japan	  after.	  Asia*	  is	  Asia	  excluding	  Japan.	  
                                                                          	  




	                                                                7	  
                    Table	  2.	  Industrial	  growth	  accelerations	  and	  decelerations	  




                                                                                                                                       	  
Note:	  The	  table	  reports	  the	  average	  difference	  in	  regions’	  growth	  rates	  between	  
successive	  sub-­‐periods.	  Note	  that	  successive	  columns	  provide	  the	  comparison	  for	  
progressively	  larger	  samples	  of	  countries.	  	  Leaders	  are	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  while	  
Leaders*	  are	  US	  and	  Germany,	  plus	  UK	  before	  1939,	  Japan	  after.	  Asia*	  is	  Asia	  excluding	  
Japan.	  
	  
	  
            Finally,	  Tables	  1	  and	  2	  are	  based	  on	  growth	  rates	  for	  all	  countries	  barring	  
those	  with	  fewer	  than	  four	  observations	  in	  a	  period,	  a	  liberal	  inclusion	  criterion.	  
Tables	  A.3-­‐A.5	  present	  results	  based	  on	  a	  sample	  which	  includes	  only	  countries	  
with	  observations	  for	  more	  than	  half	  the	  years	  in	  the	  given	  period,	  a	  more	  
conservative	  inclusion	  criterion.	  These	  appendix	  tables	  yield	  results	  very	  similar	  
to	  those	  presented	  in	  the	  text.	  In	  short,	  our	  results	  seem	  robust	  to	  the	  country	  
samples	  used.	  
            Tables	  1	  and	  2	  use	  two	  definitions	  of	  the	  country	  groupings.	  The	  first	  one	  
uses	  the	  same	  industrial	  leaders	  throughout	  -­‐-­‐	  the	  UK,	  Germany,	  and	  the	  United	  
States.	  The	  second	  one,	  on	  the	  other	  hand,	  recognizes	  that	  the	  UK	  was	  no	  longer	  
an	  industrial	  leader	  in	  the	  post-­‐World	  War	  2	  era,	  while	  Japan	  was.	  The	  three	  
industrial	  leaders	  from	  1950	  onwards	  are	  thus	  taken	  to	  be	  the	  US,	  Germany,	  and	  
Japan.	  Of	  course	  this	  means	  that	  Japan	  has	  to	  be	  removed	  from	  the	  Asian	  group	  
after	  1939.	  	  
            What	  do	  these	  data	  tell	  us?	  
            Growth	  among	  the	  leaders	  was	  fairly	  steady	  between	  1870	  and	  1913,	  
averaging	  3.1-­‐3.4	  per	  cent	  per	  annum,	  followed	  by	  a	  decline	  to	  1.4	  during	  the	  
World	  War	  1	  and	  1.9	  per	  cent	  during	  the	  interwar	  period	  when	  the	  Great	  
Depression	  did	  so	  much	  damage	  to	  the	  leaders’	  manufacturing	  sectors	  (Table	  1).	  
Manufacturing	  output	  in	  the	  three	  leaders	  was	  lower	  in	  1950	  than	  in	  1938,	  
although	  this	  is	  solely	  a	  function	  of	  the	  collapse	  in	  German	  output	  following	  its	  



	                                                                8	  
defeat	  in	  World	  2	  (Table	  A1).	  The	  table	  confirms	  the	  impressive	  industry-­‐led	  
“growth	  miracle”	  during	  1950-­‐73.	  If	  we	  maintain	  the	  same	  three	  leaders	  into	  the	  
postwar	  era,	  their	  growth	  reached	  5.2	  per	  cent	  per	  annum	  during	  the	  growth	  
miracle;	  if	  instead	  the	  UK	  is	  replaced	  by	  Japan,	  leader	  growth	  rates	  reached	  7.9	  
per	  cent	  per	  annum.	  These	  were,	  of	  course,	  the	  years	  of	  the	  German	  
Wirtschaftswunder	  and	  the	  Japanese	  postwar	  growth	  miracle.	  Since	  1973,	  
however,	  growth	  in	  the	  three	  post-­‐war	  leaders	  has	  only	  averaged	  slightly	  more	  
than	  2	  per	  cent	  per	  annum,	  and	  it	  was	  only	  1.1	  per	  cent	  during	  1973-­‐1990	  if	  the	  
UK	  is	  included	  among	  the	  leaders.	  This	  leaders’	  slow	  down	  must	  have	  been	  in	  
part	  due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  war	  reconstruction	  forces	  were	  exhausted,	  and	  to	  the	  
poor	  macroeconomic	  conditions	  following	  the	  oil	  crises.	  But	  long-­‐term	  
deindustrialization	  forces	  were	  probably	  playing	  the	  bigger	  role,	  as	  suggested	  by	  
the	  continued	  slow	  industrial	  growth	  between	  1990	  and	  2007	  (Table	  1).	  
           Our	  main	  interest,	  however,	  is	  in	  the	  performance	  of	  the	  periphery.	  The	  
most	  striking	  finding	  to	  emerge	  from	  these	  tables	  is	  perhaps	  the	  strong	  
performance	  of	  Latin	  America	  since	  1870.	  Latin	  America	  was	  one	  of	  the	  earliest	  
regions	  to	  experience	  rapid	  manufacturing	  growth,	  with	  growth	  rates	  of	  6.4	  per	  
cent	  from	  1870	  to	  1890,	  and	  4.4	  per	  cent	  from	  1890	  to	  World	  War	  1.	  Indeed,	  
Latin	  American	  growth	  rates	  were	  faster	  than	  those	  in	  the	  three	  leading	  
industrial	  economies	  during	  all	  five	  periods	  before	  1950	  (although	  its	  growth	  
rates	  were	  slowing	  over	  time:	  Table	  2).	  Growth	  was	  very	  rapid	  during	  both	  
World	  War	  2	  and	  the	  1950-­‐1973	  ISI	  period,	  in	  excess	  of	  5	  per	  cent	  per	  annum.	  
Since	  1973	  its	  growth	  rate	  slowed	  significantly,	  however,	  to	  less	  than	  three	  per	  
cent,	  and	  it	  slowed	  again	  after	  1990.	  After	  1990,	  Latin	  American	  manufacturing	  
growth	  of	  2.2	  per	  cent	  resembled	  that	  of	  a	  rich	  country	  that	  had	  completed	  its	  
industrialization	  phase.	  In	  contrast,	  Asia,	  MENA,	  and	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  all	  saw	  
much	  higher	  growth	  rates	  after	  1990	  –	  around	  4	  per	  cent	  per	  annum	  –	  a	  more	  
impressive	  performance,	  but	  also	  one	  consistent	  with	  their	  being	  comparative	  
late-­‐comers.	  
           The	  European	  periphery	  was	  the	  second	  earliest	  rapid	  industrialiser,	  with	  
per	  annum	  growth	  rates	  of	  4.7-­‐5	  per	  cent	  before	  World	  War	  1,	  4.7	  per	  cent	  
during	  the	  interwar	  period,	  and	  as	  much	  as	  8.9	  per	  cent	  during	  the	  European	  
Golden	  Age.	  Indeed,	  the	  European	  periphery	  growth	  rate	  exceeded	  that	  of	  the	  


	                                                                9	  
leaders	  during	  every	  period	  in	  our	  sample,	  with	  the	  exception	  of	  World	  War	  1,	  
when	  European	  peripheral	  industrial	  production	  collapsed.	  
           While	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  European	  periphery	  were	  both	  rapidly	  
industrialising	  from	  1870	  onwards,	  other	  regions	  started	  seeing	  such	  
manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  only	  after	  1890.	  The	  quarter-­‐century	  before	  World	  
War	  1	  saw	  the	  beginning	  of	  very	  rapid	  industrialization	  in	  Asia,	  whose	  growth	  
rates	  exceeded	  those	  of	  the	  industrial	  leaders	  in	  all	  subsequent	  periods,	  except	  
for	  1938-­‐1950.	  The	  years	  between	  1890	  and	  1913	  emerge	  as	  ones	  of	  impressive	  
industrialization	  in	  the	  poor	  periphery:	  with	  the	  exception	  of	  MENA	  
(represented	  here	  by	  Turkey	  alone),	  and	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  (for	  which	  we	  have	  
no	  data),	  average	  growth	  rates	  were	  in	  excess	  of	  4	  per	  cent	  in	  all	  periphery	  
regions,	  and	  greater	  than	  in	  the	  industrial	  core.	  	  
       Table	  3.	  Industrial	  growth	  in	  early	  members	  of	  the	  “modern	  growth	  club”	  




                                                                                                                                	  
Note:	  “In”	  indicates	  the	  first	  year	  that	  a	  country	  experienced	  a	  10-­‐year	  average	  
backward	  looking	  growth	  rate	  greater	  than	  5	  per	  cent.	  Sources:	  Tables	  A.1	  and	  A.6.	  
	  
           We	  stress	  again	  that	  these	  growth	  rates	  are	  only	  computed	  for	  those	  
countries	  for	  which	  we	  have	  the	  data,	  and	  one	  can	  presume	  that	  industrial	  



	                                                              10	  
growth	  rates	  were	  lower	  in	  countries	  for	  which	  data	  are	  lacking.	  What	  the	  data	  
show	  clearly,	  however,	  is	  that	  there	  were	  countries	  in	  all	  continents	  bar	  Africa	  
where	  industrialization	  was	  proceeding	  rapidly	  before	  1914.	  Table	  3	  tells	  us	  
something	  about	  which	  countries	  these	  were.	  It	  provides	  the	  growth	  rates	  for	  the	  
five	  original	  rapid	  industrialisers	  in	  each	  peripheral	  region,	  by	  period.	  The	  
regional	  leaders	  are	  ordered	  according	  to	  how	  early	  they	  first	  achieved	  a	  10	  year	  
average	  growth	  rate	  of	  5	  per	  cent	  or	  higher.8	  Latin	  America	  was	  led	  by	  Chile,	  
Brazil,	  Argentina,	  Uruguay	  and	  Mexico,	  while	  the	  European	  periphery	  was	  led	  by	  
Finland,	  Russia,	  Austria,	  Hungary,	  and	  Spain.	  These	  countries	  first	  achieved	  ten	  
years	  of	  5	  per	  cent	  average	  growth	  as	  early	  as	  the	  1880s,	  implying	  that	  rapid	  
growth	  began	  during	  the	  1870s.	  Asia	  was	  led	  by	  Japan	  and	  China,	  with	  the	  
Philippines,	  Taiwan	  and	  Korea	  following	  close	  behind:	  all	  but	  Korea	  had	  joined	  
the	  “modern	  industrial	  growth	  club”,	  defined	  in	  this	  way,	  by	  the	  time	  of	  World	  
War	  1.	  	  
                                                            Industrial	  production	  suffered	  in	  Turkey	  and	  (as	  already	  noted)	  
peripheral	  Europe	  during	  World	  War	  1,	  but	  elsewhere	  continued	  growing	  
rapidly.	  Rapid	  industrial	  growth	  became	  universal	  during	  the	  interwar	  period:	  all	  
peripheral	  regions,	  with	  the	  exception	  of	  Latin	  America,	  posted	  average	  
manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  greater	  than	  4	  per	  cent	  during	  this	  period	  (Table	  1):	  
4.2	  per	  cent	  in	  Asia,	  4.6	  per	  cent	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  (where	  the	  data	  refer	  to	  
South	  Africa	  and	  the	  Belgian	  Congo),	  4.7	  per	  cent	  in	  the	  European	  periphery,	  and	  
4.9	  per	  cent	  in	  MENA.	  Indeed,	  Table	  2	  shows	  that	  growth	  rates	  in	  MENA	  and	  the	  
European	  periphery	  bucked	  the	  interwar	  downward	  trend	  in	  that	  they	  were	  
even	  higher	  between	  the	  wars	  than	  before	  1914.9	  While	  we	  have	  found	  no	  pre-­‐
war	  data	  for	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa,	  one	  can	  presume	  that	  the	  same	  was	  true	  there	  
as	  well.	  Only	  in	  Latin	  America	  did	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  decline	  significantly	  
between	  the	  wars,	  to	  2.8	  per	  cent	  per	  annum.	  	  
                                                            World	  War	  2	  led	  to	  substantial	  declines	  in	  manufacturing	  output	  in	  China,	  
Japan	  and	  other	  countries	  affected	  by	  the	  fighting,	  but	  elsewhere	  in	  the	  
periphery	  output	  grew	  rapidly.	  Manufacturing	  growth	  was	  uniformly	  high	  in	  the	  
periphery	  between	  1950	  and	  1973,	  and	  substantially	  higher	  than	  during	  the	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
8	  Details	  are	  given	  in	  Table	  A.6.	  
9	  Of	  course,	  the	  Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa	  sample	  is	  represented	  by	  Turkey	  alone.	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11	  
interwar	  period	  (Table	  2).	  It	  was	  over	  8	  per	  cent	  in	  the	  European	  periphery	  and	  
Asia	  (8.3	  per	  cent	  in	  the	  latter	  if	  Japan	  is	  included	  with	  the	  leaders),	  6.2	  per	  cent	  
in	  MENA,	  5.7	  per	  cent	  in	  Latin	  America,	  and	  5.5	  per	  cent	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  
These	  impressive	  performances	  were	  generally	  not	  sufficient	  to	  match	  post-­‐war	  
“miraculous”	  growth	  in	  the	  US,	  Germany	  and	  Japan	  (7.9	  per	  cent),	  but	  were	  
equivalent	  to	  or	  higher	  than	  the	  average	  growth	  rate	  in	  the	  US,	  UK	  and	  Germany	  
(5.2	  per	  cent),	  and	  much	  higher	  than	  the	  leaders’	  collective	  performance	  between	  
1870	  and	  1913	  (3.1-­‐3.4	  per	  cent	  per	  annum).	  	  
                                                            Strikingly,	  Table	  2	  shows	  that	  manufacturing	  growth	  declined	  in	  all	  
peripheral	  regions	  after	  1973,	  and	  again	  after	  1990,	  although	  it	  still	  remained	  
high	  in	  Asia,	  MENA	  and	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa,	  and	  was	  higher	  than	  in	  the	  leading	  
economies	  as	  well.10	  
                                                            In	  summary,	  rapid	  peripheral	  industrial	  growth	  began	  in	  Latin	  America	  
and	  the	  European	  periphery	  in	  the	  1870s.	  It	  spread	  to	  Asia	  after	  1890,	  and	  to	  
MENA	  and	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  in	  the	  interwar	  period.	  The	  high-­‐point	  of	  
peripheral	  industrial	  growth	  was	  1950-­‐73,	  since	  when	  it	  has	  been	  steadily	  
declining.	  
                                                            	  
4.	  When	  did	  rapid	  industrial	  growth	  become	  widespread?	  
                                                            	  
                                                            The	  average	  regional	  growth	  rates	  presented	  above	  have	  their	  
limitations:	  they	  are	  masking	  differing	  country	  performances	  within	  each	  region,	  
and	  they	  are	  also	  based	  on	  country	  samples	  which	  increase	  in	  size	  over	  time.	  	  We	  
are	  interested	  not	  only	  in	  when	  modern	  industrial	  growth	  began	  in	  each	  region,	  
but	  when	  it	  began	  to	  be	  widespread.	  Figure	  1	  attempts	  to	  address	  this	  issue.	  It	  is	  
based	  on	  Appendix	  Table	  A.6,	  which	  shows	  for	  each	  country	  the	  first	  year	  in	  
which	  it	  posted	  a	  cumulative	  ten-­‐year	  growth	  rate	  superior	  to	  5	  per	  cent	  per	  
annum.	  That	  is,	  Table	  A.6	  gives	  the	  first	  year	  for	  which	  we	  can	  document	  when	  
each	  country	  joined	  the	  “modern	  industrial	  growth	  club”,	  where	  membership	  is	  
defined	  as	  we	  did	  earlier	  in	  Table	  3.	  



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
10	  	  The	  one	  exception	  to	  this	  statement	  being	  Latin	  America	  after	  1990	  which	  posted	  a	  growth	  

rate	  equal	  to	  that	  in	  the	  UK,	  US	  and	  Japan.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12	  
           The	  share	  of	  the	  countries	  in	  each	  region	  which	  had	  joined	  the	  “modern	  
industrial	  growth	  club”	  is	  calculated	  for	  each	  year	  and	  then	  plotted	  in	  Figure	  1.	  
The	  shares	  are	  monotonically	  increasing,	  since	  we	  are	  not	  concerned	  with	  the	  
industrially-­‐mature	  as	  they	  permanently	  exit	  from	  the	  club	  late	  in	  the	  postwar	  
period.	  After	  all,	  every	  successful	  economy	  eventually	  starts	  to	  deindustrialize	  as	  
it	  moves	  on	  to	  high-­‐tech	  services:	  most	  of	  the	  European	  core	  and	  the	  leaders	  
leave	  the	  club	  in	  the	  1960s	  and	  1970s	  as	  Table	  A.6	  documents.	  	  
           There	  are	  two	  reasons	  why	  the	  regional	  “modern	  industrial	  growth	  club”	  
shares	  should	  increase	  over	  time.	  The	  first	  is	  that	  data	  become	  available	  for	  a	  
country	  already	  in	  the	  growth	  club.	  The	  second	  is	  that	  countries	  for	  which	  data	  
are	  already	  available	  undergo	  an	  acceleration	  in	  their	  industrial	  performance.	  As	  
suggested	  earlier,	  growth	  accelerations	  may	  closely	  coincide	  with	  data	  becoming	  
available.	  Table	  A.6	  allows	  us	  to	  gauge	  how	  prevalent	  this	  was,	  since	  it	  reports	  
not	  only	  when	  countries	  first	  joined	  or	  finally	  exited	  the	  growth	  club,	  but	  also	  the	  
year	  for	  which	  data	  on	  manufacturing	  output	  first	  become	  available	  for	  the	  
country	  in	  question.	  Since	  our	  criterion	  for	  club	  membership	  is	  that	  the	  country	  
post	  a	  cumulative	  10-­‐year	  growth	  performance	  superior	  to	  5	  per	  cent	  per	  
annum,	  countries	  can	  only	  join	  the	  growth	  club	  ten	  years	  after	  we	  have	  data	  
documenting	  their	  performance.	  In	  43.3	  per	  cent	  of	  cases,	  countries	  join	  the	  club	  
precisely	  ten	  years	  after	  the	  data	  begin;	  in	  56.1	  per	  cent	  of	  cases	  they	  join	  the	  
club	  within	  15	  years	  of	  data	  becoming	  available;	  and	  in	  67.8	  per	  cent	  of	  cases	  
they	  join	  the	  club	  within	  20	  years	  of	  data	  becoming	  available.	  In	  over	  two-­‐fifths	  
of	  the	  cases,	  therefore,	  data	  became	  available	  when	  growth	  had	  already	  attained	  
the	  required	  level,	  while	  in	  an	  additional	  quarter	  of	  the	  cases,	  club	  membership	  
was	  attained	  soon	  after	  data	  became	  available.	  The	  estimates	  in	  Figure	  1	  are	  
therefore	  conservative,	  in	  that	  it	  is	  likely	  that	  several	  countries	  attained	  the	  
threshold	  growth	  level	  before	  their	  industrial	  output	  data	  became	  available.	  
           	  




	                                                                13	  
       Figure	  1.	  Regional	  diffusion	  curves:	  reaching	  the	  5	  per	  cent	  threshold	  




                                                                                                                                          	  
Note:	  The	  figure	  shows	  the	  proportion	  of	  countries	  for	  which	  the	  10-­‐year	  backward	  
looking	  average	  industrial	  growth	  rate	  exceeded	  a	  5	  per	  cent	  threshold.	  Countries	  for	  
which	  data	  are	  missing	  are	  assumed	  not	  to	  have	  exceeded	  this	  threshold.	  Source:	  Table	  
A.6.	  
	  
           Figure	  1	  shows	  the	  successive	  waves	  of	  diffusion	  of	  rapid	  manufacturing	  
growth	  in	  various	  regions	  of	  the	  periphery:	  first	  in	  the	  European	  periphery,	  then	  
Latin	  America,	  then	  Asia,	  then	  MENA,	  and	  finally	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  By	  1913,	  31	  
per	  cent	  of	  the	  European	  periphery,	  10	  per	  cent	  of	  Asia,	  and	  18	  per	  cent	  of	  Latin	  
America	  had	  joined	  the	  modern	  industrial	  club.	  Since	  club	  membership	  is	  based	  
on	  a	  retrospective	  criterion,	  this	  implies	  that	  these	  countries	  had	  been	  growing	  
rapidly	  since	  well	  before	  World	  War	  1.	  By	  1938,	  club	  membership	  had	  been	  
attained	  by	  half	  of	  the	  European	  periphery,	  15	  per	  cent	  of	  Asia,	  and	  24	  per	  cent	  
of	  Latin	  America,	  but	  still	  only	  6	  per	  cent	  of	  MENA	  and	  2	  per	  cent	  of	  sub-­‐Saharan	  
Africa.	  By	  1973	  and	  the	  end	  of	  the	  ISI	  period,	  the	  threshold	  had	  been	  attained	  by	  
63	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  European	  periphery,	  31	  per	  cent	  of	  Asia,	  56	  per	  cent	  of	  Latin	  
America,	  44	  per	  cent	  of	  MENA,	  and	  14	  per	  cent	  of	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  
           The	  percentages	  plotted	  in	  Figure	  1	  are	  conservative	  for	  two	  reasons.	  The	  
first,	  which	  we	  have	  already	  noted,	  is	  that	  where	  we	  cannot	  document	  industrial	  



	                                                               14	  
performance,	  we	  are	  forced	  to	  exclude	  the	  country	  in	  question	  from	  the	  club.	  The	  
second	  is	  that	  these	  percentages	  are	  based	  on	  a	  denominator	  which	  includes	  a	  
large	  number	  of	  modern-­‐day	  countries,	  several	  of	  which	  are	  very	  small,	  some	  of	  
which	  did	  not	  exist	  in	  previous	  periods,	  and	  for	  many	  of	  which	  we	  do	  not	  have	  
data	  for	  these	  earlier	  periods.	  	  Figure	  2	  provides	  an	  alternative	  perspective	  
which	  deals	  at	  least	  to	  some	  extent	  with	  the	  second	  of	  these	  problems,	  since	  it	  
weights	  the	  different	  country	  experiences	  by	  their	  populations	  in	  2007.	  More	  
precisely,	  it	  asks:	  what	  proportion	  of	  a	  region’s	  population	  in	  2007	  was	  living	  in	  
countries	  which	  had	  attained	  the	  5	  per	  cent	  growth	  threshold	  by	  any	  given	  year?	  	  
	  
       Figure	  2.	  Regional	  population-­‐weighted	  diffusion	  curves:	  reaching	  the	  5	  
                                          per	  cent	  threshold	  




                                                                                                                                      	  
Note:	  The	  figure	  shows	  the	  proportion	  of	  the	  region’s	  population	  in	  2007	  living	  in	  
countries	  for	  which	  the	  10-­‐year	  backward	  looking	  average	  industrial	  growth	  rate	  
exceeded	  a	  5	  per	  cent	  threshold.	  Countries	  for	  which	  data	  are	  missing	  are	  assumed	  not	  
to	  have	  exceeded	  this	  threshold.	  Source:	  Table	  A.6.	  
	  
             By	  giving	  more	  weight	  to	  Brazil	  than	  to	  Saint	  Lucia,	  or	  to	  China	  than	  to	  
Bhutan,	  we	  increase	  dramatically	  the	  measured	  diffusion	  rates	  in	  the	  




	                                                                 15	  
periphery.11	  	  By	  World	  War	  1,	  the	  5	  per	  cent	  threshold	  had	  been	  attained	  in	  
countries	  accounting	  for	  61	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  European	  periphery’s	  (2007)	  
population,	  42	  per	  cent	  of	  Asia’s	  population,	  and	  68	  per	  cent	  of	  Latin	  America’s	  
population,	  already	  very	  large	  numbers.	  By	  1938,	  the	  “modern	  industrial	  growth	  
club”	  had	  been	  attained	  by	  countries	  accounting	  for	  three-­‐quarters	  of	  the	  
population	  in	  these	  three	  poor	  periphery	  regions.	  By	  1973,	  the	  club	  had	  been	  
attained	  in	  countries	  accounting	  for	  83	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  2007	  population	  of	  the	  
European	  periphery,	  94	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  Asian	  population,	  96	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  Latin	  
American	  population,	  75	  per	  cent	  of	  the	  MENA	  population,	  and	  even	  33	  per	  cent	  
of	  the	  population	  of	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  Industrial	  diffusion	  was	  virtually	  
complete,	  according	  to	  this	  population-­‐weighted	  criterion.	  In	  Asia,	  Latin	  America	  
and	  the	  European	  periphery,	  the	  1890-­‐1938	  years	  were	  the	  ones	  that	  saw	  the	  
greatest	  diffusion;	  in	  MENA,	  diffusion	  occurred	  largely	  between	  World	  War	  2	  and	  
the	  first	  oil	  crisis;	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa,	  diffusion	  proceeded	  steadily	  between	  
the	  interwar	  years	  and	  the	  1990s,	  when	  it	  dramatically	  accelerated.	  Overall,	  the	  
decades	  between	  1890	  and	  1938	  were	  ones	  of	  the	  most	  rapid	  diffusion	  of	  
industrialization	  to	  the	  periphery,	  at	  least	  as	  measured	  by	  output	  growth.	  	  
	  
5.	  Was	  there	  historical	  persistence?	  
	  
	                                                          How	  persistent	  were	  high	  growth	  rates?	  More	  precisely,	  to	  what	  extent	  
were	  high-­‐growth	  countries	  in	  one	  period	  also	  high-­‐growth	  countries	  in	  the	  
following	  period?	  Table	  4	  provides	  a	  list	  of	  the	  top	  ten	  performers	  for	  each	  
region	  and	  time	  period,	  ranked	  by	  their	  average	  growth	  performance	  over	  the	  
period	  as	  a	  whole.12	  Certain	  countries	  appear	  consistently	  in	  the	  table:	  Russia,	  
Bulgaria,	  China,	  Japan,	  India	  and	  Brazil	  being	  perhaps	  the	  most	  prominent:	  it	  
seems	  as	  though	  the	  current	  BRICs’	  rapid	  industrialization	  is	  a	  phenomenon	  with	  
deep	  historical	  roots.	  (However,	  these	  countries	  drop	  out	  of	  the	  table	  in	  later	  
periods,	  which	  is	  consistent	  with	  the	  logic	  of	  “catching	  up”,	  of	  which	  more	  later.)	  
On	  the	  other	  hand,	  it	  is	  also	  obvious	  from	  the	  table	  that	  there	  has	  been	  a	  good	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
11	  This	  suggests,	  of	  course,	  that	  population	  and	  domestic	  market	  size	  might	  have	  been	  an	  

important	  determinant	  of	  industrial	  performance	  between	  1913	  and	  1973,	  a	  long	  anti-­‐global	  
episode.	  We	  intend	  to	  pursue	  this,	  and	  other	  possible	  determinants,	  in	  subsequent	  work.	  
12	  Table	  3,	  in	  contrast,	  ranked	  countries	  according	  to	  how	  early	  they	  joined	  the	  modern	  growth	  

club,	  which	  was	  defined	  in	  terms	  of	  growth	  performance	  over	  just	  ten	  years.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16	  
deal	  of	  churning	  over	  time,	  with	  many	  countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  leader	  
board	  within	  a	  brief	  space	  of	  time	  (and,	  occasionally,	  re-­‐entering	  at	  a	  later	  date).	  
	          Figure	  3	  confirms	  that	  there	  has	  been	  relatively	  little	  persistence	  over	  
time	  in	  long	  run	  industrial	  growth	  rates.	  It	  computes	  the	  correlation	  coefficient,	  
and	  the	  rank	  correlation	  coefficient,	  between	  average	  country	  growth	  rates	  in	  
adjacent	  periods.	  It	  does	  so	  both	  using	  a	  consistent	  30	  country	  sample,	  and	  using	  
the	  largest	  sample	  of	  countries	  for	  which	  data	  exist	  for	  both	  periods	  (which	  
sample	  naturally	  increases	  in	  size	  over	  time).	  As	  can	  be	  seen,	  these	  correlation	  
coefficients	  were	  quite	  high	  in	  the	  19th	  century,	  of	  the	  order	  of	  0.5	  to	  0.6.	  By	  and	  
large,	  a	  lot	  of	  the	  countries	  that	  were	  growing	  rapidly	  before	  1890	  were	  also	  
growing	  rapidly	  after	  1890.	  However,	  the	  correlation	  coefficients	  are	  much	  lower	  
in	  the	  20th	  century,	  of	  the	  order	  of	  0.3	  or	  less,	  suggesting	  that	  achieving	  rapid	  (or	  
relatively	  rapid)	  growth	  in	  one	  period	  was	  only	  a	  weak	  predictor	  of	  performance	  
in	  the	  subsequent	  period.	  The	  conclusion	  is	  that	  while	  there	  are	  important	  
exceptions,	  rapid	  long	  run	  industrial	  growth	  was	  not	  very	  persistent	  in	  the	  20th	  
century.	  	  




	                                                                17	  
                    Table	  4.	  The	  top	  ten	  performers	  by	  region	  and	  period	  




                                                                                                          	  
Source:	  Table	  A.1.	  
                                                             	  




	                                                         18	  
       Table	  4.	  The	  top	  ten	  performers	  by	  region	  and	  period	  (cont'd)	  




                                                                                                         	  
	                                 	  




	                                                  19	  
       Table	  4.	  The	  top	  ten	  performers	  by	  region	  and	  period	  (cont'd)	  




                                                                                                         	  
                                                      	  




	                                                  20	  
                                                            	  
          Figure	  3.	  Cross-­‐country	  correlations:	  growth	  in	  subsequent	  periods	  
             Panel	  A.	  Correlations	  of	  country	  growth	  rates	  between	  periods	  




                                                                                                                     	  
       Panel	  B.	  Rank	  correlations	  of	  country	  growth	  rates	  between	  periods	  




                                                                                                                     	  
Note:	  dashed	  lines	  indicate	  rank	  correlations	  that	  are	  statistically	  zero	  and	  10%	  
significance	  levels.	  Source:	  Table	  A1.	                                      	  


	                                                        21	  
	  
6.	  Unconditional	  “Industrial	  Catching	  Up”	  
	  
                                                            There	  is	  a	  vast	  empirical	  literature	  that	  asks	  whether	  poorer	  countries	  
grow	  more	  rapidly	  than	  richer	  ones	  (Abramovitz	  1986,	  Barro	  1997,	  Bourguignon	  
and	  Morrisson	  2002),	  and	  finds	  that	  they	  do	  not.13	  More	  recently,	  Rodrik	  (2013a)	  
has	  found	  evidence	  of	  unconditional	  convergence	  in	  labour	  productivity	  for	  
individual	  manufacturing	  sectors.	  Since	  we	  do	  not	  have	  comparable	  data	  on	  
manufacturing	  employment,	  we	  cannot	  engage	  with	  the	  productivity	  issue.	  
Instead,	  we	  ask	  a	  different	  question:	  did	  less	  industrialized	  economies	  
experience	  more	  rapid	  industrial	  growth	  than	  more	  industrialized	  countries?	  
More	  precisely,	  did	  countries	  with	  a	  lower	  level	  of	  manufacturing	  output	  per	  
capita	  systematically	  experience	  more	  rapid	  per	  capita	  growth	  in	  manufacturing	  
output	  than	  countries	  with	  more	  manufacturing	  output	  per	  capita?	  	  
                                                            We	  begin	  by	  comparing	  rates	  of	  per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  in	  our	  
five	  peripheral	  regions	  to	  those	  in	  the	  core.	  Table	  5	  gives	  the	  difference	  between	  
peripheral	  and	  leader	  per	  capita	  growth	  rates,	  for	  both	  definitions	  of	  the	  leading	  
group.	  As	  can	  be	  seen,	  per	  capita	  growth	  rates	  in	  the	  European	  periphery	  
exceeded	  those	  in	  the	  core	  throughout	  the	  period,	  except	  during	  World	  War	  1,	  
and	  since	  1890	  Asian	  per	  capita	  growth	  rates	  have	  exceeded	  core	  rates,	  except	  
during	  World	  War	  2.	  Latin	  American	  growth	  rates	  were	  higher	  than	  core	  rates	  
until	  1950.	  MENA	  and	  sub-­‐Saharan	  growth	  rates	  were	  only	  occasionally	  higher	  
than	  core	  growth	  rates.	  The	  period	  which	  saw	  the	  most	  uniform	  peripheral	  
‘catching	  up’	  on	  the	  core,	  on	  this	  criterion,	  was	  the	  interwar	  period.	  
	  
                                                                             Table	  5:	  Catching	  Up:	  Industrial	  growth	  rate	  relative	  to	  leaders	  
                                                                                                                                       Panel	  A:	  Leaders	  are	  always	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
13	  Economists	  have	  only	  found	  evidence	  of	  conditional	  convergence	  (Durlauf,	  Johnson	  and	  

Temple	  2005).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22	  
                     Panel	  B:	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  before	  1939,	  Japan	  after	  




                                                                                                                                 	  
Note:	  Average	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  by	  region	  relative	  to	  the	  leaders	  are	  
computed	  in	  two	  steps.	  First,	  we	  compute	  the	  average	  growth	  rates	  for	  each	  
region	  as	  in	  Table	  1.	  Second,	  we	  subtract	  the	  GDP-­‐weighted	  average	  of	  the	  three	  
leaders’	  growth	  rates.	  Note	  that	  the	  leader	  averages	  in	  Table	  1	  are	  unweighted.	  
                                                              	  
	        	  	  
           Table	  5	  is	  based	  on	  comparisons	  between	  regional	  averages,	  ignoring	  the	  
country-­‐level	  variation	  in	  the	  data:	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  the	  highest	  industrial	  
growth	  rates	  in	  peripheral	  regions	  were	  in	  the	  most	  industrial	  economies	  there.	  
When	  did	  it	  become	  true	  that	  per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  were	  
systematically	  higher	  in	  less	  industrialized	  countries,	  and	  when	  was	  this	  
tendency	  most	  pronounced?	  
           In	  order	  to	  answer	  these	  questions,	  we	  need	  to	  be	  able	  to	  compare	  levels	  
of	  manufacturing	  output	  across	  countries.	  This	  is	  difficult,	  so	  we	  follow	  two	  
approaches.	  First,	  the	  World	  Bank’s	  World	  Development	  Indicators	  report	  
comparable	  manufacturing	  output	  levels	  for	  2001,	  expressed	  in	  US	  dollars.	  We	  
extrapolate	  these	  2001	  output	  levels	  back	  in	  time	  to	  six	  benchmark	  years	  (1870,	  
1890,	  1920,	  1950,	  1973	  and	  1990)	  using	  our	  output	  indices,	  and	  then	  divide	  
these	  output	  figures	  by	  population	  taken	  from	  the	  World	  Development	  
Indicators	  and	  Maddison	  (2010).	  Where	  we	  cannot	  do	  this,	  for	  example	  because	  
missing	  data	  make	  it	  impossible	  to	  link	  manufacturing	  indices	  before	  and	  after	  a	  
world	  war,	  we	  are	  forced	  to	  drop	  countries	  from	  the	  sample.	  
           There	  are	  dangers	  in	  extrapolating	  relative	  aggregate	  output	  levels	  
backwards	  over	  such	  long	  periods,	  involving	  as	  they	  do	  compositional	  shifts,	  
relative	  price	  changes,	  and	  the	  like.	  Furthermore,	  Maddison’s	  data	  assume	  
constant	  boundaries,	  whereas	  our	  growth	  rates	  are	  typically	  for	  period-­‐specific	  
boundaries.	  Therefore,	  we	  also	  adopted	  a	  second	  approach,	  which	  was	  to	  take	  
Paul	  Bairoch’s	  (1982)	  data	  on	  cross-­‐country	  industrial	  output	  per	  capita	  for	  two	  
benchmark	  years	  (1913,	  1928),	  and	  then,	  where	  we	  have	  the	  annual	  output	  
indices,	  to	  use	  these	  (and	  population	  data)	  to	  generate	  comparable	  absolute	  


	                                                            23	  
levels	  of	  per	  capita	  output	  for	  1870,	  1890,	  and	  1920.	  Similarly,	  we	  used	  UN	  data	  
for	  1967	  to	  generate	  comparable	  absolute	  levels	  of	  per	  capita	  output	  for	  1950,	  
and	  World	  Bank	  data	  to	  generate	  comparable	  absolute	  levels	  for	  1973	  and	  1990.	  
While	  safer,	  the	  disadvantage	  of	  this	  procedure	  is	  that	  it	  involves	  fewer	  country	  
observations	  since	  Bairoch	  provides	  data	  for	  fewer	  countries	  than	  we	  do.	  
	                                                          Armed	  with	  these	  two	  sets	  of	  data,	  we	  can	  now	  ask:	  when	  was	  per	  capita	  
manufacturing	  growth	  faster	  in	  less	  industrialized	  countries,	  where	  the	  level	  of	  
industrialization	  is	  measured	  by	  manufacturing	  output	  per	  capita	  (Bairoch	  
1982)?	  Such	  “industrial	  catching	  up”,	  when	  it	  took	  place,	  must	  have	  been	  due	  to	  
convergence	  either	  in	  economic	  structures	  (i.e.	  less	  industrialized	  countries	  
seeing	  a	  shift	  of	  labour	  out	  of	  agriculture	  and	  into	  manufacturing),	  or	  in	  
manufacturing	  labour	  productivity,	  or	  both.14	  	  
	                                                          Table	  6	  provides	  the	  slope	  coefficients	  from	  regressions	  of	  the	  per	  annum,	  
per	  capita	  manufacturing	  output	  growth	  rates	  reported	  in	  Table	  A.7	  against	  
initial	  levels	  of	  per	  capita	  output.	  The	  first	  column	  presents	  our	  preferred	  
estimates,	  using	  the	  data	  on	  output	  per	  capita	  generated	  from	  period-­‐specific	  
benchmarks	  (i.e.	  the	  Bairoch	  data	  for	  1913	  and	  1928,	  and	  the	  UN	  data	  for	  1967).	  
One	  problem	  with	  these	  results	  is	  that	  the	  number	  of	  observations	  is	  not	  
constant	  across	  time	  periods,	  making	  the	  coefficients	  difficult	  to	  compare.15	  
Subsequent	  columns	  address	  this	  issue,	  using	  the	  data	  on	  levels	  constructed	  by	  
extrapolating	  backward	  from	  the	  2001	  World	  Bank	  data.	  In	  each	  column,	  the	  
sample	  size	  is	  kept	  constant	  over	  time.	  For	  example,	  the	  estimated	  coefficient	  for	  
the	  interwar	  period,	  using	  the	  sample	  of	  countries	  for	  which	  we	  have	  data	  
between	  1870	  and	  1890,	  is	  -­‐0.238,	  with	  a	  robust	  standard	  error	  of	  0.091.	  In	  this	  
manner,	  the	  coefficients	  in	  any	  given	  column	  are	  comparable	  with	  each	  other,	  
being	  based	  as	  they	  are	  on	  the	  same	  country	  samples.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
14	  Assuming	  constant	  labour	  participation	  rates.	  Manufacturing	  output	  per	  capita,	  Qm/P,	  is	  equal	  

to	  (Qm/Lm)(Lm/L)(L/P),	  where	  Qm	  is	  manufacturing	  output,	  P	  is	  population,	  Lm	  is	  employment	  
in	  manufacturing,	  and	  L	  is	  total	  employment.	  Poor	  periphery	  manufacturing	  typically	  meant	  low	  
productivity,	  small	  scale	  and	  labour-­‐intensive	  manufacturing	  compared	  with	  the	  leaders.	  The	  
onset	  of	  modern	  industrialization	  should	  have	  led	  to	  convergence	  in	  (Qm/Lm),	  therefore.	  
Compared	  with	  the	  leaders,	  the	  followers	  were	  likely	  to	  undergo	  a	  demographic	  transition	  during	  
their	  industrial	  take	  off,	  thus	  raising	  (with	  a	  lag)	  L/P,	  and	  thus	  raising	  the	  growth	  of	  Qm/P.	  See	  
Bloom	  and	  Williamson	  1998;	  Bloom	  and	  Canning	  2001;	  Lee	  and	  Mason	  2010.	  Finally,	  Lm/L	  rises	  
over	  time	  during	  industrial	  revolutions	  (see	  for	  example	  Crafts	  1985).	  	  	  	  	  	  
15	  For	  our	  six	  periods,	  the	  coefficients	  are	  estimated	  using	  data	  for	  20,	  23,	  29,	  40,	  70	  and	  146	  

countries	  respectively.	  For	  the	  final	  two	  periods,	  this	  column	  uses	  benchmark	  data	  from	  the	  
World	  Development	  Indicators.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24	  
                              Table	  6:	  Unconditional	  industrial	  catching	  up	  




                                                                                                                                        	  
Note:	  Coefficients	  are	  obtained	  by	  regressing	  regression-­‐based	  growth	  rates	  of	  per	  
capita	  manufacturing	  output	  reported	  in	  Table	  A.7	  on	  the	  log	  level	  of	  per	  capita	  
manufacturing	  output	  at	  the	  beginning	  of	  the	  period.	  The	  first	  column	  reports	  
coefficients	  using	  period	  specific	  benchmarks;	  subsequent	  columns	  use	  backward	  
extrapolation	  from	  a	  2001	  benchmark.	  See	  text	  for	  details.	  *,	  **,	  ***	  indicate	  statistical	  
significance	  at	  the	  10%,	  5%	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  in	  
parentheses.	  
	  
           Table	  6	  tells	  a	  consistent	  story.	  While	  there	  is	  evidence	  of	  unconditional	  
convergence	  between	  1870	  and	  1913,	  it	  only	  became	  statistically	  
significant	  at	  conventional	  levels	  after	  World	  War	  1.	  The	  highpoint	  of	  
unconditional	  industrial	  convergence	  in	  the	  periphery	  was	  the	  ISI	  period	  
between	  1950	  and	  1973:	  while	  strong	  unconditional	  convergence	  persisted	  after	  
the	  first	  oil	  shock,	  it	  was	  slightly	  less	  pronounced	  than	  before	  (compare	  the	  
coefficients	  obtained	  using	  the	  1950-­‐73	  country	  sample	  for	  the	  two	  sub-­‐periods).	  
According	  to	  the	  first	  and	  the	  last	  columns	  in	  Table	  6	  (which	  use	  the	  same	  data	  
for	  the	  last	  period),	  unconditional	  convergence	  in	  per	  capita	  manufacturing	  
output	  fizzled	  out	  after	  1990.	  	  
	  
7.	  Implications	  and	  Agenda	  
	  
	       Rapid	  peripheral	  industrialization	  is	  not	  a	  phenomenon	  unique	  to	  the	  
recent	  past.	  It	  was	  taking	  place	  at	  least	  as	  far	  back	  as	  the	  1870s	  in	  Latin	  America	  
and	  the	  European	  periphery,	  and	  was	  well	  underway	  in	  Asia	  by	  the	  end	  of	  the	  
nineteenth	  century.	  It	  had	  become	  widespread	  in	  all	  three	  regions	  by	  the	  



	                                                                25	  
interwar	  period.	  The	  highpoint	  of	  peripheral	  industrialization	  was	  not	  the	  1990-­‐
2007	  period,	  but	  the	  ISI	  period	  from	  1950	  to	  1973,	  which	  was	  also	  the	  highpoint	  
of	  the	  periphery’s	  industrial	  catching	  up	  on	  the	  core.	  
	         It	  will	  be	  challenging	  to	  identify	  the	  fundamentals	  explaining	  the	  
performance	  documented	  here.	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  European	  periphery	  
began	  to	  rapidly	  industrialize	  behind	  tariff	  barriers,	  but	  nineteenth	  century	  Asia	  
had	  free	  trade	  imposed	  upon	  it,	  and	  also	  enjoyed	  rapid	  industrial	  growth.	  What	  
all	  three	  experiences	  had	  in	  common	  was	  that	  they	  occurred	  during	  a	  period	  of	  
generalized	  globalization	  before	  World	  War	  1.	  However,	  industrial	  growth	  in	  the	  
poor	  periphery	  persisted	  during	  the	  crisis-­‐ridden	  and	  anti-­‐global	  interwar	  
period	  of	  word	  trade	  busts,	  and	  spread	  to	  many	  more	  countries.	  Industrial	  
growth	  was	  fastest	  during	  the	  1950-­‐73	  ISI	  period,	  in	  which	  developing	  
economies	  erected	  high	  trade	  barriers	  between	  themselves	  and	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  
world,	  but	  this	  was	  true	  everywhere,	  not	  just	  in	  the	  poor	  periphery.	  Post-­‐war	  
industrial	  growth	  was	  rapid	  in	  countries	  with	  many	  different	  institutional	  
features,	  under	  pro-­‐market	  and	  anti-­‐market	  policies,	  and	  under	  pro-­‐global	  and	  
anti-­‐global	  environments:	  in	  re-­‐globalizing	  Western	  Europe,	  in	  closed	  and	  state-­‐
led	  communist	  Eastern	  Europe,	  and	  in	  the	  newly	  independent	  poor	  periphery	  
pursuing	  inward-­‐looking	  industrialization	  policies.	  	  
	         The	  relationship	  between	  openness	  and	  industrialization	  is	  not	  
straightforward:	  it	  may	  be	  contingent	  on	  other	  factors,	  as	  appears	  to	  be	  true	  of	  
the	  relationship	  between	  openness	  and	  growth	  more	  generally	  (Clemens	  and	  
Williamson	  2004).	  Nor	  can	  explanations	  for	  performance	  based	  on	  invariant	  
country	  characteristics	  easily	  explain	  the	  low	  persistence	  of	  leadership	  in	  the	  
industrial	  growth	  stakes.	  One	  striking	  feature	  of	  the	  data	  is	  the	  way	  in	  which	  
rapid	  industrialization	  began	  in	  different	  regions	  at	  different	  times:	  first	  in	  Latin	  
America	  and	  the	  European	  periphery,	  then	  in	  Asia,	  then	  in	  MENA,	  and	  finally	  in	  
sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  If	  it	  were	  not	  for	  this	  geographical	  clustering,	  the	  assumption	  
by	  Robert	  Lucas	  (2000)	  that	  countries	  embark	  on	  modern	  growth	  in	  an	  
essentially	  random	  way	  might	  seem	  a	  good	  way	  to	  explain	  the	  spread	  of	  
industry.	  It	  appears	  that	  his	  assumption	  may	  need	  to	  be	  augmented	  to	  allow	  for	  
geographical	  spillovers	  of	  some	  sort,	  although	  whether	  this	  is	  due	  to	  emulation	  




	                                                            26	  
effects,	  economic	  geography	  forces	  related	  to	  market	  size,	  or	  other	  factors,	  
remains	  unclear.	  
	         The	  dataset	  we	  have	  constructed	  will	  now	  allow	  us	  and	  others	  to	  explore	  
the	  determinants	  of	  the	  timing	  and	  location	  of	  industry’s	  spread	  to	  the	  poor	  
periphery.	  To	  what	  extent	  can	  industrial	  growth	  be	  explained	  by	  the	  
convergence	  forces	  discussed	  by	  Lucas	  (2000)	  and	  Rodrik	  (2013a),	  and	  what	  
explains	  the	  geographical	  clustering	  in	  our	  data?	  Did	  low	  peripheral	  wages	  give	  
the	  poor	  periphery	  an	  increasing	  competitive	  advantage	  over	  time	  relative	  to	  
those	  in	  the	  core?	  Did	  falling	  transport	  costs	  help	  peripheral	  countries	  
industrialize,	  by	  enabling	  resource-­‐scarce	  countries	  buy	  essential	  fuel	  and	  raw	  
materials	  on	  world	  markets	  at	  ever-­‐cheaper	  prices	  relative	  to	  resource-­‐abundant	  
countries?	  And	  what,	  if	  any,	  were	  the	  roles	  of	  peripheral	  trade	  policy	  
(Coatsworth	  and	  Williamson	  2004,	  Williamson	  	  2006),	  the	  changing	  terms	  of	  
trade	  (Prebisch	  1950,	  Singer	  1950,	  Williamson	  2011a),	  and/or	  exchange	  rate	  
policy	  in	  fostering	  industrialization?	  We	  intend	  to	  address	  these	  and	  related	  
issues	  in	  our	  future	  work.	  
	                                           	  




	                                                           27	  
References	  
	  
Abramovitz,	  M.	  (1986),	  “Catching	  Up,	  Forging	  Ahead,	  and	  Falling	  Behind,”	  Journal	  of	  
Economic	  History	  46	  (2):	  385-­‐406.	  
	  
Acemoglu,	  D.	  (2009),	  Introduction	  to	  Modern	  Economic	  Growth	  (Princeton,	  N.J.:	  
Princeton	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Allen,	  R.	  (1979),	  "International	  Competition	  in	  Iron	  and	  Steel,	  1850-­‐1913,"	  Journal	  of	  	  
Economic	  History	  39	  (4):	  911-­‐37.	  
	  
Allen,	  R.	  C.	  (2001),	  “The	  Great	  Divergence	  in	  European	  Wages	  and	  Prices	  from	  the	  
Middle	  Ages	  to	  the	  First	  World	  War,”	  Explorations	  in	  Economic	  History	  38	  (October):	  
411-­‐47.	  
	  
Allen,	  R.C.	  (2009),	  The	  British	  Industrial	  Revolution	  in	  Global	  Perspective	  (Cambridge:	  
Cambridge	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Bairoch,	  P.	  (1982),	  “International	  Industrialization	  Levels	  from	  1750	  to	  1980,”	  Journal	  of	  
European	  Economic	  History	  11	  (Fall):	  269-­‐333.	  
	  
Barro,	  R.	  J.	  (1997),	  Determinants	  of	  Economic	  Growth:	  A	  Cross-­‐Country	  Empirical	  Study	  
(Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  MIT	  Press).	  
	  
Bloom,	  D.	  and	  J.	  G.	  Williamson	  (1998),	  “Demographic	  Transitions	  and	  Economic	  Miracles	  
in	  Emerging	  Asia,”	  World	  Bank	  Economic	  Review	  12	  (September):	  419-­‐55.	  	  
	  
Bloom,	  D.	  and	  D.	  Canning	  (2001),	  “Cumulative	  Causality,	  Economic	  Growth,	  and	  the	  
Demographic	  Transition.”	  In	  N.	  Birdsall,	  A.	  C.	  Kelley	  and	  S.	  W.	  Sinding	  (eds.),	  Population	  
Matters:	  Demographic	  Change,	  Economic	  Growth,	  and	  Poverty	  in	  the	  Developing	  World	  
(Oxford:	  Oxford	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Bourguinon,	  F.	  and	  C.	  Morrisson	  (2002),	  “Inequality	  among	  World	  Citizens:	  1820-­‐1992,”	  	  
American	  Economic	  Review	  92,	  4	  (September):	  727-­‐44.	  
	  
Clemens	  and	  J.G.	  Williamson	  (2004),	  “Why	  did	  the	  Tariff-­‐Growth	  Correlation	  Change	  
After	  1950?”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Growth	  9,	  1	  (November):	  5-­‐46.	  
	  
Coatsworth,	  J.	  and	  J.	  G.	  Williamson	  (2004),	  “Always	  Protectionist?	  Latin	  American	  Tariffs	  
from	  Independence	  to	  Great	  Depression,”	  Journal	  of	  Latin	  American	  Studies	  36,	  2	  (May):	  
205-­‐32.	  	  
	  
Crafts,	  N.F.R.	  (1985),	  British	  Economic	  Growth	  During	  the	  Industrial	  Revolution	  (Oxford:	  
Oxford	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Durlauf,	  S.,	  P.	  Johnson,	  and	  J.	  Temple	  (2005),	  “Growth	  Econometrics.”	  In	  P.	  Aghion	  and	  S.	  
Durlauf	  (eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  Economic	  Growth	  (Amsterdam:	  North-­‐Holland).	  
	  
Lee,	  R.	  and	  A.	  Mason	  (2010),	  “Fertility,	  Human	  Capital,	  and	  Economic	  Growth	  over	  the	  
Demographic	  Transition,”	  European	  Journal	  of	  Population	  26	  (2):	  159-­‐82.	  
	  
Lewis,	  W.	  A.	  (1978),	  The	  Evolution	  of	  the	  International	  Economic	  Order	  (Princeton,	  N.	  J.:	  
Princeton	  University	  Press).	  



	                                                               28	  
Lucas,	  R.E.	  (2000),	  “Some	  Macroeconomics	  for	  the	  21st	  Century,”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Perspectives	  14,	  1	  (Winter):	  159-­‐68.	  
	  
Maddison,	  A.	  (2010),	  Statistics	  on	  World	  Population,	  GDP	  and	  Per	  Capita	  GDP,	  1-­‐2008	  AD,	  
http://www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/oriindex.htm	  
	  
O’Rourke,	  K.	  H.	  and	  J.	  G.	  Williamson	  (1999),	  Globalization	  and	  History	  (Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  
Cambridge	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Pollard,	  S.	  (1982),	  Peaceful	  Conquest:	  The	  Industrialization	  of	  Europe	  1760-­‐1970	  (Oxford:	  
Oxford	  University	  Press).	  
	  
Prebisch,	  R.	  (1950),	  The	  Economic	  Development	  of	  Latin	  America	  and	  Its	  Principal	  	  	  	  	  
Problems,	  Lake	  Success,	  NY:	  United	  Nations,	  Department	  of	  Economic	  Affairs,	  1950.	  
	  
Rodrik,	  D.	  (2013a),	  “Unconditional	  Convergence	  in	  Manufacturing,”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  
Economics	  128:	  165-­‐204.	  
	  
Rodrik,	  D.	  (2013b),	  “The	  Past,	  Present,	  and	  Future	  of	  Economic	  Growth,”	  Global	  Citizen	  
Foundation	  Working	  Paper	  1,	  Global	  Citizen	  Foundation	  (June).	  	  
	  
Singer,	  H.	  W.	  (1950),	  "The	  Distribution	  of	  Gains	  between	  Investing	  and	  Borrowing	  
Countries,"	  American	  Economic	  Review	  40	  (1950):	  473-­‐85.	  
	  
Smits,	  J.-­‐P.,	  P.	  Woltjer,	  and	  D.	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  Comparative	  Historical	  National	  
Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  Groningen	  Growth	  and	  
Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  Groningen:	  University	  of	  
Groningen.	  http://www.rug.nl/feb/Onderzoek/Onderzoekscentra/GGDC/data/hna	  
	  
Williamson,	  J.G.	  (2008),	  “Globalization	  and	  the	  Great	  Divergence:	  Terms	  of	  Trade	  Booms,	  
Volatility	  and	  the	  Poor	  Periphery,	  1782-­‐1913,”	  European	  Review	  of	  Economic	  History	  12,	  
3	  (December):	  355-­‐91.	  
	  
Williamson,	  J.	  G.	  (2006),	  “Explaining	  World	  Tariffs	  1870-­‐1938:	  Stolper-­‐Samuelson,	  	  
Strategic	  Tariffs	  and	  State	  Revenues,”	  in	  R.	  Findlay,	  R.	  Henriksson,	  H.	  Lindgren	  and	  M.	  
Lundahl	  (Eds.),	  Eli	  Heckscher,	  1879-­‐1952:	  A	  Celebratory	  Symposium	  (Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  
MIT	  Press).	  
	  
Williamson,	  J.	  G.	  (2010),	  “When,	  Where,	  and	  Why?	  Early	  Industrialization	  in	  the	  Poor	  
Periphery	  1870-­‐1940,”	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  16344,	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  
Research,	  Cambridge,	  Mass.	  (September).	  	  
	  
Williamson,	  J.	  G.	  (2011a),	  Trade	  and	  Poverty:	  When	  the	  Third	  World	  Fell	  Behind	  
(Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  MIT	  Press).	  
	  
Williamson,	  J.	  G.	  (2011b),	  “Industrial	  Catching	  Up	  in	  the	  Third	  World	  1870-­‐1975,”	  NBER	  
Working	  Paper	  16809,	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research,	  Cambridge,	  Mass.	  
(February).	  
	  
Wright,	  G.	  (1990),	  "The	  Origins	  of	  American	  Industrial	  Success,	  1879-­‐1940,"	  American	  
Economic	  Review	  80	  (September):	  651-­‐68.	  
	                                                    	  




	                                                              29	  
                 Appendix	  (Not	  for	  publication)	  
       Table	  A.1	  Individual	  country	  growth	  experiences	  




                                                                            	  
	                     	  




	                                    30	  
       Table	  A.1	  Individual	  country	  growth	  experiences	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                        	  
	                           	  




	                                          31	  
       Table	  A.1	  Individual	  country	  growth	  experiences	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                        	  
	                           	  




	                                          32	  
       Table	  A.1	  Individual	  country	  growth	  experiences	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                        	  
	                           	  




	                                          33	  
       Table	  A.1	  Individual	  country	  growth	  experiences	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                        	  
	                           	  




	                                          34	  
                  Table	  A.2	  Industrial	  growth	  acceleration.	  Constant	  samples	  
                                Panel	  A:	  1890-­‐1913	  sample:	  38	  countries	  




                                                                                                                               	  
                                   Panel	  B:	  1920-­‐1938	  sample:	  49	  countries	  




                                                                                                                     	  
                                                                   	  
                                                                   	  
   Table	  A.3	  Average	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  in	  countries	  with	  data	  for	  at	  least	  half	  
                                               of	  the	  period	  




                                                                                                                                      	  
Note:	  The	  table	  reports	  unweighted	  average	  industrial	  growth	  rates	  by	  region.	  
Individual	  country	  growth	  rates	  are	  computed	  as	  the	  β	  coefficient	  of	  the	  following	  
regression:	  Y=α+βt	  where	  Y	  is	  the	  natural	  logarithm	  of	  industrial	  production	  and	  t	  is	  a	  
linear	  time	  trend.	  Regressions	  are	  performed	  only	  where	  at	  least	  four	  observations	  are	  
present.	  Leaders	  are	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  while	  Leaders*	  are	  US	  and	  Germany,	  plus	  UK	  
before	  1939,	  Japan	  after.	  Asia*	  is	  Asia	  excluding	  Japan.	  




	                                                               35	  
       Table	  A.4	  Industrial	  growth	  accelerations	  in	  countries	  with	  data	  for	  at	  least	  half	  
                                                    of	  the	  period	  




                                                                                                                                         	  
Note:	  The	  table	  reports	  the	  average	  difference	  in	  regions’	  growth	  rates	  between	  
successive	  sub-­‐periods.	  Note	  that	  successive	  columns	  provide	  the	  comparison	  for	  
progressively	  larger	  samples	  of	  countries.	  	  Leaders	  are	  US,	  Germany	  and	  UK	  while	  
Leaders*	  are	  US	  and	  Germany,	  plus	  UK	  before	  1939,	  Japan	  after.	  Asia*	  is	  Asia	  excluding	  
Japan.	  
	  
       Table	  A.5	  Industrial	  growth	  acceleration	  in	  countries	  with	  data	  for	  at	  least	  half	  
                                       of	  the	  period.	  Constant	  samples	  
                                   Panel	  A:	  1890-­‐1913	  sample:	  36	  countries	  




                                                                                                                                  	  
                                      Panel	  B:	  1920-­‐1938	  sample:	  48	  countries	  




                                                                                                                        	  
	  
	  




	                                                               36	  
       Table	  A.6	  Countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  5%	  growth	  club	  




                                                                                                    	  
	                               	  




	                                               37	  
       Table	  A.6	  Countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  5%	  growth	  club	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                                                	  
	                                     	  




	                                                     38	  
       Table	  A.6	  Countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  5%	  growth	  club	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                                                	  
	                                     	  




	                                                     39	  
       Table	  A.6	  Countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  5%	  growth	  club	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                                                	  
	                                     	  




	                                                     40	  
          Table	  A.6	  Countries	  entering	  and	  exiting	  the	  5%	  growth	  club	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                                                                            	  
Note:	  “Data	  Starts”	  is	  the	  first	  year	  for	  which	  industrial	  production	  growth	  data	  are	  
available.	  “In”	  indicates	  the	  first	  year	  that	  a	  country	  experienced	  a	  10-­‐year	  average	  
backward	  looking	  growth	  rate	  greater	  than	  5	  per	  cent.	  Backward	  looking	  average	  
growth	  rates	  are	  computed	  following	  a	  regression-­‐based	  approach.	  More	  precisely,	  we	  
take	  the	  β	  coefficient	  of	  the	  following	  regression	  model:	  Y=α+βt	  estimated	  using	  data	  for	  
the	  T-­‐1	  to	  T-­‐10	  period	  and	  assign	  this	  growth	  rate	  to	  year	  T.Y	  is	  the	  natural	  logarithm	  of	  
industrial	  production	  and	  tis	  a	  linear	  time	  trend.	  The	  5	  per	  cent	  threshold	  is	  computed	  
by	  taking	  the	  average	  of	  the	  growth	  rates	  in	  the	  U.S.,	  U.K.	  and	  Germany,	  during	  the	  1870-­‐
1913	  period.	  “Out”	  indicates	  the	  last	  year	  that	  a	  country	  showed	  a	  10-­‐year	  backward	  
looking	  year-­‐on-­‐year	  average	  growth	  rate	  greater	  than	  5	  per	  cent.	  


	                                                                      41	  
       Table	  A.7.	  Per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  




                                                                                	  
	                      	  




	                                     42	  
       Table	  A.7.	  Per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                            	  
	                            	  




	                                            43	  
       Table	  A.7.	  Per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                            	  
	                            	  




	                                            44	  
       Table	  A.7.	  Per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                            	  
	                            	  




	                                            45	  
       Table	  A.7.	  Per	  capita	  manufacturing	  growth	  rates	  (cont’d)	  




                                                                                            	  
                                                	  
	                            	  




	                                            46	  
                      Data	  Appendix	  (Not	  for	  publication)	  

                                                         Leaders	  

Germany	  
1870-­‐1980:	  Broadberry,	  Stephen	  (1997),	  The	  Productivity	  Race.	  British	  Manufacturing	  
in	  Perspective,	  1850-­‐1990.	  Table	  A3.1	  (a),	  p.	  42.	  Data	  for	  1913-­‐24,	  1938-­‐49	  interpolated.	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


United	  Kingdom	  
1970-­‐1981:	  Broadberry,	  Stephen	  (1997),	  The	  Productivity	  Race.	  British	  Manufacturing	  
in	  Perspective,	  1850-­‐1990.	  Table	  A3.1	  (a)	  p.	  42.	  Data	  for	  1938-­‐45	  interpolated.	  
1981-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


United	  States	  
1870-­‐1989:	  Broadberry,	  Stephen	  (1997),	  The	  Productivity	  Race.	  British	  Manufacturing	  
in	  Perspective,	  1850-­‐1990.	  Table	  A3.1	  (a)	  p.	  42.	  Data	  for	  1870-­‐89	  interpolated.	  
1989-­‐1998:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1998-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                                                European	  Core	  

Belgium	  
1871-­‐1901:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Industry	  value	  added.	  
1901-­‐1960:	  United	  Nations	  International	  Trade	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1960.	  Index	  of	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1953=100.	  Data	  for	  1913-­‐21,	  1938-­‐50	  interpolated.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  OECD	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  Manufacturing	  
industries.	  
1967-­‐1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  




	                                                               47	  
France	  
1870-­‐1950:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Total	  industry.	  Data	  for	  1913-­‐1919,	  1938-­‐1948	  
interpolated.	  
1950-­‐1985:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing.	  
1985-­‐1999:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1999-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Luxembourg	  
1948-­‐1960:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1962.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1960-­‐1963:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1967-­‐1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐1995:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


The	  Netherlands	  
1870-­‐1977:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing.	  Data	  for	  1943-­‐1946	  interpolated.	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Switzerland	  
1870-­‐1913:	  The	  Swiss	  Economic	  and	  Historical	  Database.	  Wavre	  index	  of	  industrial	  
production.	  Table	  K10,	  column	  L.	  
http://www.fsw.uzh.ch/hstat/nls/sylkgenerator.php?datei=K.10Bau.BWS1851-­‐
1913R.slk&filename=K.10Bau.BWS1851-­‐1913R.slk&chapter=./k/	  
1913-­‐1944:	  The	  Swiss	  Economic	  and	  Historical	  Database.	  Index	  of	  Industrial	  
Production	  David	  (1995).	  Table	  K14,	  Column	  N.	  
http://www.fsw.uzh.ch/hstat/nls/sylkgenerator.php?datei=K.14.Index.Ind.1913-­‐
92R.slk&filename=K.14.Index.Ind.1913-­‐92R.slk&chapter=./k/	  	  


	                                                           48	  
1944-­‐1958:	  The	  Swiss	  Economic	  and	  Historical	  Database.	  Table	  K13,	  column	  Z.	  
http://www.fsw.uzh.ch/hstat/nls/sylkgenerator.php?datei=K.13Lage.ziffer1925-­‐
68L.slk&filename=K.13Lage.ziffer1925-­‐68L.slk&chapter=./k/	  
1958-­‐1960:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1955-­‐1971.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1967-­‐1980:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                                               Scandinavia	  

Denmark	  
1870-­‐1913:	  Hansen,	  Aage	  (1974),	  Økonomisk	  Vækst	  i	  Danmark,	  Copenhagen:	  
Akademisk	  Forlag.	  
1913-­‐1960:	  United	  Nations,	  International	  Trade	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1960.	  Index	  of	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1953=100.	  Data	  for	  1913-­‐1912,	  1938-­‐1950	  interpolated.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  459.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐1980:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Norway	  
1970-­‐1930:	  VA	  in	  secondary	  sector.	  Data	  graciously	  provided	  by	  Ola	  Grytten	  
1930-­‐1960:	  United	  Nations,	  Historical	  Data	  1900-­‐1960	  on	  international	  merchandise	  
trade	  statistics.	  Index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  1953=100.	  Data	  for	  1938-­‐1950	  
interpolated.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  industries.	  
1967-­‐1970:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Sweden	  
1970-­‐1981:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing.	  



	                                                         49	  
1981-­‐1993:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1993-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                                       European	  Periphery	  

Albania	  
1938-­‐1950:	  Lampe	  and	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  1550-­‐1950.	  From	  
Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Indiana	  University	  Press.	  Table	  13.11,	  
Industrial	  Output	  1938-­‐1950,	  p.	  561.	  Data	  for	  1938-­‐49	  interpolated.	  
1950-­‐1970:	  Lampe	  and	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  1550-­‐1950.	  From	  
Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Indiana	  University	  Press.	  Table	  14.1,	  Growth	  
of	  Population,	  Labor	  force	  and	  Production,	  p.	  580.	  Net	  Material	  Product	  in	  Industry	  
(Constant	  Prices).	  Data	  for	  1950-­‐60,	  1960-­‐70	  interpolated.	  
1993-­‐1996:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1996-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Austria	  
1870-­‐1913:	  Max-­‐Stephan	  Schulze	  (2000),	  “Patterns	  of	  Growth	  and	  Stagnation	  in	  the	  
Late	  Nineteenth	  Century	  Habsburg	  Economy,”	  European	  Review	  of	  Economic	  History	  4:	  
311-­‐340.	  Table	  A3,	  Indices	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  in	  Austria	  (1913	  prices,	  
1913=100),	  p.	  339.	  	  
1913-­‐1917:	  Max-­‐Stephan	  Schulze	  (2005),	  “Austria-­‐Hungary’s	  economy	  in	  World	  War	  I,”	  
in	  Stephen	  Broadberry	  and	  Mark	  Harrison	  (eds.),	  The	  Economics	  of	  World	  War	  I.	  
Cambridge:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  Tables	  3.10	  and	  3.11,	  pp.	  85-­‐86.	  Manufacturing.	  
1917-­‐1921:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  IV,	  p.	  136.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1913	  =	  100).	  
1921-­‐1960:	  United	  Nations,	  Historical	  Data	  1900-­‐1960	  on	  international	  merchandise	  
trade	  statistics.	  Index	  of	  Manufacturing	  Production	  1953=100.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1967-­‐1976:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1976-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Belarus	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                           50	  
Bosnia	  and	  Herzegovina	  
1881-­‐1915:	  Palairet,	  Michael	  (1993),	  “The	  Habsburg	  Industrial	  Achievement	  in	  Bosnia-­‐
Hercegovina,	  1878-­‐1914:	  An	  Economic	  Spurt	  That	  Succeeded?,”	  Austrian	  History	  
Yearbook,	  XXIV	  (1993),	  pp.	  133-­‐152.	  Index	  of	  Large	  Scale	  Industrial	  Value	  Added.	  Bosnia	  
Hercegovina,	  1881-­‐1915	  (All	  Industries	  1907=1000),	  Table	  1,	  p.	  142.	  
1994-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bulgaria	  
1870-­‐2000:	  Data	  graciously	  provided	  by	  Martin	  Ivanov,	  based	  on	  Ivanov,	  M.,	  The	  Gross	  
Domestic	  Product	  of	  Bulgaria	  1870-­‐1945-­‐2000,	  forthcoming.	  Data	  for	  1870-­‐1887	  
interpolated.	  
2000-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Croatia	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cyprus	  
1962-­‐1967: Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.
1967-­‐1975: United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1975-­‐2007: World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).


Czech	  Republic	  
1996-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Czechoslovakia	  
1913-­‐1937:	  Svennilson,	  Ingvar	  (1954),	  Growth	  and	  Stagnation	  in	  the	  European	  
Economy,	  United	  Nations	  Economic	  Commission	  for	  Europe.	  Table	  A66.	  Annual	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1913-­‐1950.	  
1937-­‐1991:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Industry	  value	  added.	  Data	  for	  1937-­‐1948	  
interpolated.	  


	                                                            51	  
Estonia	  
1920-­‐1938:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  VI,	  p.	  143.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1925-­‐29	  =	  100).	  
1985-­‐1993:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3),	  Manufacturing.	  
1993-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Finland	  
1870-­‐1975:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Data	  for	  1937-­‐1948	  interpolated.	  Manufacturing	  
value	  added.	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Greece	  
1913-­‐1938:	  Svennilson,	  Ingvar	  (1954),	  Growth	  and	  Stagnation	  in	  the	  European	  
Economy,	  United	  Nations	  Economic	  Commission	  for	  Europe.	  Table	  A66,	  Annual	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1913-­‐1950.	  
1938-­‐1939:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  459.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1939-­‐1948:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Manufacturing.	  Data	  for	  this	  
period	  are	  interpolated.	  
1948-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1962,	  
Manufacturing.	  
1967-­‐1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐2000:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Hungary	  
1870-­‐1917:	  Schulze,	  Max-­‐Stephan	  (2000),	  "Patterns	  of	  growth	  and	  stagnation	  in	  the	  
late	  nineteenth	  century	  Habsburg	  economy,"	  European	  Review	  of	  Economic	  History	  4:	  
311-­‐340.	  Table	  4A.	  Indices	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  in	  Hungary	  (1913	  prices,	  
1913=100),	  p.	  340.	  
1917-­‐1929:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  VI,	  p.	  143.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1925-­‐29	  =	  100).	  




	                                                           52	  
1929-­‐1938:	  Ránki	  Gyorgy	  (1964),	  “Problems	  of	  the	  Development	  of	  the	  Hungarian	  
Industry,	  1900-­‐1944,”	  The	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  History	  24:	  204-­‐228.	  	  Tables	  1	  and	  2,	  p.	  
214.	  
1938-­‐1943:	  Ránki	  Gyorgy	  (1964),	  “Problems	  of	  the	  Development	  of	  the	  Hungarian	  
Industry,	  1900-­‐1944,”	  The	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  History	  24:	  204-­‐228.	  	  Table	  4.	  War-­‐time	  
industrial	  production	  calculated	  on	  unchanged	  price	  basis,	  p.	  220.	  
1943-­‐1967:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  459.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐1991:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1991-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Iceland	  
1997-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Ireland	  
1926-­‐1948:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  459.	  Industrial	  production.	  Data	  for	  1926-­‐
1928,	  1929-­‐1930,	  1932-­‐1935,	  and	  1939-­‐1943	  interpolated.	  
1948-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1962,	  
Manufacturing.	  
1967-­‐	  1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Italy	  
1870-­‐	  1970:	  Baffigi,	  Alberto	  (2011),	  “Italian	  National	  Accounts,”	  A	  project	  of	  Banca	  
d'Italia,	  Istat	  and	  University	  of	  Rome	  Tor	  Vergata,	  in	  Economic	  History	  Working	  Papers,	  
Banca	  d'Italia,	  N.	  18.	  Table	  5.	  Manufacturing	  (current	  frontiers).	  
http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/pubsto/quastoeco/QSE_18	  	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Latvia	  
1913-­‐1938:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  VI,	  p.	  143.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1925-­‐29	  =	  100).	  Data	  for	  1913-­‐1920	  interpolated.	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                                53	  
Lithuania	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Macedonia,	  FYR	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Malta	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



Moldova	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Montenegro	  
2000-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Poland	  
1913-­‐1938:	  Svennilson,	  Ingvar	  (1954),	  Growth	  and	  Stagnation	  in	  the	  European	  
Economy,	  United	  Nations	  Economic	  Commission	  for	  Europe.	  Table	  A66,	  Annual	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1913-­‐1950.	  
1938-­‐1967:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  459.	  Industrial	  production.	  Data	  for	  1938-­‐
1948	  interpolated.	  
1967-­‐1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐1992:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1992-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Portugal	  
1870-­‐1953:	  Lains,	  Pedro	  (2006),	  "Growth	  in	  a	  Protected	  Environment:	  Portugal,	  1850-­‐
1950,”	  Research	  in	  Economic	  History	  24.	  Table	  A1,	  p.	  152.	  Industrial	  output	  (including	  
manufacturing,	  mining,	  electricity,	  water	  and	  construction).	  
1953-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1955-­‐1971.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  



	                                                             54	  
1967-­‐1988:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1988-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Romania	  
1902-­‐1913:	  Jackson,	  Marvin	  R.	  (1982),	  “The	  Evidence	  of	  Industrial	  Growth	  in	  
Southeastern	  Europe	  before	  the	  Second	  World	  War,”	  East	  European	  Quarterly	  16:4.	  
Table	  3.	  Estimated	  Growth	  of	  real	  output	  from	  factory	  manufacturing	  from	  1901-­‐2	  to	  
1915,	  p.	  401.	  
1913-­‐1938:	  Svennilson,	  Ingvar	  (1954),	  Growth	  and	  Stagnation	  in	  the	  European	  
Economy,	  United	  Nations	  Economic	  Commission	  for	  Europe.	  Table	  A66,	  Annual	  
Manufacturing	  Production	  1913-­‐1950.	  
1938-­‐1981:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  	  Romania,	  Value	  Added	  by	  Sector	  of	  Origin	  at	  
Adjusted	  Factor	  Costs	  in	  Constant	  Prices.	  Industry	  Volume	  index	  (1990	  =	  100).	  	  
1981-­‐2004:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
2004-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Russia/USSR	  
1870-­‐1967:	  Mitchell	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  458.	  	  Industrial	  production.	  Data	  for	  
1913-­‐1924,	  1940-­‐1944	  interpolated.	  
1967-­‐1990:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1990-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Serbia	  and	  Montenegro	  
1898-­‐1910:	  Lampe,	  John	  R.	  and	  Marvin	  R.	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  
1550-­‐1950:	  From	  Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Bloomington,	  Ind.:	  Indiana	  
University	  Press.	  Table	  8.6,	  p.	  205.	  Gross	  Real	  Industrial	  Output	  (million	  dinars,	  1898	  
prices).	  
1990-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Slovak	  Republic	  
1990-­‐1993:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  




	                                                             55	  
1993-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Slovenia	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Spain	  
1870-­‐1981:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  value	  added.	  
1981-­‐1995:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Ukraine	  
1987-­‐1990:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Yugoslavia	  
1923-­‐1929:	  Lampe,	  John	  R.	  and	  Marvin	  R.	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  
1550-­‐1950:	  From	  Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Bloomington,	  Ind.:	  Indiana	  
University	  Press.	  Table	  10.5.	  Growth	  and	  Structure	  of	  Material	  Product	  sectors	  1911-­‐
1930,	  p.	  339.	  
1929-­‐1938:	  Lampe,	  John	  R.	  and	  Marvin	  R.	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  
1550-­‐1950:	  From	  Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Bloomington,	  Ind.:	  Indiana	  
University	  Press.	  Table	  12.14.	  Real	  Industrial	  growth,	  p.	  484.	  
1938-­‐1948:	  Lampe,	  John	  R.	  and	  Marvin	  R.	  Jackson	  (1982),	  Balkan	  Economic	  History,	  
1550-­‐1950:	  From	  Imperial	  Borderlands	  to	  Developing	  Nations,	  Bloomington,	  Ind.:	  Indiana	  
University	  Press.	  Table	  13.11.	  Industrial	  Output,	  p.	  561.	  Gross	  Output.	  
1948-­‐1963:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1900-­‐1962.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1963-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Europe	  1750-­‐
2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  460.	  	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐1990:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  




	                                                           56	  
                      Australia,	  Canada	  and	  New	  Zealand	  

Australia	  
1870-­‐1949:	  Haig,	  Brian	  (2001),	  “New	  Estimates	  of	  Australian	  GDP:	  1861-­‐1948/9,”	  
Australian	  Economic	  History	  Review	  41:	  1-­‐34.	  Table	  A2,	  pp.	  28-­‐30.	  Manufacturing.	  Data	  
for	  period	  1939-­‐1949,	  interpolated.	  
1949-­‐1957:	  Haig,	  Brian	  (1967),	  “Estimates	  of	  Australian	  Real	  Product	  by	  Industry,”	  
Australian	  Economic	  Papers	  5(8):	  230-­‐242.	  Table	  V,	  p.245.	  Output	  in	  manufacturing.	  
1957-­‐1963:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  371.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1963-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  Industries.	  
1967-­‐1975:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Canada	  
1870-­‐1923:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  V,	  p.	  139,	  141.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1925-­‐29	  =	  100).	  Data	  for	  the	  periods	  1870-­‐1900,	  1913-­‐1920	  interpolated.	  
1923-­‐1960:	  United	  Nations,	  Historical	  Data	  1900-­‐1960	  on	  international	  merchandise	  
trade	  statistic.	  Index	  of	  Manufacturing	  Production	  1953=100.	  Data	  for	  periods1938-­‐
1950	  interpolated.	  
1960-­‐1967:	  OECD,	  Industrial	  Production	  Historical	  Statistics	  1960-­‐1975.	  
Manufacturing	  industries,	  Supplement	  No.	  1.	  
1967-­‐1981:	  United	  Nations,	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD,	  
Manufacturing.	  
1981-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


New	  Zealand	  
1875-­‐1914:	  Greasley,	  Greasley	  and	  Les	  Oxley	  (2010),	  Knowledge,	  natural	  resource	  
abundance	  and	  economic	  development:	  Lessons	  from	  New	  Zealand	  1861–1939,"	  
Explorations	  in	  Economic	  History	  47(4):	  443-­‐459.	  	  Table	  A1,	  p.13.	  Manufacturing.	  
1914-­‐1958:	  United	  Nations,	  Historical	  Data	  1900-­‐1960	  on	  international	  merchandise	  
trade	  statistic.	  Index	  of	  Manufacturing	  Production	  1953=100.	  Data	  for	  the	  periods	  1913-­‐
1921,	  1938-­‐1950	  interpolated.	  
1958-­‐1977:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  371.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1977-­‐1981:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                            57	  
1981-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


                                                            Asia	  

Afghanistan	  
2002-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Armenia	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Azerbaijan	  
1981-­‐1992:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1992-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bangladesh	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bhutan	  
1981-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Brunei	  Darussalam	  
1989-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cambodia	  
1993-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


China	  
1889-­‐1913:	  Maddison	  Angus	  (1998),	  Chinese	  Economic	  Performance	  in	  the	  Long	  Run	  
(OECD	  Development	  Centre).	  Modern	  Manufacturing	  (1890=26	  and	  1913=156),	  Table	  
C.1,	  page	  155.	  Data	  for	  1891-­‐1913	  interpolated.	  	  



	                                                             58	  
1913-­‐1949:	  Kubo,	  Toru	  (2009),	  A	  Search	  for	  20th	  Century	  China's	  Economic	  History	  
(Shinshu	  University),	  Chapter	  4,	  Table	  16.	  Industrial	  Production.	  
	  
1949-­‐1997:	  Wu,	  Harry	  X.	  (2002),	  “How	  Fast	  has	  Chinese	  Industry	  Grown?	  –	  Measuring	  
the	  Real	  Output	  of	  Chinese	  Industry,	  1949-­‐97,”	  Review	  of	  Income	  and	  Wealth	  48:	  179-­‐
204.	  Table	  A2,	  pg	  202.	  Total	  Manufacturing,	  million	  1987	  yuan.	  
	  
1997-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Fiji	  
1966-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Georgia	  
1996-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Hong	  Kong	  SAR	  of	  China	  
1982-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


India	  
1870-­‐1960:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  value	  added.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Indonesia	  
1880-­‐1960:	  van	  der	  Eng,	  Pierre	  (2010),	  "The	  sources	  of	  long-­‐term	  economic	  growth	  in	  
Indonesia,	  1880-­‐2008,"	  Explorations	  in	  Economic	  History	  47(3):	  294-­‐309,	  Table	  A1,	  304-­‐
6.	  Gross	  value	  added	  in	  manufacturing.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Japan	  
1874-­‐1885:	  Miyohei	  Shinohara	  (1972),	  Estimates	  of	  Long-­‐Term	  Economic	  Statistics	  of	  
Japan	  since	  1868,	  Volume	  10:	  Mining	  and	  Manufacturing	  (Tokyo:	  Toyo	  Keizai	  Shinposha,	  
1972),	  pp.	  145-­‐147.	  Manufacturing	  Output:	  1874-­‐1940	  value	  of	  production	  in	  
manufacturing.	  


	                                                             59	  
1885-­‐1950:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  value	  added.	  	  
1950-­‐1953:	  Ohkawa,	  Kazushi	  and	  Miyohei	  Shinohara	  with	  Larry	  Meissner	  (1979),	  
Patterns	  of	  Japanese	  Economic	  Development:	  A	  Quantitative	  Appraisal,	  New	  Haven,	  Conn.:	  
Yale	  University	  Press,	  1979.	  Value	  of	  production	  (pp.	  305-­‐6)	  in	  manufacturing.	  
1953-­‐1980:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  value	  added.	  	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Kazakhstan	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Kiribati	  
1982-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Korea,	  Republic	  of	  
1910-­‐1911:	  Changes	  in	  the	  Korean	  Economy	  1910-­‐1940	  (Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  Harvard	  
University	  Press,	  1978),	  Tables	  A-­‐12,	  p.	  171	  and	  Table	  20,	  p.	  49.	  Net	  value	  of	  commodity	  
product	  in	  1939	  prices	  (millions	  K	  yen).	  
1911-­‐1950:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  added	  value.	  
1950-­‐1953:	  Hak	  Pyo	  (2000),	  “Economic	  Growth	  in	  Korea:	  Long-­‐term	  Trends	  and	  
Perspectives,”	  in	  Constructing	  a	  Historical	  Macroeconomic	  Database	  for	  Trans-­‐Asian	  
Regions,	  ed.	  K.	  Odaka,	  Y.	  iyokawa	  and	  M.	  Kuboniwa	  (Tokyo:	  Hitotsubashi	  Institute,	  
March	  2000),	  Table	  27.	  
1953-­‐1960:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  added	  value.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                                 60	  
Kyrgyz	  Republic	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Lao	  People's	  Democratic	  Republic	  
1984-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Macao	  SAR	  of	  China	  
1996-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Malaysia	  
1968-­‐1970:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Maldives	  
1984-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Mongolia	  
1964-­‐1981:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1981-­‐1994:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1994-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Myanmar	  (Burma)	  
1901-­‐1938:	  Hlaing,	  Aye	  (1964),	  “Trends	  of	  economic	  growth,”	  Journal	  of	  Burma	  
Research	  Society	  47:	  57-­‐108.	  Burma	  Net	  Domestic	  Product	  1901-­‐1938,	  Rs.	  000	  constant	  
prices,	  p.	  144.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Nepal	  
1973-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                             61	  
Pakistan	  
1950-­‐	  1954:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Manufacturing.	  
1954-­‐1960:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Papua	  New	  Guinea	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


The	  Philippines	  
1902-­‐1951:	  Hooley,	  Richard	  (2005),	  “American	  economic	  policy	  in	  the	  Philippines,	  
1902-­‐1940:	  Exploring	  a	  statistical	  dark	  age	  in	  colonial	  statistics,”	  Journal	  of	  Asian	  Studies	  
16,	  Table	  A.1,	  pp.	  480-­‐1.	  Gross	  value	  added	  in	  manufacturing	  in	  1985	  pesos.	  
1951-­‐1960:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Samoa	  
1994-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Singapore	  
1966-­‐1968:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1968-­‐1975:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Solomon	  Islands	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Sri	  Lanka	  
1957-­‐1960:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                               62	  
Taiwan	  
1903-­‐1937:	  Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  Perspective,”	  
Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  
Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  Manufacturing	  +	  Mining	  (Thousands	  yen	  (1934-­‐36	  
prices,	  1935=100)).	  
1937-­‐1948:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  367.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1948-­‐1958:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Manufacturing.	  
1958-­‐1975:	  Toshiyuki,	  Mizoguchi	  (2000),	  “Long-­‐term	  National	  Accounts	  Data	  Base	  of	  
Japan,	  Taiwan	  and	  Korea,”	  in	  Constructing	  a	  Historical	  Macroeconomic	  Database	  for	  
Trans-­‐Asian	  Regions,	  ed.	  K.	  Odaka,	  Y.	  Kiyokawa	  and	  M.	  Kuboniwa.	  Tokyo:	  Hitotsubashi	  
Institute.	  
1975-­‐1993:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1993-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Tajikistan	  
1985-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Thailand	  
1870-­‐1950:	  Sompop	  Manarungsan	  (1989),	  “Economic	  development	  of	  Thailand,	  1850-­‐
1950:	  response	  to	  the	  challenge	  of	  the	  world	  economy,”	  Groningen:	  University	  of	  
Groningen,	  1989,	  p.	  251.	  Thailand	  GDP	  1870–1950	  market	  prices.	  Manufacturing.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Tonga	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Uzbekistan	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Vanuatu	  
1998-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                           63	  
Vietnam	  
1985-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                              Latin	  America	  and	  Caribbean	  

Antigua	  and	  Barbuda	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).


Argentina	  
1875-­‐1900:	  Barbero,	  María	  and	  Fernando	  Rocchi	  (2003),	  “Industry,”	  in	  Gerardo	  Della	  
Paolera	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor	  (eds.)	  A	  New	  Economic	  History	  of	  Argentina.	  Chapter	  9,	  Table	  
9.2,	  Evolution	  of	  industrial	  output	  1875-­‐1990,	  p.	  265.	  
1900-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1900-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  at	  constant	  prices	  from	  Vázquez	  Presedo	  (1990)	  for	  
1977-­‐1990,	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002)	  for	  1991-­‐2000.	  Figures	  are	  
expressed	  in	  Pesos	  Argentinos	  (PA).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bahamas	  
1989-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Barbados	  
1970-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  
2005-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations,	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Belize	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bolivia	  
1950-­‐1970:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1950-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  




	                                                              64	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  at	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  
(1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Pesos	  (P).	  	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Brazil	  
1900-­‐1920:	  Claudia	  L.	  S.	  Haddad	  (1978),	  Crescimento	  do	  Produto	  Real	  no	  Brasil	  1900-­‐
1947,	  Rio	  de	  Janeiro:	  FGV	  1978.	  Tabela	  1,	  pp.	  7-­‐8.	  Real	  industrial	  product	  1900-­‐1947	  
(1939=100).	  
1920-­‐1990:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  
1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002)	  and	  from	  ECLAC,	  “Base	  de	  datos	  macroeconómicos	  del	  Estudio	  
Económico	  de	  América	  Latina	  y	  el	  Caribe,”	  available	  from	  
http://www.eclac.org/DE/proyectos/eee/eee2002/index.htm	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  
New	  Cruzeiros	  (NC).	  	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Chile	  
1870-­‐1900:	  Braun,	  Juan,	  Matías	  Braun,	  Ignacio	  Briones,	  José	  Díaz,	  Rolf	  Lüders	  and	  Gert	  
Wagner	  (2000),	  Economía	  Chilena	  1810-­‐1995:	  Estadísticas	  Históricas,	  Pontifica	  
Universidad	  Católica	  de	  Chile.	  Table	  1.2	  pp.	  27-­‐28	  and	  Table	  7.2	  pp.	  219-­‐220.	  Real	  
Output.	  
1900-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1900-­‐1907	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  GDP	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  
Hofman	  (2000).	  Figures	  for	  1908-­‐1939	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  Ballesteros	  &	  Davis	  (1963).	  
Ballesteros	  &	  Davis	  &	  Davis	  (1963)	  assume	  the	  value	  of	  figures	  for	  1913-­‐1916	  constant.	  
Figures	  for	  1940-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  
with	  the	  rate	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  
1987,	  1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Escudos	  (E).	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Colombia	  
1900-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1900-­‐1924	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  
constant	  prices	  from	  Hofman	  (2000).	  Figures	  for	  1925-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  
Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐
added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1978,	  1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  
Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Pesos	  (P).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                             65	  
Costa	  Rica	  
1920-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1945	  are	  from	  Bulmer-­‐Thomas	  (1987).	  Figures	  for	  1946-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  
CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1982,	  1986,	  1993,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  
are	  expressed	  in	  Colones	  (C).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cuba	  
1930-­‐1970:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1980	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1930-­‐1945	  are	  calculated	  from	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  net	  income	  from	  
Brundenius	  (1984).	  Figures	  for	  1946-­‐2000	  are	  provided	  by	  Claes	  Brundenius.	  Figures	  
are	  expressed	  in	  Pesos	  (P).	  	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Dominica	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Dominican	  Republic	  
1950-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1950-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  from	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1981,	  1985,	  1989,	  
1993,	  1997,	  1999,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Pesos	  (P).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Ecuador	  
1940-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
are	  for	  1939-­‐1976	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  
1996,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Sucres	  (S).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


El	  Salvador	  
1920-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1945	  are	  calculated	  from	  Bulmer-­‐Thomas	  (1987).	  Figures	  for	  1946-­‐1976	  are	  
from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  




	                                                              66	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1982,	  1986,	  1993,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  
are	  expressed	  in	  Colones	  (C).	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Grenada	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Guatemala	  
1920-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1949	  are	  calculated	  from	  Bulmer-­‐Thomas	  (1987).	  Figures	  for	  1950-­‐1976	  are	  
from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1981,	  1986,	  1993,	  
1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Quetzales	  (Q).	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Guyana	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Haiti	  
1950-­‐1997:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1950-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  from	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  
1996,	  1997,	  2002),	  years	  ending	  30	  September.	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Gourdes	  (G).
1997-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Honduras	  
1920-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1949	  are	  calculated	  from	  Bulmer-­‐Thomas	  (1987).	  Figures	  for	  1950-­‐1976	  are	  
from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1982,	  1986,	  1993,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  
are	  expressed	  in	  Lempiras	  (L).	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Jamaica	  
1966-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


	                                                              67	  
Mexico	  
1891-­‐1899:	  Razo,	  Armando	  and	  Stephen	  Haber	  (1998),	  “The	  Rate	  of	  Growth	  of	  
Productivity	  in	  Mexico,	  1850-­‐1933,”	  Journal	  of	  Latin	  American	  Studies	  30,	  Table	  4,	  p.498.	  
Cotton	  Textile	  Output.	  	  
1899-­‐1900:	  United	  Nations	  Economic	  Commission	  for	  Latin	  America,	  The	  Process	  of	  
Industrialization	  in	  Latin	  America:	  Statistical	  Annex	  19	  (January	  1966:	  
ST/ECLA/Conf.23/L.2/Add.2),	  Table	  I-­‐1,	  p.	  1	  and	  I-­‐11,	  p.	  11.	  Industrial	  Production.	  
1900-­‐1965:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1900-­‐1910	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  
from	  INEGI	  (1990),	  no	  data	  for	  Mexico	  during	  the	  Revolution	  (1911-­‐1920).	  Figures	  for	  
1921-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  
rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  
1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  Silver	  Pesos	  (SP).	  	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Nicaragua	  
1920-­‐1994:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1920-­‐1944	  are	  calculated	  from	  Bulmer-­‐Thomas	  (1987).	  Figures	  for	  1945-­‐1976	  are	  
from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1981,	  1986,	  1993,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  
are	  expressed	  in	  Córdobas	  Viejas	  (CV).	  	  
1994-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Panama	  
1945-­‐1980:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1945-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978),	  figures	  for	  1945-­‐1949	  include	  mining	  and	  
quarrying.	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  
manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  
1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  calculated	  based	  on	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  are	  higher	  than	  
the	  levels	  reported	  in	  subsequent	  issues	  of	  ECLAC	  SYLA.	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  
Balboas	  (B).	  	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Paraguay	  
1938-­‐1962:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1938-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978),	  includes	  mining	  and	  quarrying	  from	  1938-­‐
1950.	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  
value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  1996,	  1997,	  2002).	  
Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Guaraníes	  (G).	  	  
1962-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


	                                                              68	  
Peru	  
1896-­‐1929:	  Seminario,	  Bruno	  and	  Arlette	  Beltran	  (2000),	  “Crecimento	  Económico	  en	  el	  
Peru:	  1896-­‐1995:	  Nuevas	  Evidencias	  Estadísticas,”	  Lima:	  Universidad	  del	  Pacífico.	  
Cuadro	  X.8,	  pp.	  285-­‐7.	  PBI	  for	  the	  secondary	  sector.	  
1929-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1929-­‐1944	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  VA	  in	  constant	  
prices	  from	  Seminario	  &	  Beltrán	  (1998).	  Figures	  for	  1945-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  
(1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  
value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  (1984,	  1987,	  1993,	  1996,	  2002).	  
Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Soles	  (S).	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Puerto	  Rico	  
1969-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


St.	  Kitts	  and	  Nevis	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


St.	  Lucia	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


St.	  Vincent	  and	  the	  Grenadines	  
1977-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Suriname	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Trinidad	  and	  Tobago	  
1971-­‐	  1984:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1984-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                            69	  
Uruguay	  
1870-­‐2007:	  Bértola,	  Luis.	  (1998),	  “El	  PBI	  de	  Uruguay	  1870-­‐1936	  y	  otras	  estimaciones,”	  
in	  La	  industria	  manufacturera	  uruguaya.	  Cuadro	  III.13	  1961-­‐2009:	  Banco	  Central	  del	  
Uruguay.	  Real	  Gross	  Domestic	  and	  Manufacturing	  Product,	  1870-­‐2009.	  


Venezuela	  
1936-­‐1960:	  MOxLAD.	  Manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  (million	  constant	  1970	  LCU):	  Figures	  
for	  1936-­‐1976	  are	  from	  ECLAC	  CE	  (1978).	  Figures	  for	  1977-­‐2000	  are	  calculated	  with	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  manufacturing	  value-­‐added	  in	  constant	  prices	  from	  ECLAC	  SYLA	  
(1981,	  1985,	  1989,	  1993,	  1997,	  1999,	  2002).	  Figures	  are	  expressed	  in	  Bolívares	  (B).	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                             Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa	  

Algeria	  
1948-­‐1958:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Manufacturing.	  
1958-­‐1960:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  365.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Bahrain	  
1980-­‐1985:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Egypt	  
1919-­‐1940:	  Hansen,	  Bent	  and	  Girgis	  A.	  Marzouk	  (1965),	  Development	  and	  Economic	  
Policy	  in	  the	  UAR	  (Egypt),	  Amsterdam:	  North-­‐Holland.	  Estimate	  GDP	  growth	  1928-­‐1939	  
(1954	  prices,	  Chart	  1.1,	  p.	  3)	  at	  1.60%	  per	  annum.	  	  
1951-­‐1957:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Total	  Industry.	  
1957-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  365.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐1987:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1987-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Iran,	  Islamic	  Republic	  of	  
1960-­‐1965:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  


	                                                           70	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Iraq	  
1997-­‐2003:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Israel	  
1955-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐2007:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  


Jordan	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Kuwait	  
1995-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Lebanon	  
1994-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Morocco	  
1938-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  365.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Oman	  
1988-­‐2004:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (Constant	  
Local	  Currency	  Units).	  Data	  for	  1988-­‐1990	  interpolated.	  
2004-­‐2006:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  


Saudi	  Arabia	  
1968-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                             71	  
Sudan	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Syrian	  Arab	  Republic	  
1957-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  368.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1967-­‐	  2000:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
2000-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Tunisia	  
1937-­‐1965:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  365.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Turkey	  
1880-­‐1923:	  Altug,	  Sumru,	  Alpay	  Filiztekin,	  and	  Sevket	  Pamuk	  (2008),	  “Sources	  of	  long-­‐
term	  economic	  growth	  for	  Turkey,	  1800-­‐2005,”	  European	  Review	  of	  Economic	  History	  
12,	  3.	  Table	  3	  pg.	  405.	  
1923-­‐	  1938:	  Data	  graciously	  provided	  by	  Şevket	  Pamuk.	  (Total	  Industrial	  VA)	  	  
1938-­‐1968:	  Global	  Financial	  Data,	  Industrial	  Production	  Index	  NSA	  
1968-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


United	  Arab	  Emirates	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Yemen,	  Republic	  of	  
1990-­‐2003:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                                      South-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  

Angola	  
1986-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  



	                                                           72	  
Benin	  
1971-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Botswana	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Burkina	  Faso	  
1970-­‐2006:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Burundi	  
1970-­‐1999:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cameroon	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cape	  Verde	  
1986-­‐2004:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Central	  African	  Republic	  
1965-­‐2006:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Comoros	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Congo,	  Dem.	  Rep.	  of	  
1929-­‐1959:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  365.	  Industrial	  production.	  
Data	  for	  period	  1929-­‐1935	  interpolated	  
1968-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                           73	  
Congo,	  Rep.	  of	  
1965-­‐1996:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Cote	  d'Ivoire	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Djibouti	  
1990-­‐2006:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Equatorial	  Guinea	  
2000-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Eritrea	  
1992-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Ethiopia	  
1981-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Gabon	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Gambia,	  The	  
1966-­‐2004:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Ghana	  
1956-­‐1974:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1977-­‐2004:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  




	                                                           74	  
Guinea	  
1989-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Kenya	  
1953-­‐1958:	  United	  Nations,	  Patterns	  of	  Industrial	  Growth.	  Manufacturing.	  
1958-­‐1964:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1964-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (Constant	  
Local	  Currency	  Units).	  


Lesotho	  
1970-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Madagascar	  
1984-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Mali	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Mauritania	  
1985-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Mauritius	  
1976-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Malawi	  
1970-­‐1975:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1975-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  




	                                                           75	  
Mozambique	  
1960-­‐1974:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  
Data	  for	  1960-­‐1967	  interpolated.	  
1991-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Namibia	  
1980-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Niger	  
1985-­‐2003:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Rwanda	  
1965-­‐2003:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


São	  Tomé	  and	  Príncipe	  
2001-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Senegal	  
1959-­‐1968:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1968-­‐1979:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1979-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Seychelles	  
1978-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Sierra	  Leone	  
1990-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (Constant	  
Local	  Currency	  Units).Data	  for	  period	  1995-­‐2005	  interpolated.	  




	                                                           76	  
Somalia	  
1970-­‐1990:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


South	  Africa	  
1913-­‐	  1920:	  League	  of	  Nations	  (1945),	  Industrialization	  and	  Foreign	  Trade.	  New	  York:	  
League	  of	  Nations	  1945.	  Table	  VI,	  p.	  143.	  Annual	  index	  of	  manufacturing	  production	  
(1925-­‐29	  =	  100).	  Data	  for	  1914-­‐1917	  interpolated.	  
1920-­‐1960:	  Feinstein,	  Charles	  H.	  (2005),	  An	  Economic	  History	  of	  South	  Africa:	  Conquest,	  
Discrimination	  and	  Development,	  Cambridge,	  Cambridge	  University	  Press,	  Table	  6.2,	  p.	  
122	  and	  Table	  8.5,	  p.	  186.	  	  
1960-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Swaziland	  
1971-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Tanzania	  
1986	  -­‐1990:	  United	  Nations	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  2010	  at	  the	  2-­‐digit	  level	  of	  
ISIC	  Code	  (Revision	  3).	  Manufacturing.	  
1990-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Togo	  
1977-­‐2005:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Uganda	  
1982-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Zambia	  
1955-­‐1965:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  
1965-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


Zimbabwe	  
1955-­‐1967:	  Mitchell,	  Brian	  R.	  (2007),	  International	  Historical	  Statistics:	  Africa,	  Asia	  &	  
Oceania	  1750-­‐2005,	  6th	  ed.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  Table	  D1,	  p.	  366.	  Industrial	  production.	  


	                                                             77	  
1967-­‐1969:	  United	  Nations	  General	  Industrial	  Statistics	  Database	  1953-­‐93	  CD.	  
Manufacturing.	  
1969-­‐2007:	  World	  Bank,	  World	  Development	  Indicators.	  Manufacturing	  (constant	  local	  
currency	  units).	  


                                                         Links	  

       •   Smits,	  Jan-­‐Pieter,	  Pieter	  Woltjer	  and	  Debin	  Ma	  (2009),	  “A	  Dataset	  on	  
           Comparative	  Historical	  National	  Accounts,	  ca.	  1870-­‐1950:	  A	  Time-­‐Series	  
           Perspective,”	  Groningen	  Growth	  and	  Development	  Centre	  Research	  
           Memorandum	  GD-­‐107,	  Groningen:	  University	  of	  Groningen.	  
           http://www.rug.nl/feb/Onderzoek/Onderzoekscentra/GGDC/data/hna	  
	  
       •   The	  Montevideo-­‐Oxford	  Latin	  American	  Economic	  History	  Database	  (MOxLAD)	  
           http://oxlad.qeh.ox.ac.uk/search.php	  
           	  
       •   Baffigi,	  Alberto	  (2011),	  “Italian	  National	  Accounts,”	  A	  project	  of	  Banca	  d'Italia,	  
           Istat	  and	  University	  of	  Rome	  Tor	  Vergata,	  in	  Economic	  History	  Working	  Papers,	  
           Banca	  d'Italia,	  N.	  18	  Table	  5,	  Manufacturing	  (current	  frontiers).	  
           http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/pubsto/quastoeco/QSE_18	  
           	  
       •   United	  Nations,	  Historical	  Data	  1900-­‐1960	  on	  international	  merchandise	  trade	  
           statistic.	  http://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/imts/historical_data.htm	  
	  




	                                                            78	  
