NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW INFLATION AFFECTS MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE:
AN AGENT-BASED COMPUTATIONAL INVESTIGATION
Quamrul Ashraf
Boris Gershman
Peter Howitt
Working Paper 18225
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18225
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

This paper is an extended version of an identically titled paper prepared for the upcoming special issue
of Macroeconomic Dynamics on "Complexity in Economic Systems." Useful comments were received
from two anonymous referees, workshop participants at the Lorentz Center in Leiden, and seminar
participants at the OFCE in Sophia Antipolis, the Federal Reserve Board, and the National Bank of
Austria. The C++ code for our model can be downloaded at http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Peter_Howitt/working/Inflation.zip.
It was compiled and run as a 64-bit Windows application. The output files sufficient to replicate the
results reported in the paper can be downloaded at ˛http://www.econ.brown.edu/faculty/Peter_Howitt/working/Inflation_results.zip.
Ashraf acknowledges research support from the Hellman Fellows Program at Williams College. Howitt
acknowledges research support from the National Science Foundation (SES-0617869). This paper
was partly written while Ashraf was visiting Harvard Kennedy School and the Center for International
Development at Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Quamrul Ashraf, Boris Gershman, and Peter Howitt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Inflation Affects Macroeconomic Performance: An Agent-Based Computational Investigation
Quamrul Ashraf, Boris Gershman, and Peter Howitt
NBER Working Paper No. 18225
July 2012, Revised July 2013
JEL No. C63,E00,E31,E50
ABSTRACT
We use an agent-based computational approach to show how inflation can worsen macroeconomic
performance by disrupting the mechanism of exchange in a decentralized market economy. We find
that increasing the trend rate of inflation above 3 percent has a substantial deleterious effect, but lowering
it below 3 percent has no significant macroeconomic consequences. Our finding remains qualitatively
robust to changes in parameter values and to modifications to our model that partly address the Lucas
critique. Finally, we contribute a novel explanation for why cross-country regressions may fail to detect
a significant negative effect of trend inflation on output even when such an effect exists in reality.
Quamrul Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu
Boris Gershman
American University
Department of Economics
Kreeger Hall
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8029
bgershman@gmail.com

Peter Howitt
Department of Economics
Brown University, Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
peter_howitt@brown.edu

1

Introduction

Inflation-targeting central banks frequently justify their narrow focus on inflation by arguing
that maintaining a low and stable rate of inflation is the best way for them to promote high
employment and output. Yet, neither mainstream economic theory nor existing empirical
studies offer much support for the belief that a country’s real economic performance is significantly improved by reducing the trend rate of inflation, except in extreme circumstances.
Indeed, Fortin (1996) and Akerlof et al. (1996) argue that reducing inflation too close to
zero worsens economic performance because of downward nominal wage rigidity. Moreover,
too low a rate of inflation can result in real instability because of the zero lower bound on
nominal interest rates.
Given the lack of support from economic science, and because of the dangers posed
by nominal wage rigidity and the zero lower bound, inflation-targeting central banks are
reluctant to reduce their targets below 2 or 3 percent. However, the commonly acknowledged
weakness of the microfoundations of mainstream monetary theory leaves many wondering if
there might still be significant costs of inflation that theorists have not yet discovered.
The research reported here goes somewhat beyond mainstream monetary economics
to investigate this issue of how economic performance might be enhanced by reducing the
trend rate of inflation. The paper explores an idea that has been advanced by economists
such as Heymann and Leijonhufvud (1995), namely that inflation might impede the market mechanisms responsible for coordinating economic activities (see also Ragan, 1998).
Strictly speaking, this idea cannot be investigated in a conventional rational-expectationsequilibrium framework because the concept of rational-expectations equilibrium presupposes
that peoples’ actions and beliefs are always perfectly coordinated without the need for any
explicit mechanism. We therefore exploit a less conventional methodology, namely that of
agent-based computational economics (ACE).1
More specifically, we use a modified version of the ACE model that we developed in
Ashraf et al. (2011), henceforth AGH (2011), for addressing the role of banks in an economic
system. In this model economy, all trades are coordinated by a self-organizing network of
trade specialists, as they are in reality by shops, brokers, middlemen, banks, realtors, and
so forth. Here, we simplify the model by ignoring the existence of banks. The model is
calibrated to U.S. data and simulated many times under different target inflation rates to
see what difference the inflation target makes to the average level and variability of GDP,
the variability of inflation, and the average rate of unemployment.
1

See Tesfatsion and Judd (2006) for a survey. Examples of recent macroeconomic applications of ACE
include Deissenberg et al. (2008), Delli Gatti et al. (2008), Dosi et al. (2010), and Ashraf et al. (2011).

1

The basic reason for thinking that this model may help to account for significant costs of
inflation is that it provides a propagation mechanism through which inflation might impede
the market processes that coordinate economic activity. The mechanism involves the entry
and exit of business firms that collectively constitute the network of trade specialists. Because
price changes are not perfectly coordinated, a higher trend rate of inflation should imply,
on average, more dispersion in the relative prices offered by the different specialists. Such
extraneous relative-price variability introduces more volatility into the demand faced by any
individual specialist, thus raising the incidence of shop failures throughout the economy. As
a result, abstracting from any effects of wage rigidity and the problem of the zero lower
bound on nominal interest rates, increased trend inflation should reduce average GDP by
impeding the transactions process.
Our main finding from this investigation is that the trend inflation rate has a powerful
adverse effect on economic performance, but only when it rises above 3 percent. For example,
an increase of trend inflation from 3 to 10 percent reduces the average annual level of GDP
in the median simulation by 6.8 percent. It has qualitatively similar effects on the other
macroeconomic indicators that we examine.
Our paper demonstrates how an ACE approach can deal with questions not readily
addressed by conventional equilibrium analyses, and also how to tackle some common objections to ACE methodology. One such objection is that simulations can be sensitive to
numerical values assigned to parameters. We handle this objection, first, by calibrating our
parameter values to U.S. data and, second, by performing a sensitivity analysis, which shows
that our main finding is qualitatively robust to changes in parameter values.
Another common objection to ACE is that it is subject to the “Lucas critique.” In our
context, when trend inflation rises, one would expect individual behavior to adjust to this
change in the environment, but a model with exogenous behavioral rules does not allow as
much adaptation as a rational-expectations analysis would. To deal with this critique, we
first use our sensitivity analysis to identify which behavioral parameters are most important
for our results. Specifically, we find that the markup applied by a firm when setting its retail
price is particularly critical – the effect of inflation is greatly magnified by having a small
markup. We then modify our model to allow markups to adapt to the environment through
the selection mechanism implicit in the firm exit process. We find that the economy-wide
average surviving markup ends up being higher when inflation is higher, but we also find
that our main result remains intact when we take this endogenous behavior of markups into
consideration.

2

One question raised by our numerical results concerns the absence of conclusive evidence
from existing empirical studies, which, for the most part, have failed to find a sizable and
robust effect of long-run inflation on a country’s GDP. Interestingly, we show that if the
baseline calibrated model were true, then there would still be a 15 percent chance that a
cross-country regression of log GDP on inflation would reveal a statistically insignificant
effect. The reason is that our model implies an inherent endogeneity issue, which arises from
a positive Phillips-type relationship between output and inflation that tends to mask the
underlying negative long-run causal effect of trend inflation on output.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly survey some of the relevant
literature on the real effects of inflation. Section 3 lays out the basic structure of our
agent-based model and discusses its workings. Section 4 presents our method for calibrating
the model’s parameters. Section 5 reveals our main results and those from our sensitivity
analysis. In Section 6, we discuss our technique for dealing with the Lucas critique. Section
7 shows the implications of the model for cross-country regressions of output on inflation,
and Section 8 concludes.

2

Literature on the real effects of inflation

There is an extensive literature on the potential real effects and costs of inflation. One strand
of the literature has focused on effects that work through the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing money. Raising this opportunity cost can reduce output by lowering capital
accumulation and labor supply (Stockman, 1981; Cooley and Hansen, 1989; Gomme, 1993)
or by altering search intensity (Rocheteau and Wright, 2005; Lagos and Rocheteau, 2005).
It is hard to make the case, however, that such effects are empirically important given that
non-interest-bearing money is such a small item in people’s portfolios. Accordingly, Chari et
al. (1995) report a very modest impact of inflation on the steady-state growth rate of output
in a variety of endogenous growth models where the opportunity cost of holding money is
the only channel through which inflation is allowed to matter.
Another line of research has argued that non-indexation of private accounting systems
distorts savings decisions and the allocation of capital under high rates of inflation and,
moreover, that inflation diverts talent away from real productive activity and into less socially
productive financial activity designed simply to cope with or profit from changes in the
value of money (Leijonhufvud, 1977; Howitt, 1990; Summers, 1991). These possible costs
of inflation are difficult to quantify, and we are not aware of any attempts to estimate
their effects on the path of real output. On the other hand, Feldstein (1999) has argued
3

that reducing inflation from 2 percent to 0 would raise output by 4 to 6 percentage points
because of the non-indexation of capital income taxation. However, this effect seems more
like a problem to be dealt with by tax authorities than central bankers.
In New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, trend inflation affects
output mainly through its effect on the equilibrium degree of price dispersion. This is
especially true in those versions that use the Calvo (1983) price-setting model.2 The rise
in price dispersion due to inflation can also have real effects by increasing the amount of
resources devoted to search on the part of buyers, as emphasized in the search-theoretic
literature (Bénabou, 1992; Head and Kumar, 2005). It will also play a crucial role in our
framework, which highlights the detrimental effect of rising price dispersion on business
failures.
On the empirical side, there is virtually no robust evidence on the relationship between
inflation and real outcomes. The literature on the effects of trend inflation on the growth
rate of output, as surveyed in Ragan (1998), has produced little evidence of a significant
impact, except in extreme circumstances. There is also almost no direct evidence of an
effect of trend inflation on the level of real output as opposed to its growth rate or volatility
(Bullard and Keating, 1995). Later in the paper, we provide a novel explanation for why it
may be hard to detect a significant negative effect of trend inflation on output.
Despite the absence of robust reduced-form evidence on the real effects of inflation,
there is considerable empirical support for the relationship between inflation and relativeprice dispersion, which plays a major role not only in New Keynesian and search-theoretic
models but also in our agent-based framework. For example, Parks (1978), Parsley (1996),
Debelle and Lamont (1997), and Lastrapes (2006) document a strong positive association
between inflation and price dispersion in U.S. data.3

3

The model

Our model is a special case of the one developed in AGH (2011). Here, for simplicity,
we abstract from the banking sector. The model attempts to portray, in an admittedly
crude form, the mechanism by which economic activities are coordinated in a decentralized
economy. It starts from the proposition that, in reality, almost all exchanges in an advanced
2

Ascari (2004) and Yun (2005) show this effect to be large. However, this result seems to be sensitive to
the two features of the Calvo model that most economists would not want to rely on, namely the assumptions
that producers are constrained to always satisfy whatever demand is forthcoming at their posted prices and
that the opportunity to change one’s price is delivered by a state-independent Poisson process providing no
upper bound to the length of time between price changes (Howitt and Milionis, 2007).
3
Similar findings have also been reported for other nations such as Israel (Lach and Tsiddon, 1992).

4

economy involve a specialized trader (“shop owner”) on one side or the other of the market.
On this foundation, we have built a model whose structure and macroeconomic aggregates are
comparable to the canonical New Keynesian analysis of Woodford (2003). That is, prices are
set by competing firms acting under monopolistic competition, the rate of interest is set by
a monetary authority following a Taylor rule, and consumer demands depend, inter alia, on
current wealth. However, it is quite different from the standard New Keynesian framework
in three important respects. First, we have introduced elements of search in both goods
(retail) markets and labor markets. Second, instead of having a fixed population of firms,
we assume that firms are subject to failure and that the process of replacing failed firms is a
costly one that disrupts established trading patterns. Third, rather than assuming complete
contingent financial markets, we assume that the only available financial instruments are
government-issued money and bonds.
To simplify the model and abstract from the issue of expectations formation, we assume
throughout that peoples’ expectations of inflation are firmly anchored by the central bank.
Thus, expected inflation is always equal to the announced inflation target.4

3.1

The conceptual framework

There is a fixed number N of people, a fixed number n of different durable goods, and the
same number n of different types of labor. Labor of type i can be used only to produce
good i. Time is discrete, indexed by “weeks” t = 1, ..., T . There are 48 weeks per “year.” In
addition to the n goods, there are two nominal assets: fiat money and bonds. A bond is a
promise by the government to pay one unit of money (“dollar”) next week.
Each person has a fixed type (i, j), where i 6= j and i 6= j + 1 (mod n), meaning that
each week he is endowed with one unit of labor of type i (his “production good”) and can eat
only goods j and j + 1 (mod n) (his primary and secondary “consumption goods”). There
is exactly one person of each type. Thus, the population of the economy is N = n (n − 2).
In everything that follows, we set the number of goods n equal to 50, implying a population
of N = 2400 people.
Because no person can eat his own production good, everyone must trade to consume.
Trading can take place only through facilities called “shops.” Each shop is a combined
production/trading operation. There are n different types of shops. A shop of type i is
4

Our model almost invariably generates a mean rate of inflation that is very close to the announced
target, so expectations are correct on average. We believe that fixed expectations help stabilize our model as
they do in standard old Keynesian frameworks. While rule-of-thumb expectations would admittedly be more
realistic, we are ultimately interested in isolating the costs of inflation that may arise even in the absence of
destabilizing expectations.

5

capable of buying type i labor with money, converting type i labor into good i, and selling
good i for money. The number of shops of each type will evolve endogenously.
To trade with a shop, a person must form a trading relationship with it. Each person
may have a trading relationship with at most one shop that deals in his production good,
in which case that shop is his “employer” and he is one of its “employees,” and at most
one shop that deals in each of his consumption goods, in which case that shop is one of his
“stores” and he is one of its “customers.” Each person’s trading relationships will evolve
endogenously.
Each shop of type i has a single owner whose production good is i. Operating the shop
entails a fixed overhead cost of F units of type i labor per week and a variable cost of one
unit of type i labor per unit of good i produced. All trade takes place at prices that are
posted in advance by the shop. Specifically, each shop posts a retail price and a weekly wage
rate, each of which may be adjusted periodically.
There is no depreciation or other physical storage cost. Goods produced but not sold in
a week are kept in inventory. Former shop owners continue to hold their “legacy inventories”
until these are sold in special “firesale” markets.
The government does not purchase goods or labor but it does issue money and bonds,
and it services the interest on bonds through a sales tax on every retail transaction. It
adjusts the ad valorem tax rate τ once per year. The central bank pegs the interest rate i on
bonds by open market operations. It adjusts this rate every 4 weeks according to a Taylor
rule. In addition, the central bank is engaged in the forecasting of future GDP, inflation,
and interest rates.

3.2

Protocol and behavioral rules

Each week our model economy proceeds through the same sequence of actions consisting of
nine stages: 1) entry; 2) search and matching; 3) bond market trading; 4) labor and goods
market trading; 5) monetary policy; 6) match breakups; 7) fiscal policy; 8) exit; and 9) wage
and price setting. We believe that each of these 9 stages represents a process that is of central
importance to the functioning of a market economy. Our underlying strategy is to model
each process as simply as possible, that is, with unsophisticated yet plausible behavioral
rules that maintain the spirit of ACE modeling, while attempting to be roughly consistent
with mainstream macroeconomics. The rest of this sub-section sketches the protocol and
behavioral rules of the model. We refer the reader to AGH (2011) for the exhaustive details
of the algorithm that implements the model, further discussion of the behavioral rules, and
the way to incorporate a banking sector in the model.
6

Entry. In the first stage, each person who is not already a shop owner (that is, has
another employer or is unemployed) becomes a potential entrant (“entrepreneur”) with a
fixed probability θ/N , where the parameter θ represents the supply of entrepreneurship or
the weekly frequency of innovation. Each entrepreneur goes through the following process
to decide whether to enter.
First, the entrepreneur formulates a business plan for his prospective shop, which consists
of a wage rate w and a sales target y trg . He sets the initial wage rate equal to the previous
week’s (publicly known) economy-wide average wage, adjusted for expected inflation over
the prospective wage contract period of ∆ weeks, where ∆ is a fixed parameter. He then
picks his sales target y trg from a uniform distribution over [1, n] and plans to post the retail
price p = (1 + µ)w/(1 − τ ), which is a fixed percentage markup µ over after-tax marginal
cost.5 These choices imply a profit flow Π that the firm would earn if it opened and if its
sales target were realized.
Given this business plan, the entrepreneur will allow the opportunity for entry to lapse
if his financial wealth A (the sum of his money and bond holdings) is not enough to pay
for the fixed cost of operating the shop during the first month. He will also allow the entry
opportunity to lapse if his prospective profit Π is less than his currently estimated permanent
income, which is discussed further below.
The entrepreneur also conducts “market research” before deciding whether to enter. In
particular, he sends invitations to two people, one a potential employee and the other a
potential customer, to form trading relationships with him if the shop opens. The potential
employee accepts if the shop’s wage w exceeds his current “effective wage,” and the potential
customer accepts if the shop’s planned retail price p is less than his current “effective price.”6
If either invitee declines, the entrepreneur allows the entry opportunity to lapse.
If he passes all these tests, the entrepreneur opens a shop with an “input target” equal
trg
to x = y trg + F + λI (y trg − I), where λI is the weekly inventory adjustment speed and I is
current inventories, which, for a new shop, are just equal to the entrant’s legacy inventories.
Implicit in this equation is a desired inventory level equal to one week’s sales.
Search and matching. Next, each person is given an opportunity to search for possible
trading relationships. Each person who is not a shop owner engages in job search with probability σ. Job search consists in asking one “comrade” (someone with the same production
good) what his effective wage is. If this exceeds the searcher’s current effective wage, then
5

Specifically, the entrepreneur’s sales target is initially determined by “animal spirits.” If he does enter,
however, the sales target will be adjusted to actual market conditions every week.
6
The notions of effective wage and effective price are defined further below.

7

the searcher will ask the comrade’s employer for a job. The employer will take on the new
worker if his last period’s labor input does not exceed his current input target.
Store search is undertaken by every person. The searcher first asks a “soulmate”
(someone with the same consumption goods) for his effective retail prices, and then asks
a randomly chosen shop if it has a posted price for one of the searcher’s consumption goods.
For each of his consumption goods, the searcher decides to switch, to either the soulmate’s
shop or to the randomly located shop, or decides to stay with his current shop, depending
on which choice yields the lowest effective price.
Bond market trading. Next, everyone goes to the bond market. First, the government
redeems all bonds. At this point, all the financial wealth A of any transactor is in the form of
money. Then, each person decides on this week’s planned consumption expenditures E. He
p
p
first adjusts his permanent income Y p according to the adaptive rule Y p = Y +λp Y − Y ,
p
where Y is actual income (either wages or profit) and Y is permanent income from the
previous period, and λp is the weekly permanent income adjustment speed. He then adjusts
permanent income for expected weekly inflation. Finally, he sets planned consumption equal
to a fixed fraction v of total wealth.7 Total wealth is A plus any legacy inventories plus the
expected present value of his estimated permanent income, V ·Y p , where V is a capitalization
factor equal to the present value of a perpetual weekly (real) income stream of one dollar
in today’s prices. The capitalization factor is calculated by the central bank, based on its
projected inflation and nominal interest rates, and is announced to the public on a monthly
basis.8
People then adjust their portfolios. Someone who does not own a shop retains E in the
form of money and invests A − E in bonds. However, if E > A, he sets his money holdings
equal to A. A shop owner goes through a similar procedure except that his desired money
holding is the amount needed to cover not only his planned consumption expenditure but
also his target wage bill, which is his current posted wage rate times his input target xtrg .
Labor and goods market trading. This stage starts with trade in the firesale markets,
where inventories can be purchased at a discounted price from former shop owners. Next,
7

In AGH (2011), we point out that such an expenditure function would apply if the person knew for
certain his future incomes and interest rates, and if he were choosing E to maximize an intertemporally
additive logarithmic utility function with a weekly rate of time preference ρw = v/ (1 − v), subject to the
usual lifetime budget constraint. We use this interpretation of the expenditure function and calibrate it in
48
terms of the annual rate of time preference ρ = (1 + ρw ) − 1.
8
An alternative would have been to allow agents to calculate the capitalization factor on their own, based
on their inflation expectations (anchored to the central bank’s target inflation rate) and the central bank’s
nominal interest rate projections. This modification to our model yielded results that are almost identical
to those reported further below.

8

each person in turn engages in labor market trading (with his employer) and goods market
trading (with his stores). Labor market trading proceeds as follows. If the person has an
employer with positive money holdings, he offers to trade his endowment in exchange for
the effective wage weff = min {w, M }, where w is the employer’s posted wage and M is the
employer’s money holdings just prior to this trade. The employer accepts the offer unless
the shop’s labor input already exceeds its input target and the ratio of inventory to sales
target exceeds a critical threshold value IS > 1.
Goods market trading happens in the following manner. First, the customer learns the
price ps currently posted by each of his two stores (s = 1, 2). Then, when a person visits
a store with positive inventory I, he can place an order for some amount cs , subject to a
cash-in-advance constraint. The store then sells the person an amount ceff
s = min{cs , I}. The
eff
person’s effective price for that good is defined as peff
s = ps cs /cs . However, if I = 0 or the
person does not have a store for that good, the person’s effective price is set to infinity.
Each customer chooses his desired consumption bundle (c1 , c2 ) to maximize his utility
ε/(ε+1)
ε/(ε+1)
with a “demand parameter” ε > 0, subject to his budget
+c2
function u(c1 , c2 ) = c1
constraint. If he has established relationships with stores for both of his consumption goods,
the budget constraint is p1 c1 + p2 c2 = E. However, if he has a relationship with only one
store, he spends the entire amount E on that store’s good.
Monetary policy. Every fourth week, the central bank sets the rate of interest i according
to the Taylor rule, ln (1 + i) = max {ln (1 + i∗ ) + γπ [ln (1 + π) − ln (1 + π ∗ )] + γy [y − ỹ] , 0},
where γπ and γy are fixed coefficients, 1 + π is the inflation factor over the past 12 months,
π ∗ is the fixed inflation target, y is the current 3-months moving average for the weekly
average log GDP, ỹ is the central bank’s evolving estimate of weekly log potential output,
and i∗ ≡ r∗ + π ∗ , where r∗ is the evolving target for the long-run real interest rate.
Since the central bank cannot be presumed to know the economy’s natural interest rate
or potential output, it must estimate them adaptively. Accordingly, it adjusts r∗ up or
down depending on whether the current inflation rate exceeds or falls short of the inflation
target π ∗ , with an adjustment speed ηr . It also estimates ỹ as the long-run expected value
of y under an AR(1) process whose parameters are re-estimated right after r∗ is adjusted.
As mentioned previously, the central bank also calculates the capitalization factor required
by people for planning their consumption. To this end, it estimates an AR(1) process for
inflation and feeds the predictions of its estimated AR(1) processes for y and π into its Taylor
rule to obtain the nominal interest rate projections.9
9

There are 4 parameters that are used to initialize the central bank’s adaptive learning processes. These
include the initial target real interest rate, r0∗ , the initial estimate of log potential output, ỹ0 , and the initial

9

Match breakups. Established trading relationships may break up randomly. In particular,
each person in the economy who does not own a shop is subjected to a probability δ of quitting
the labor and goods markets, which entails the unconditional severance of all current trading
relationships by the person with his employer and his stores.
Fiscal policy. Next, once a year, and in the last week of the year, the retail sales tax rate
τ is adjusted. The government sets the tax rate equal to a value τ ∗ , which is the value that
would leave the debt-to-GDP ratio undisturbed in the no-shock equilibrium outlined in the
next sub-section, plus an adjustment factor that is proportional to the difference between
the actual and the target debt-to-GDP ratio b∗ , with a fiscal adjustment coefficient λτ .
Exit. Now, each shop has an opportunity to exit. First, each shop exits for exogenous
reasons with probability δ. Second, each remaining shop can choose voluntarily to exit if
the shop owner is “hopeless,” that is, if his financial wealth A is not enough to pay for
the coming week’s fixed overhead cost. Third, each unprofitable shop exits with probability
φ. In computing profitability, the shop owner takes into account the opportunity cost of his
labor services, that could be earning a wage, and the interest-opportunity cost of maintaining
the shop’s inventory. Once a shop exits for any reason, all trading relationships (with both
employees and customers) are dissolved.
Wage and price setting. Finally, each shop has an opportunity to update its posted wage
and retail price. The shop first sets its sales target equal to the current week’s actual sales
and adjusts its input target accordingly. Then, it proceeds to update its wage but only if the
previous contract period of ∆ weeks has just ended. Its wage adjustment obeys a firm-level
expectations-augmented Phillips curve, that is, w = w̄ · (1 + β · x) · (1 + π ∗ ), where w̄ is the
pre-existing wage, π ∗ is the inflation rate expected over the next contract period, β is a fixed
adjustment parameter, and x is a measure of the shop’s excess demand for labor, namely
the average percentage deviation of its input target from the amount of labor it has been
offered in the trading process over the previous contract period.
The shop has the opportunity each week to change its retail price. Following Blinder et
al. (1998) we assume that price adjustments are mainly due to changes in costs. Specifically,
the shop will update its price, so as to maintain a constant markup, whenever there is a
change in its marginal cost, w/ (1 − τ ), because of a change in either its wage w (which
happens every ∆ weeks) or in the tax rate τ (which happens once a year). Motivated by
the fact that most price changes are temporary in nature (Bils and Klenow, 2004), we also
assume that the shop can make price adjustments based on its inventory-to-sales ratio. In
estimates of the autocorrelation coefficients for output and inflation, λ̂y0 and λ̂π0 . In addition, we assume
that the central bank begins to adjust all estimates and targets after Tcb years.

10

particular, when that ratio exceeds the fixed upper threshold IS > 1, the price is reduced
by a factor δp > 1, and when the ratio falls below the lower threshold 1/IS, the price is
increased by this same factor. Unless there is a change in marginal cost or a crossing of the
inventory-to-sales ratio beyond either threshold, the shop will leave its price unchanged.

3.3

The workings of the model

As the preceding discussion has made clear, all shocks in this economy are individual shocks.
Nevertheless, the individual shocks that cause matches to break up and shops to enter or leave
particular markets do have aggregate consequences because there is only a finite number of
agents. So, in general, the economy will not settle down to a deterministic steady state unless
we turn off these shocks. If we do turn off all shocks, there is a deterministic equilibrium
that the economy would stay in if left undisturbed by entry and breakups, with wages being
adjusted each week (∆ = 1). This equilibrium will serve as an initial position for all the
experiments we perform on the model below.
The equilibrium is one in which all the potential gains from trade are realized. Each
person is matched with one employer and two stores. There are n shops, one trading in
each of the n goods. To preserve symmetry across goods, we suppose that each good is
the primary consumption good for exactly one shop owner. Each shop begins every week
with actual and target input both equal to n − 2, which is the number of suppliers of each
good, and with actual and target sales equal to inventory holdings equal to actual output,
n − 2 − F . Thus, the economy’s total output equals full capacity, y ∗ = n (n − 2 − F ).
In AGH (2011), we characterize the rest of this equilibrium, which will repeat itself
indefinitely, with all nominal magnitudes – money and bond holdings, actual and effective
wages and prices, and permanent incomes – rising each week at the constant target rate of
inflation, provided that the fixed cost of operation F is small enough that shops always pass
the profitability test during the exit stage.
Inflation has almost no effect in this flexible-price equilibrium without any shocks. There
will be a minor effect on the equilibrium tax rate τ because, with higher inflation, the
government is collecting more seigniorage and, hence, can maintain its target real debt level
with a lower sales tax. However, aggregate output and employment will be unaffected, the
real rate of interest will remain equal to the rate of time preference, and the volatility of
output and inflation will remain equal to zero.
When the shocks are turned on, the economy ceases to track full employment and full
capacity. In particular, GDP falls whenever a shop that was satisfying some consumers goes
out of business or a customer loses a store because of a random breakup. GDP also falls
11

whenever a new shop enters and diverts workers from old shops that were satisfying some
customers, because some of these workers’ efforts will now be used up in defraying the fixed
cost of the new shop rather than producing goods that can be consumed by customers of
the old shop.
These events that reduce GDP are constantly being offset to some degree by the entry
of new shops that are able to satisfy customers in markets where there had previously been
no viable shop, and by the exit of shops that were using up fixed costs but not producing
enough to satisfy their customers. Thus, both entry and exit are critical to the system’s
ability to approximate full-capacity utilization. However, although entry of new shops is
useful in markets where there are no incumbents, or where the incumbents are not hiring
all the potential workers because of layoffs or because of financial problems that prevent
them from meeting their payroll, entry can be harmful (to the level of real GDP) in cases
where incumbent shops were hiring most of the potential workers and satisfying most of the
potential customers. Likewise, although exit is important in cases where the shop has ceased
to play an active intermediation role, whether because of financial difficulties, a surfeit of
inventories, or a too high markup, exit can also be very harmful in cases where the incumbent
was previously doing well, because it can cascade across markets causing a cumulative loss
of output (Howitt, 2006).
The effects of the shocks will tend to be larger when inflation is higher because inflation
introduces an extra source of dispersion in relative prices, given that individual prices are
changed at random times, and it does so by a larger percentage amount the higher is the
trend inflation rate.10 This dispersion in relative prices induces variability in each shop’s sales
and, hence, in profitability, and the concomitant widening of the distribution of profitability
ends up putting more firms near the edge of failure, making it more likely for firms to fail due
to a random shock to innovation or a match breakup. The bigger is the fixed cost and the
smaller is the markup, the more likely is such a shock to trigger the failure of the shop. Thus,
a higher target rate of inflation intensifies the propagation of shocks through the failure of
trading enterprises. To explore this mechanism in more detail, however, we need first to
calibrate the model and then simulate it under different target inflation rates.
10

In the context of our model, the facts that (i) inflation expectations are anchored to the central bank’s
target, (ii) wage updating follows a firm-level expectations-augmented Phillips curve, (iii) prices are always a
fixed percentage markup over marginal costs (except for temporary price changes), and (iv) at any point in
time, there is a distribution across firms in terms of how far along they are in their respective wage contract
periods, together imply that a higher target rate of inflation will yield a greater percentage difference in
prices between firms that have just updated their wages and those that are yet to do so.

12

4

Calibration

This section briefly describes our calibration procedure, but for further detail we refer the
reader to AGH (2011). There are a total of 25 parameters to be calibrated. This is less
than the 33 parameters in AGH (2011) because 7 of those pertained to the behavior and
regulation of banks, which are absent from the present setup.11 These parameters can be
categorized as shop parameters, personal parameters, and government policy parameters.
They are listed in Table 1 along with their assigned values, their six-letter codes used in
Figure 3, and their levels of calibration as explained in the rest of this section.
Our calibration took place at three different levels. At the first level, one subset of
parameter values was chosen to match empirical counterparts in the U.S. data and/or to
match values used in previous studies. The 14 parameters with a “1” in the fifth column of
Table 1 were calibrated this way, and they take on the same values as in AGH (2011) but
with one exception. The exception is the markup, which was uniformly distributed across
shops in the earlier paper where the mean of this distribution was calibrated at the second
level. Here, in our baseline calibration, we keep the markup fixed across shops at 13 percent,
which falls within the 10 to 20 percent range of markup estimates cited by Golosov and
Lucas (2007), but we relax this assumption in Section 6 below.
At the second level, the values of other parameters were chosen to be internally consistent
with the central tendency of simulation outcomes. The two parameters with a “2” in the
fifth column of Table 1 were calibrated this way, namely the initial values of the government
targets for log potential output and the real interest rate. We used an iterative procedure to
select each value so that it would equal the median outcome of the targeted variable across
simulations.
The remaining 9 parameters, indicated with a “3” in the fifth column of Table 1,
were calibrated at the third level. The values of these parameters, for which we could
find no convenient empirical counterparts, were chosen so as to make median outcomes
across simulations (loosely) match certain properties of the U.S. data. More specifically,
we ran 10,000 simulations of 60 years. Each 60-year simulation began near the no-shock
equilibrium and continued for 20 years before we started calculating the average value of
each outcome variable across the remaining 40 years of that simulation. This was done to
eliminate transient effects due to initial conditions. For each variable, we then computed the
11

Another parameter from the earlier paper that we have suppressed here is the setup cost of opening a
shop, which we have set to zero because most entrepreneurs will not be able to finance this cost without the
help of a banking sector.

13

Table 1: The calibrated parameters of the model
Personal parameters
ρ
ε
δ
λp
σ
θ

Rate of time preference (annual)
Demand parameter
Quit rate (per week)
Permanent income adjustment speed (weekly)
Job search probability
Frequency of innovation (weekly)

0.04
7.0
0.001
0.3
0.5
80

TMPRFY
DMDELS
BRKFRC
INCSPD
SRCHPP
INFREQ

1
1
3
3
3
3

48
3.5
0.16
0.3
0.13
0.015
2.0
1.0075

CNTPRD
FXDCST
INVSPD
WAGSPD
MARKUP
FAILRT
TRIGGR
PDELTA

1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3

0.33
0.054

BNDINC
FSCSPD

1
1

0.29
0.66
1.5
0.5
0.03
0.035
7.6
0.0075
15

INFCOR
GAPCOR
INFTYR
GAPTRY
PITRGY
RRTTRG
GAPTRG
ADJRRT
LRNLAG

1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3

Shop parameters
∆
F
λI
β
µ
φ
IS
δp

Length of the contract period (in weeks)
Fixed cost
Inventory adjustment speed (weekly)
Wage adjustment coefficient (annual)
Percentage markup over variable costs
Failure rate of unprofitable shops (weekly)
Critical inventory/sales ratio
Size of price cut (old price/new price)
Government policy parameters

b∗
λτ
λ̂π0
λ̂y0
γπ
γy
π∗
r0∗
ỹ0
ηr
Tcb

Fiscal Policy
Target debt-GDP ratio
Fiscal adjustment speed (annual)
Monetary Policy
Inflation autocorrelation coefficient (initial estimate)
Output autocorrelation coefficient (initial estimate)
Inflation coefficient in Taylor rule
Output gap coefficient in Taylor rule
Annual target inflation rate
Initial target real interest rate
Initial estimate of log potential output
Adjustment speed of evolving real rate target
Number of years before central bank’s learning begins

median of these cross-year averages across all simulations.12 The 11 outcome variables to
which we calibrated these parameters are listed in Table 2, along with their data values and
their median values in our fully calibrated model. All numbers are expressed in percentage
points, except for unemployment duration, which is expressed in weeks, and price change
frequency, which is expressed in numbers per year.
12
Because the absence of banks by itself tends to make the economy operate further from capacity, we
could not use the same values of these 9 level-3 parameters as in AGH (2011).

14

Table 2: U.S. data vs. median outcomes in the model
Variable
Inflation
Real interest rate
Unemployment rate
Unemployment duration
Volatility of output gap
Volatility of inflation
Autocorrelation of gap
Autocorrelation of inflation
Exit rate
Job loss rate
Price change frequency

5

Data
3.0
1.8
6.1
14
2.0 to 3.2
1.3
20 to 76
16
46
0.69
4.0

Model
3.0
3.5
6.2
9.8
2.6
0.50
31
17
35
0.66
4.3

Main results

In order to assess the effect of higher inflation on macro performance, we simulated the model
while varying the central bank’s target rate of inflation. Specifically, we ran an experiment
in which, for each integer-valued inflation target from 0 to 10, we created 10,000 artificial
60-year histories of the economy by running the model starting in a neighborhood of the
no-shock equilibrium. To eliminate transient effects due to initial conditions, we then threw
out the first 20 years of each history and considered only the remaining 40 years. For each
set of simulations (runs), we recorded the cross-run median of the 40-year average value of
each of 5 different macroeconomic indicators: the log output gap, the unemployment rate,
the annual inflation rate, the volatility of output, and the volatility of inflation.13 Hereafter,
we refer to this statistic for a given indicator as the “median” value of that indicator.
The results of this experiment are reported in Figure 1. The most salient finding is a
monotonic deterioration in performance of all 5 indicators for target inflation rates between
3 and 10 percent per year. Over this range, the median output gap increased by over
7 percent while median unemployment rose by over 6 percentage points. Median output
volatility nearly doubled while median inflation volatility rose by about 40 percent. In
addition, over the whole range, the median inflation rate rose approximately point for point
with the inflation target, indicating that the central bank does typically hit its long-run
target in the model.
13

The output gap is defined as the ratio of capacity to actual GDP. For each run, the volatilities of output
and inflation are measured as standard deviations of the annual time series of log GDP and year-to-year
percentage inflation respectively.

15

.15
.125
.1
.075

Median values

.05
.025
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Target inflation rate, percent
Inflation rate

Output gap

Inflation volatility

Output volatility

Unemployment rate

Figure 1: Inflation and macroeconomic performance
During some simulations, our model economy crashed, in the sense that the log output
gap became infinite in finite time. Further, we observed that the incidence of these crashed
runs increased monotonically with the target inflation rate. Specifically, while we did not
observe any crashes for low inflation targets, the fraction of crashed runs increased from 0.07
percent at the 4 percent target to 17.77 percent at the 10 percent target. Given that we
omitted crashed runs from the sample when calculating the cross-run medians, the adverse
effect of inflation on economic performance in our model is presumably higher than what is
reported in Figure 1.
For low rates of target inflation, that is, between 0 and 3 percent, the results shown
in Figure 1 indicate little or no deterioration as inflation rises. Indeed, it seems that the
economy performs slightly better at 3 percent inflation than at zero inflation, at least in terms
of output and unemployment, although both measures of volatility are virtually constant over
this range.14 Exactly why there is this small beneficial effect of inflation at very low positive
rates is not something we have managed to answer. There is apparently more going on than
the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates since, when we suppress that lower bound
14

We also ran an experiment to check the performance of our model economy under negative trend inflation
rates up to the −3 percent inflation target, and we found a monotonic deterioration in macroeconomic
performance as the target became more negative. Specifically, going from 0 to −3 percent for the inflation
target, the median output gap increased by about 1.6 percent and median unemployment rose by just over
1 percentage point.

16

.3

.15

.2
.05

.1

.15

Percentile values

.25

.125
.1

Median values

.075
.05
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Target inflation rate, percent

Target inflation rate, percent

Output gap

Output gap

Unemployment rate

8

9

10

Unemployment rate

Figure 2: Statistical significance of the main results
by allowing the nominal interest rate to become negative, we get almost identical results in
terms of our macro indicators between 0 and 3 percent inflation.15
The deterioration in performance when inflation rises above 3 percent is significant not
just economically but also statistically. The left panel of Figure 2 shows, for each inflation
rate, the 95 percent confidence intervals for the output gap and the unemployment rate based
on our simulation sample. The confidence interval bands are narrow, and their bounds are
rising monotonically for inflation rate targets between 3 and 10 percent. Similar results
were found for all our other macro indicators. Thus, it seems certain that the monotonic
deterioration we have found is indeed implied by the model and is not just a result of sampling
error from too small a number of simulations.
Given that there was indeed considerable variation in outcomes across runs even when
all parameters were held constant, there exists a significant chance that an increase in target
inflation might not cause a deterioration in macro performance. This is indicated by the
box-and-whisker plots on the right panel of Figure 2. For each inflation target, and for both
the average output gap and the average unemployment rate, the plots show the interquartile
range, the median, and the 5th and 95th percentiles of the cross-run distributions. As
is apparent from the diagram, although there is considerable overlap of the interquartile
ranges between contiguous inflation targets, we still observe a monotonic upward shift of the
distribution of possible outcomes as target inflation rises above 3 percent.
To check the robustness of our main findings to variations in parameter values, we
conducted a sensitivity analysis. We did this one parameter at a time and for all the 25
15
Of course, negative nominal interest rates are not consistent with our assumption that the cash-inadvance constraint is binding on households, but we retained that assumption in any event just to see what
difference it made when the central bank was freed from the zero lower bound constraint.

17

.15
0

.05

.1

Low

MARKUP
SRCHPP
TRIGGR
BNDINC
DMDELS
FSCSPD
FXDCST
CNTPRD
TMPRFY
BRKFRC
WAGSPD
INFREQ
FAILRT
GAPTRG
RRTTRG
GAPTYR
PDELTA
INVSPD
GAPCOR
LRNLAG
INFTYR
INCSPD
ADJRRT
INFCOR

−.05

Deviation from baseline effect

High

Figure 3: Sensitivity of the main results to baseline parameter values
parameters of the model, except for the target inflation rate π ∗ . Specifically, for each of
these 24 parameters, we redid our experiment assuming that the parameter value was first
25 percent higher than in the baseline calibration and then 25 percent lower. In the case of
5 parameters, the model crashed more than 90 percent of the time at one of these extremes
when the inflation target was 10 percent, so we reduced the variation to plus or minus 10
percent. In one of those cases, namely the fixed cost F , there was still more than a 90 percent
incidence of crashes, so we reduced the variation to plus or minus 5 percent. Our confidence
in our results was increased when we found, without exception, that the monotonic increase
in the output gap, unemployment, and output volatility, as the inflation target increases
from 3 to 10 percent, survived the variations in the parameter values. The same was largely
true of the monotonic increase in inflation volatility.
This sensitivity analysis also helped us to understand which of the parameters in the
model are the most critical ones for our main results. Figure 3 shows how sensitive the effect
of trend inflation on the output gap is to parameter variations. We measure this effect as the
difference between the cross-run median output gaps observed under the 3 and 10 percent
inflation targets. For each parameter and for each of its high and low values, the figure thus
plots the difference between the effect observed under this value and that observed under
the baseline calibration. This analysis shows that, of all the parameters in the model, the
most critical one appears to be the markup even though we are only considering variations
of plus or minus 10 percent for this parameter. This finding will be used in section 6 below
where we address the Lucas critique.

18

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Profit dispersion

12
11
10
9

Median duration of unemployment, weeks

13

1.1
1
.9
.6

10

0

Target inflation rate, percent
Price dispersion (x10)

.8

Median job loss rate, percent

60
58

Median number of shops

56
54
1

.7

62

.8
.7
.6
.5
.4

Median price and profit dispersion

.3
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Target inflation rate, percent
Number of shops

Job loss rate

Duration of unemployment

Figure 4: Identifying the mechanism behind the main results
Our interpretation of the deterioration of macro performance when trend inflation rises
above 3 percent focuses on the costs of maintaining the trading facilities that are necessary for
economic transactions. Specifically, given that price changes are not perfectly coordinated
across shops, an increase in inflation should create an artificial increase in the dispersion
of relative prices, that is, an increase unrelated to tastes for consuming and technology
for producing the wares of different sellers. This will clearly add to the volatility and
unpredictability of demand faced by any seller, making it more likely that some sellers
will be at risk of failure because of their inability to cover the fixed overhead cost. The
result should be a reduction in the number of shops, an increase in the number of potential
transactions that go unconsummated for lack of a trading facility, and, hence, a fall in the
level of economic activity and a rise in the rate of unemployment.
This interpretation is consistent with the facts shown in Figure 4. Specifically, the left
panel of the figure shows that, as the inflation target rises from 3 to 10 percent, there is
indeed a monotonic increase in both sales-weighted price and profit dispersion across sellers.
This panel also shows that the annual average number of shops in the median run declines
monotonically over this range. While this decline is only on the order of 10 percent, it is
economically significant in an economy that needs at least 50 shops to function at peak
efficiency and has only a 20 percent margin of redundant shops (60 shops in total) when
inflation is at 3 percent. The right panel of Figure 4 shows that, with target inflation
increasing from 3 to 10 percent, both the job loss rate and the duration of unemployment
increase substantially and monotonically, which is what one would expect if the main effect of
increased inflation was working through a higher incidence of business failures and a smaller
number of shops offering employment.

19

.15
.075
0

.025

.05

Median values

.1

.125

.15
.125
.1
.075

Median values

.05
.025
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Target inflation rate, percent

Target inflation rate, percent

Output gap

Output gap

Unemployment rate

7

8

9

10

Unemployment rate

Figure 5: Breakdown of the main results under price flexibility and no turnover
We sought further corroboration of our interpretation by running a number of related
experiments. First, we suppressed the source of price variability by forcing all wages and
prices to be reset every week. As shown in the left panel of Figure 5, this did not eliminate
unemployment or the output gap, which are still non-zero because of other frictions in the
model, but it did cause both indicators to be virtually independent of inflation, suggesting
that our main results are indeed attributable to the effects of uncoordinated price changes.
Next, we suppressed all turnover in firms, thereby eliminating job loss as a result of shop
failures. There was still a monotonic increase in unemployment and the output gap for trend
inflation rates higher than 3 percent, but, as shown in the right panel of Figure 5, the increase
in each case was much smaller in magnitude than in our main experiment, suggesting that
much of the deterioration in the main experiment did indeed come from people losing their
jobs when shops failed. Finally, we combined the two previous experiments by suppressing
price variability and turnover simultaneously. As a result, both the unemployment rate and
the output gap fell to about 1 percent for all rates of inflation, suggesting that these two
factors taken together are at the root of our main results.

6

Lucas critique

Our approach thus far leaves us open to the Lucas critique, namely that our predicted effects
of a change in the policy environment may be undone by endogenous changes in behavior
due to individual or social learning on the one hand and Darwinian selection on the other. In
this section, we discuss how one might address such a critique in an agent-based framework,

20

and we illustrate our strategy with respect to the behavioral parameter identified by our
sensitivity analysis as being the most critical for our main results – the markup.
In particular, our analysis begs the question of whether an increase in the trend rate
of inflation, which affects the economy by putting more firms at risk of failure, might
not naturally induce shops to set a larger markup, thereby delivering them more profits
in any given situation and, hence, alleviating the increased failure risk. We address this
concern here by modifying our model such that shops in a given simulation, rather than
entering with identical markup coefficients, now draw their own respective markups from
a uniform distribution that remains fixed throughout the simulation. This variant of our
model essentially permits the economy-wide average markup in a given simulation to change
over time due to the evolutionary selection mechanism that is implicit in the exit process.
Furthermore, the long-run outcome of this selection process will be different depending on
the policy environment (target inflation rate) of the simulation.
However, in pursuing this strategy, we are left with the difficult task of choosing,
for each target inflation rate in our main experiment, the mean of the distribution from
which markups are drawn. We decided to let these policy-environment-specific means be
determined by internal consistency. Specifically, for each target inflation rate, we used an
iterative procedure to select an “equilibrium” value for the mean of this distribution, such
that, when new entrants draw from this distribution, the median markup (that is, the median
across simulations of the 40-year mean of the economy-wide average markup) ends up being
equal to that value. Having thus determined the means of the policy-environment-specific
distributions from which markups are drawn, we then reconducted our main experiment
using this alternative version of our model.
The results of our exercise are shown in Figure 6. As is evident from the figure, surviving
markups do indeed respond to changes in the policy environment, being systematically
higher on average the higher the target inflation rate. Specifically, the median markup
rises monotonically from 13 to 20 percent as the target inflation rate increases from 3 to
10 percent. Interestingly, however, as shown in the figure, allowing for this endogenous
response of markups does not seem to mitigate the deleterious effects of inflation uncovered
by our baseline analysis under fixed markups. For instance, with endogenous markups, as
the target inflation rate rises from 3 to 10 percent, the median output gap increases by 7.2
percent while median unemployment rises by 7.7 percentage points. We conclude that, at
least with respect to endogenous variations in markups, our estimates of the macroeconomic
costs of inflation are less vulnerable to the Lucas critique than one might think.

21

.2
.15
.1

Median values

.05
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Target inflation rate, percent
Inflation rate

Output gap

Unemployment rate

Inflation volatility

Output volatility

Markup

Figure 6: The main results under endogenous markups

7

Cross-country regressions

As already discussed, existing empirical studies have generally failed to uncover a systematic
relationship between long-run inflation and the level or growth of GDP at the country level.
In attempting to address the discrepancy between this finding and our numerical results,
we proceeded to quantify the likelihood that, under the null hypothesis that our baseline
calibrated model were the true data generating process, a cross-country regression of GDP
on the observed rate of inflation would yield a statistically insignificant effect.
To accomplish this task, we needed to generate a large number of artificial cross-country
samples using our model. We did this by focusing on a sample of 63 countries, and for
each country in this sample, we set the target rate of inflation in our baseline calibrated
model equal to the country’s actual trend inflation rate during the 1960–2009 time period
before simulating the model 5000 times over.16 For each country, this yielded 5000 artificial
histories of the 40-year average values of the log output gap and the annual inflation rate,
thereby allowing us to construct just as many artificial cross-country samples of these two
variables. For each artificial cross-country sample, we then ran a regression of the log output
16

Our sample of 63 countries is based on that used by Levine and Zervos (1993) in their influential paper
that finds no relationship between inflation and GDP growth. To be consistent with the range of inflation
targets used in our main experiment, we excluded those countries with historical trend inflation rates above 10
percent. We also updated the Levine-Zervos analysis with data for the 1960–2009 time horizon and verified
that their baseline cross-country regression of GDP growth on inflation continues to find no statistically
significant relationship.

22

1

400

0

.25

.5

Output gap

.75

300
200
100

Frequency (number of observations per bin)

0
−5

0

5

10

4

t−statistic

4.5

5

5.5

6

Inflation rate, percent

Figure 7: Cross-country regression results
gap on the annual inflation rate and recorded the t-statistic associated with the relevant slope
coefficient. The left panel of Figure 7 depicts the histogram of these t-statistics across 5000
artificial cross-country regressions along with a kernel density estimate of the distribution.
Our analysis of this distribution suggests that, in a world described fully by our baseline
calibrated model, the likelihood that one would find a statistically insignificant result from
running a cross-country regression of GDP on inflation is about 15 percent.
While this likelihood may not seem large, it is certainly significant considering the
fact that a cross-country regression in a world described by our model will not be plagued
by the same set of endogeneity issues afflicting such regressions in real life. We therefore
sought to find an explanation for why, in some states of our model world, a cross-country
regression would fail to detect a significant effect of inflation on output. In the course of our
investigations, we decided to look at the relationship between the 40-year average values of
the annual inflation rate and the log output gap across country-specific artificial histories,
that is, across simulations with the same target inflation rate. For any target inflation rate,
what we found was a systematic Phillips-type relationship like the one shown in the right
panel of Figure 7 for the country with the median trend inflation rate in our 63-country
sample. We hypothesize that this negative Phillips-type relationship between the output
gap and actual inflation might be responsible for partially masking the positive causal effect
of trend inflation on the output gap in our model.

23

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we use an ACE model to show how inflation can disrupt the mechanism of
exchange in a decentralized market economy and, thus, have an adverse effect on macroeconomic performance. The effect works through the increased dispersion of relative prices
caused by staggered price setting, which ultimately raises the incidence of failures amongst
the specialist trading enterprises crucial for creating and organizing the network of markets
that coordinate economic activities.
We find that, in our model economy, the trend rate of inflation has a substantial
deleterious effect when it rises above 3 percent. Our analysis, however, provides no support
for the notion that inflation targets below 3 percent can yield any gains in output or
employment. Our main finding remains qualitatively robust to changes in parameter values
and to modifications made to our model to partly address the Lucas critique. Finally, we
contribute a novel explanation for why it may be difficult to detect a significant negative
effect of trend inflation on output in a cross-country context.

References
Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry. “The Macroeconomics of Low
Inflation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1996): 1–76.
Ascari, Guido. “Staggered Prices and Trend Inflation: Some Nuisances.” Review of Economic Dynamics 7 (July 2004): 642–667.
Ashraf, Quamrul, Boris Gershman, and Peter Howitt. “Banks, Market Organization, and
Macroeconomic Performance: An Agent-Based Computational Analysis.” NBER working
paper No. 17102, June 2011.
Bénabou, Roland. “Inflation and Efficiency in Search Markets.” Review of Economic Studies
59 (April 1992): 299–329.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.”
Journal of Political Economy 112 (October 2004): 947–985.
Blinder, Alan S., Elie R. D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd. Asking About
Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1998.
Bullard, James, and John W. Keating. “The Long-Run Relationship between Inflation and
Output in Postwar Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (December 1995):
477–496.

24

Calvo, Guillermo A. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983): 383–398.
Chari, V. V., Larry E. Jones, and Rodolfo E. Manuelli. “The Growth Effects of Monetary
Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 19 (Fall 1995): 18–32.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Gary D. Hansen. “The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle
Model.” American Economic Review 79 (September 1989): 733–748.
Debelle, Guy, and Owen Lamont. “Relative Price Variability and Inflation: Evidence from
U.S. Cities.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (February 1997): 132–152.
Deissenberg, Christophe, Sander van der Hoog, and Herbert Dawid. “EURACE: A Massively Parallel Agent-Based Model of the European Economy.” Applied Mathematics and
Computation 204 (October 2008): 541–552.
Delli Gatti, Domenico, Edoardo Gaffeo, Mauro Gallegati, Gianfranco Giulioni, and Antonio
Palestrini. Emergent Macroeconomics: An Agent-Based Approach to Business Fluctuations. New York: Springer, 2008.
Dosi, Giovanni, Giorgio Fagiolo, and Andrea Roventini. “Schumpeter Meeting Keynes: A
Policy-Friendly Model of Endogenous Growth and Business Cycles.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 34 (September 2010): 1748–1767.
Feldstein, Martin. “Capital Income Taxes and the Benefit of Price Stability.” In The Costs
and Benefits of Price Stability, edited by Martin Feldstein, 9–46. University of Chicago
Press, 1999.
Fortin, Pierre. “The Great Canadian Slump.” Canadian Journal of Economics 29 (November 1996): 761–787.
Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas Jr. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal of
Political Economy 115 (April 2007): 171–199.
Gomme, Paul. “Money and Growth Revisited: Measuring the Costs of Inflation in an
Endogenous Growth Model.” Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (August 1993): 51–77.
Head, Allen, and Alok Kumar. “Price Dispersion, Inflation, and Welfare.” International
Economic Review 46 (May 2005): 533–572.
Heymann, Daniel, and Axel Leijonhufvud. High Inflation. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.
Howitt, Peter. “Zero Inflation as a Long-Run Target for Monetary Policy.” In Zero Inflation:
The Goal of Price Stability, edited by Richard G. Lipsey, 66–108. Toronto: C.D. Howe
Institute, 1990.
Howitt, Peter, and Petros Milionis. “On the Robustness of the Calvo Price Setting Model.”
Unpublished, Brown University, June 25, 2007.

25

Howitt, Peter. “The Microfoundations of the Keynesian Multiplier Process.” Journal of
Economic Interaction and Coordination 1 (May 2006): 33–44.
Lach, Saul, and Daniel Tsiddon. “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical
Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data.” Journal of Political Economy 100 (April 1992):
349–389.
Lagos, Ricardo, and Guillaume Rocheteau. “Inflation, Output, and Welfare.” International
Economic Review 46 (May 2005): 495–522.
Lastrapes, William D. “Inflation and the Distribution of Relative Prices: The Role of
Productivity and Money Supply Shocks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38
(December 2006): 2159–2198.
Leijonhufvud, Axel. “Costs and Consequences of Inflation.” In The Microeconomic Foundations of Macroeconomics, edited by G. C. Harcourt. London: Macmillan, 1977.
Levine, Ross, and Sara J. Zervos. “What We Have Learned About Policy and Growth
from Cross-Country Regressions.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings
83 (May 1993): 426–430.
Parks, Richard W. “Inflation and Relative Price Variability.” Journal of Political Economy
86 (February 1978): 79–95.
Parsley, David C. “Inflation and Relative Price Variability in the Short and Long Run: New
Evidence from the United States.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 28 (August
1996): 323–341.
Ragan, Christopher. “On The Believable Benefits of Low Inflation.” Bank of Canada
working paper No. 98-15, September 1998.
Rocheteau, Guillaume, and Randall Wright. “Money in Search Equilibrium, in Competitive
Equilibrium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium.” Econometrica 73 (January 2005):
175–202.
Stockman, Alan C. “Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock in a Cash-in-Advance
Economy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (October 1981): 387–393.
Summers, Lawrence. “How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy be Determined?” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 23 (August 1991): 625–631.
Tesfatsion, Leigh, and Kenneth L. Judd, eds. Handbook of Computational Economics. Vol.
2. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006.
Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Yun, Tack. “Optimal Monetary Policy with Relative Price Distortions.” American Economic
Review 95 (March 2005): 89–109.

26

