                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      COMPETITION AND IDEOLOGICAL DIVERSITY:
                      HISTORICAL EVIDENCE FROM US NEWSPAPERS

                                          Matthew Gentzkow
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro
                                          Michael Sinkinson

                                         Working Paper 18234
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18234


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2012




We are grateful to Alan Bester, Ambarish Chandra, Tim Conley, Christian Hansen, Igal Hendel, Caroline
Hoxby, Jon Levin, Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, E. Glen Weyl, and numerous seminar participants
for advice and suggestions, and to our dedicated research assistants for important contributions to this
project. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets, the George J. Stigler
Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Centel
Foundation/Robert P. Reuss Faculty Research Fund, the Neubauer Family Foundation and the Kathryn
C. Gould Research Fund, all at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition and Ideological Diversity: Historical Evidence from US Newspapers
Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson
NBER Working Paper No. 18234
July 2012, Revised September 2013
JEL No. L11,L52,L82

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the competitive forces that shaped ideological diversity in the US press in the early twentieth
century. We find that households preferred like-minded news and that newspapers used their political
orientation to differentiate from competitors. We formulate a model of newspaper demand, entry, and
political affiliation choice in which newspapers compete for both readers and advertisers. We use a
combination of estimation and calibration to identify the model’s parameters from novel data on newspaper
circulation, costs, and revenues. The estimated model implies that competition enhances ideological
diversity, that the market undersupplies diversity, and that optimal competition policy requires accounting
for the two-sidedness of the news market.


Matthew Gentzkow                                     Michael Sinkinson
University of Chicago                                Wharton School
Booth School of Business                             University of Pennsylvania
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                           3620 Locust Walk
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                             msink@wharton.upenn.edu
gentzkow@chicagobooth.edu

Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jmshapir@uchicago.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18234
1 Introduction
Decentralized markets may not supply the socially optimal variety of products (Steiner 1952; Dixit and
Stiglitz 1977; Mankiw and Whinston 1986). This is especially true of the news media, because diversity
of news and opinion can have beneficial effects on political competition that are not internalized by the
market participants (Becker 1958; Downs 1957). According to the US Supreme Court, “the widest possible
dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public”
(Associated Press v. United States, 1945).
     Competition policy toward media has long been shaped by the perceived importance of these politi-
cal externalities. The Postal Act of 1792 created massive subsidies for newspaper distribution (Kielbowicz
1983, 1990).1 Joint operating agreements, in which newspapers effectively colluded on subscription and
advertising sales but remained editorially separate, began in 1933 and later became a legislated exception to
the Sherman Act (Busterna and Picard 1993).2 The Communications Act of 1934 empowered the Federal
Communications Commission to limit concentration of control over broadcast spectrum (Candeub 2007).
Concerns about diversity of viewpoints played a major role in the federal antitrust action against the As-
sociated Press, which ended with the 1945 Supreme Court decision quoted above. Antitrust exemptions,
ownership regulation, and explicit subsidies remain important policies in the US and elsewhere.3
     We present a historical study of the economic forces that determine ideological diversity, and the impact
of policies designed to increase it, using novel data from US daily newspapers in 1924. In this period,
hundreds of cities across the country had multiple competing papers, affording us a large cross-section of
experiments that can be used to identify competitive interactions. Most newspapers had current or past
affiliations with either the Republican or Democratic party, providing a convenient proxy for the political
slant of their content (Gentzkow et al. 2006; Hamilton 2006). Ideology was one of the main dimensions of
differentiation along which competitive lines were drawn. Television had not been introduced, and radio was
still in its infancy, so newspapers were for most Americans the only source of daily political information.
Whether a given town had only Republican papers, only Democratic papers, or papers spanning both sides
of the political spectrum thus had a dramatic effect on the range of views to which its voters were exposed
(Galvis et al. 2012).
     We model newspaper competition in this period in a framework that endogenizes decisions over en-
try, political orientation, subscription prices and advertising rates. The model embeds Gentzkow’s (2007)
multiple-discrete-choice demand framework in a sequential entry game in the spirit of Bresnahan and Reiss
(1991) and Mazzeo (2002). In the model, newspapers first decide whether to enter the market, then choose
either Republican or Democratic affiliation, taking into account household demand, the responses of other
entering newspapers, and the effect of affiliation choice on subscription and advertising prices. The model

    1 Under  the 1792 act, a four-page letter cost one dollar to mail 450 miles; a newspaper of the same size cost one and a half
cents (Kielbowicz 1983). Debate over the details of the subsidy concerned, among other things, the appropriate diversity of news
provision from local and national sources (Kielbowicz 1983; John 2009).
     2 The Newspaper Preservation Act of 1970, which established the antitrust exemption for joint operating agreements, states its

goal as “maintaining a newspaper press editorially and reportorially independent and competitive in all parts of the United States.”
     3 House Speaker Nancy Pelosi recently asked Attorney General Eric Holder to consider First Amendment issues when deciding

antitrust enforcement for local newspaper consolidation (Pelosi 2009). The Federal Communications Commission continues to
regulate broadcast media ownership “on the theory that diversification of mass media ownership serves the public interest by
promoting diversity of program and service viewpoints” (FCC 2010). The proposed Newspaper Revitalization Act would grant
newspapers an implicit federal subsidy in the form of nonprofit status (Priest 2011). Explicit subsidies to the press are common in
Europe (Murschetz 1998).


                                                                 2
allows households to exhibit a preference for newspapers whose ideology matches their own, and to re-
gard newspapers with the same political affiliation as more substitutable than newspapers with different
affiliations. The advertising model is stylized, but it captures the key prediction from the theory literature
on two-sided markets that advertising-market competition depends on the extent of overlap in newspapers’
readership (Armstrong 2002; Ambrus and Reisinger 2006; Anderson et al. 2011).
     Our key results hinge on the strength of newspapers’ incentives to differentiate ideologically from their
competitors. In our model, these incentives are governed by two parameters. First, they depend on the
extent to which same-affiliation newspapers are closer substitutes than opposite-affiliation papers. This
determines the gains to differentiation through standard Hotelling channels. Second, they depend on the
extent of diminishing returns to impressions in the advertising market. This determines the overall intensity
of advertising competition, and thus the incentive to differentiate in order to soften this competition.
     To estimate the demand side of the model, we use data on 1924 daily newspaper circulation by town.
These data allow us to compare the circulation of a given newspaper across many towns with differing
ideology. Descriptive analysis shows that a 10 percentage point increase in a town’s Republican vote share
increases circulation of Republican papers relative to Democratic papers by 10 percent. This fact pins down
consumers’ taste for like-minded news in our model. The relative substitutability of same-affiliation papers
is identified by variation in relative circulation with respect to the number of papers of each type. We
find that adding a second Republican paper to a town with one Republican and one Democratic newspaper
reduces the relative circulation of the existing Republican paper by 4 percent.
     We calibrate several model parameters. Because we do not have price instruments we believe are cred-
ible, we estimate the price coefficient by imposing the assumption that observed prices satisfy firms’ first
order conditions. Because our circulation data do not record overlap in the readership of different papers,
we calibrate the overlap predicted by our model to match that observed in a set of historical readership
surveys. We calibrate marginal costs and advertisers’ willingness to pay to match historical data for a set
of representative newspapers. Large markups over marginal costs and significant overlap in readership both
suggest that newspapers were highly differentiated products.
     To estimate the entry, affiliation choice, and advertising parameters of the model, we use data on the
order of entry and observed affiliations in each 1924 newspaper market. Controlling for the fraction Repub-
lican, our descriptive analysis suggests that adding an additional Republican incumbent reduces an entering
paper’s likelihood of choosing a Republican affiliation by 15 percentage points. This relationship identifies
the strength of differentiation incentives overall. Since the demand estimates pin down the Hotelling portion
of these incentives, the residual is attributed in our model to diminishing returns to advertising. The rela-
tionship between population and the observed number of firms identifies the parameters of the distribution
of fixed costs.
     An important concern is that the correlations we exploit for identification may be confounded with
unobserved variation in consumer ideology or preferences, biasing downward the estimated incentive to dif-
ferentiate and the estimated substitutability of same-affiliation newspapers (Aguirregabiria and Nevo 2013).
We address these issues by allowing explicitly for unobserved variation in household ideology, using a novel
identification strategy that exploits correlation across markets that are close enough to share similar char-
acteristics but far enough apart that their newspapers do not compete. We assume in the spirit of Murphy
and Topel (1990) and Altonji et al. (2005) that the spatial correlation in unobservable dimensions of ideol-
ogy matches that of observable measures. The resulting spatial structure allows us to infer the distribution


                                                      3
of market-level unobservables, much as panel structure facilitates recovering this distribution in dynamic
settings (e.g., Collard-Wexler 2013; see also Arcidiacono and Miller 2011).
     We use the estimated model to measure the importance of competitive forces relative to other incentives
in shaping the ideological diversity of the news market. We measure diversity by the number of markets
with at least one newspaper affiliated with each party, the share of households living in such markets, and
the share of households reading at least one newspaper affiliated with each party. We find that the incentive
to differentiate from competitors in order to attract more readers and soften price and advertising competition
(Mullainathan and Shleifer 2005) increases diversity significantly, offsetting a strong incentive to cater to
the tastes of majority consumers (George and Waldfogel 2003).
     Next, we compare the market outcomes to those that would be chosen by a social planner maximizing
economic welfare, but ignoring any externalities from diversity. Relative to the first best, market entry is
inefficiently low, market prices are inefficiently high, and the market incentive to differentiate politically
from competitors is inefficiently weak. Thus, there is no conflict between the policy goals of maximizing
economic welfare and preserving diversity in the marketplace of ideas. Policies aimed at the latter goal are
likely to also be beneficial from the perspective of the former.
     Finally, we consider a range of competition policy experiments. Allowing newspapers to collude on
circulation prices reduces economic welfare and has mixed effects on diversity. By contrast, allowing news-
papers to collude on advertising prices increases both economic welfare and diversity. Advertising prices
rise, leading circulation prices to fall as newspapers compete intensely for readers (Rochet and Tirole 2006;
Dewenter et al. 2011). Entry increases dramatically. Consumer surplus increases, significant profit is
transferred from advertisers to newspapers, and the share of households who read diverse papers increases
significantly. The contrasting effects of circulation and advertising price collusion highlight the importance
of accounting for the two-sided nature of media markets in policy evaluation. When we allow newspapers to
form joint operating agreements and collude on both circulation and advertising prices, diversity increases
at no cost to economic welfare. We show that joint ownership (in which one entity has the exclusive right to
open and operate newspapers in a market) reduces welfare and diversity, while an explicit subsidy (modeled
on the US postal subsidy system) increases both welfare and diversity.
     Throughout our analysis, we treat consumer ideology, as measured by Republican vote shares, as ex-
ogenous to newspaper affiliations. This decision follows our finding in Gentzkow et al. (2011) that the entry
or exit of a partisan newspaper does not change the expected party vote share. Importantly, this assump-
tion is consistent with large political externalities to ideological diversity. A newspaper’s party affiliation
need not affect expected vote shares, since rational voters will take an outlet’s bias into account in updating
their beliefs (Chiang and Knight 2011). Yet diverse media may still provide more information in aggregate
(Anderson and McLaren 2012), making beliefs more correlated with the truth even if though they may not
change on average. For example, if Democratic papers report more aggressively on scandals affecting Re-
publican politicians and vice versa (Gentzkow et al. 2006; Galvis et al. 2012), having a newspaper from
each party will tend to maximize the chance that consumers learn about a given scandal. In the supplemental
appendix to this paper, we offer a formal model that captures these ideas.
     Our work builds on other empirical models of entry and product positioning with explicit demand sys-
tems (Reiss and Spiller 1989; Einav 2007 and 2010; Draganska et al. 2009; Jeziorski 2012; Berry et al.
2013; Seim and Waldfogel 2013; Fan 2013). Like Fan (2013), we use a demand model that allows con-
sumers to choose bundles of products. Like Fan (2013) and Jeziorski (2012), we include a micro-founded


                                                      4
model of advertising competition. Along with Berry et al. (2013), we are among the first to model both entry
and product positioning decisions in a two-sided market. An important difference between our model and
past work is that we allow for both unobserved market characteristics and idiosyncratic firm-level shocks,
introducing a novel strategy to separate causal effects of one firm’s choices on its competitors from the
confounding effect of correlated unobservables.
    More broadly, our work relates to a large literature on entry and competition in advertising-funded
markets, including Berry and Waldfogel (2001), Rysman (2004), Kaiser and Wright (2006), Argentesi and
Filistrucchi (2007), Wilbur (2008), Chandra and Collard-Wexler (2009), and Sweeting (2010).
    Our paper also relates to the theoretical literature on two-sided markets. Most existing theoretical mod-
els (e.g., Gabszewicz et al. 2001, 2002, Kind et al. 2013, and Antonielli and Filistrucchi 2012) of product
differentiation in two-sided markets assume that each consumer can consume a single-product. We join
Armstrong (2002), Ambrus and Reisinger (2006), Anderson et al. (2010, 2011) in emphasizing the impor-
tance of “multi-homing” by consumers, and we add richness to the model by endogenizing both entry and
product positioning. In this sense our findings regarding the efficiency of market equilibrium and the effects
of competition policy contribute novel possibility results to the theoretical literature.
    Finally, our paper is related to research on the incentives that shape the political orientation of the news
media.4 Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) use a similar framework to study ideological positioning of US
newspapers in recent years. Because few modern markets have more than one newspaper, however, they
cannot address the impact of competition. Chiang’s (2010) study of US newspapers is the closest to ours
in investigating equilibrium ideological positioning of newspapers in multi-paper markets. Chiang (2010)
uses household-level data to test the predictions of a variant of Mullainathan and Shleifer’s (2005) model,
and finds that ideologically extreme households in multi-paper markets are more likely to read a newspaper
than those in single-paper markets.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the historical data that forms the
basis of our analysis. Section 3 discusses the historical context for our data. Section 4 presents descriptive
evidence on the determinants of newspaper demand and affiliations and lays out our strategy for estimating
the incentive to differentiate in the presence of unobserved consumer heterogeneity. Section 5 lays out our
model. Sections 6 and 7 detail the estimation and identification of the demand and supply portions of the
model, respectively. Section 8 presents estimates and counterfactual simulations. Section 9 concludes.


2 Data
2.1 Roadmap
We use two main data sources. To estimate the supply side of our model — that is, newspapers’ entry
and affiliation decisions — we use 1924 data on the number, affiliations, and circulation prices of papers
in a cross-section of daily newspaper markets. These data come from newspaper directories, and have a
single observation for each newspaper. To estimate the demand side of the model, we use 1924 data on
the circulation of each daily newspaper by town. These data come from circulation reports newspapers
file with an auditing agency, and since the typical newspaper circulates in many towns, they have multiple
    4 See Prat and Strömberg (2011) for a review. More broadly, our paper relates to empirical studies of the effect of competition
and ownership structure on product variety in the news media (Berry and Waldfogel 2001; Sweeting 2010; Waldfogel 2011), and
to studies of the extent to which competition creates an incentive to differentiate (e.g., Borenstein and Netz 1999).


                                                                5
observations per newspaper. We supplement these two primary data sets with information on costs and
revenues of representative newspapers, as well as information from a small number of readership surveys,
which we use to calibrate some of the parameters of our model.

2.2 Cross-section of Daily Newspaper Markets
Our cross section of newspaper markets is based on the US Newspaper Panel introduced in Gentzkow et
al. (2011). The complete panel is drawn from annual directories of US newspapers from 1869 and from
every presidential year from 1872 to 1924, inclusive. Our main analysis is based on the data for 1924.
We use other years to define the order of entry, to define a historical measure of newspapers’ affiliations,
and for supplemental descriptive analysis. In each year, we extract the name, city, political affiliation, and
subscription price of every English-language daily newspaper. We match newspapers across years on the
basis of their title, city, and time of day. Gentzkow et al. (2011) provide details on data collection and
validation of data quality.
     We classify a newspaper’s affiliation as Republican if it ever declares a Republican affiliation and as
Democratic if it ever declares a Democratic affiliation.5 This historical measure differs from contempora-
neous affiliation mainly because by 1924 many newspapers had switched their affiliation to “Independent.”
As we discuss further in section 3 below, the evidence suggests that such switches were not associated with
large changes in content, so that historical affiliations are a better proxy for newspapers’ true political types
than contemporaneous affiliations. We exclude from our sample 142 newspapers whose only declared af-
filiation is Independent and 36 newspapers that never declare an affiliation of any kind. In appendix A we
present results for the subsample of markets that do not contain an Independent newspaper in 1924 and the
subsample that do not contain an unaffiliated newspaper in 1924.
     We define a newspaper’s year of entry as the year in which it first appears in a newspaper directory in our
panel. For each market with two or more daily newspapers, we define the order of entry of the newspapers
based on their years of entry, breaking ties at random.
     We match markets to Census place definitions in 1990 and match each Census place to the county
containing the largest share of the place’s population in 1990. We use the Census place-county match to
combine city-level newspaper data with county-level voting data from various sources, as in Gentzkow et
al. (2011). Our main measure of consumer ideology is the average share of the two-party presidential vote
going to Republicans over the period 1868 to 1928. We exclude a small number of markets for which we
cannot identify the presidential vote share. In appendix A we present results excluding markets in the South,
where the Democrats were dominant.
     We define the universe of potential newspaper markets as the set of all cities with populations between
3,000 and 100,000 and at least one weekly newspaper as of 1924.6 The word potential is important, because
we will estimate a model of newspapers’ entry decisions, so our sample must include markets that could
have had a daily newspaper but did not. We exclude very large and very small cities because we expect
their economic primitives may be sufficiently different that our model will be a poor fit. (New York City, for
example, had more than 100 newspapers in 1924, and these papers were far more heterogeneous than those
in the typical market in our data.) In appendix A we present an analysis of the sensitivity of our findings to
    5 In the handful of cases in which a newspaper declares a Republican affiliation in one year and a Democratic affiliation in
another, we use the affiliation declared most often by the newspaper.
    6 Data on the universe of cities and their populations come from the 1924 N. W. Ayer & Son’s American Newspaper Annual.



                                                               6
tightening the population bounds for the sample and to excluding markets close to very large cities.
     We will use spatial correlation in newspapers’ affiliations to identify the distribution of unobservable
market-level heterogeneity in ideology. Executing this strategy requires identifying geographically proxi-
mate markets that are likely to have similar unobservable consumer characteristics. We construct such pairs
as follows. We identify all pairs of markets in which both markets are located in the same state and are
between 100 and 400 kilometers apart. Among all such pairs, we identify the pair with lowest absolute
difference in log population, breaking ties randomly. We then remove the matched markets from consider-
ation and find the pair with the next lowest population difference. We repeat this matching process until all
markets are matched.
     Table 1 presents summary statistics for our cross-section of markets. Our sample includes 1, 910 mar-
kets, 950 of which have at least one daily newspaper, and 338 of which have more than one daily newspaper.
Population is highly correlated with the number of newspapers. In total there are 1, 338 newspapers in the
sample, of which 57 percent are Republican. Overall, 54 percent of multi-paper markets are ideologically
diverse in the sense of having at least one Republican and at least one Democratic newspaper. In the average
market, Republican and Democratic presidential candidates tend to get a similar number of votes, but there
is substantial cross-market variation in the vote share.

2.3 Town-level Circulation Data
Our data on circulation by town come from 1924 reports submitted by newspapers to the Audit Bureau of
Circulations (ABC), an independent organization created to verify circulation claims. In most cases these
audits cover a twelve-month period ending in 1924; in some cases the examination period is shorter or ends
in 1923. We obtained the reports on microfilm from ABC and converted them to machine-readable text.
This is, to our knowledge, the first dataset with disaggregated information on circulation for a large number
of newspapers prior to the late twentieth century.
    From each audit report we extract the newspaper’s name, location, and circulation in each town that
receives “25 or more copies daily through carriers, dealers, agents, and mail.” We compute total circulation
by town across all editions of the same paper and average circulation by town across all audit reports (if
more than one edition or audit report is available).
    We match newspapers in the ABC data to those in the US Newspaper Panel using the newspaper’s
name and location. Not all newspapers are represented in the ABC data. In appendix A we present results
excluding towns for which newspapers headquartered nearby are not represented in the data.
    We construct a cross-section of towns with at least one matching circulating newspaper in which no
newspaper is headquartered. We exclude headquarter markets because we wish to estimate our demand
model using variation the circulation of the same newspaper across a set of comparable small towns in
which no single newspaper has a dominant position.
    We match towns to 1990 Census place codes using town and state name, and we use place codes to
match towns to counties. We exclude towns that we cannot successfully match to Census geographies, and
a small number for which we do not have county presidential voting data. For computational reasons, we
exclude 52 towns in which more than 10 newspapers are available.
    We use the same algorithm described for markets in section 2.2 to construct pairs of geographically
proximate towns that are likely to have similar unobservable consumer characteristics.



                                                     7
    Table 2 presents summary statistics for the towns in our sample. Our sample includes 12, 188 towns,
in 8, 044 of which more than one daily newspaper circulates. Overall, 53 percent of multi-paper towns are
ideologically diverse in the sense of having at least one Republican and at least one Democratic newspaper
available. Towns have much smaller populations than markets. In appendix A we present results excluding
the largest and smallest towns from our sample.

2.4 Readership Survey Data
Our circulation data measure total copies circulated but do not tell us anything about patterns of readership
at the household level. We supplement the data with information from two sources.
     First, we use newly digitized aggregate reports from 17 newspaper readership surveys, covering 9
(mostly large) cities over the period 1929-1969.7 Survey respondents declared the full set of newspapers
read by their household. From each report we compute, for each pair of newspapers, the share of subscribers
to either newspaper who subscribe to both. We use this measure to characterize the extent of multiple read-
ership in competitive markets.
     Second, we use data from the study Cost of Living in the United States, 1917-1919 (ICPSR 8299; see
also Costa 2001). This study contains microdata on “number of newspapers purchased by the household”
for a sample of “families of wage earners or salaried workers in industrial locales scattered throughout
the United States.” Though the data are not nationally representative and do not include detail on specific
newspapers, they provide the earliest microdata we are aware of on the number of newspapers read by US
families. We match the geographic codes in the data to those in our cross-section of newspaper markets,
and we select the subsample of the data consisting of newspaper-reading families that live in a city in our
cross-section.

2.5 Cost and Revenue Data
To calibrate features of newspaper cost and revenue structure, we obtained income statements for 94 anony-
mous newspapers in 1927 from the Inland Daily Press Association (Yewdall 1928). Since the data do not
identify individual newspapers, we match each record in the US Newspaper Panel to the record in the Inland
Press data with the closest circulation value.
    We compute the variable cost of each newspaper as the annual per-copy cost of printing and distribution,
including paper and ink costs and mailing and delivery costs. We compute fixed costs per copy as the
difference between annual total costs per copy and annual variable costs per copy. We also compute the
annual per-copy advertising revenue of each newspaper. Finally, we compute the annual per-copy circulation
revenue of each newspaper (revenue from subscriptions and single-copy sales).


3 Historical Background on Newspaper Affiliations
The median newspaper in our 1924 cross-section entered its market prior to 1896. During the 1890s, news-
papers devoted 20 − 40 percent of their coverage to politics (Baldasty 1992). It was common for newspapers
to choose an explicit affiliation with either the Democratic or the Republican party. The practice faded over

   7 We   provide publication details for each report in the supplemental appendix.


                                                                 8
time: by the mid-twentieth century it was rare for newly-formed newspapers to declare an explicit affiliation
(Gentzkow et al. 2006; Hamilton 2006).
     We use political affiliation as a proxy for the political orientation of a newspaper’s content and hence
for its likely appeal to readers of different political stripes. A connection among newspaper affiliation, con-
tent, and audience was explicit in newspapers’ own pronouncements. For example, in 1868, the Democratic
Detroit Free Press announced, “The Free Press alone in this State is able to combine a Democratic point of
view of our state politics and local issues with those of national importance” (Kaplan 2002, 23). Similarly,
in 1872, the Republican Detroit Post declared as its mission “To meet the demands of the Republicans of
Michigan and to advance their cause” (Kaplan 2002, 22). In Gentzkow et al. (2011) we report quantitative
evidence for our newspaper panel showing that newspapers devoted more attention to the presidential can-
didates of their own party than those of the opposing party. Many other quantitative and qualitative studies
support a strong connection between affiliation and content (Hamilton 2006; Gentzkow et al. 2006; Kaplan
2002; Summers 1994).
     We will treat political affiliation as a way for a newspaper to differentiate commercially from its com-
petitors. Anecdotal evidence suggests that newspaper owners thought of political affiliation in those terms.
James E. Scripps declared in 1879 that “As a rule, there is never a field for a second paper of precisely the
same characteristics as one already in existence. A Democratic paper may be established where there is
already a Republican; or vice versa; an afternoon paper where there is only a morning; a cheap paper where
there is only a high-priced one; but I think I can safely affirm that an attempt to supplant an existing newspa-
per...of exactly the same character has never succeeded” (quoted in Hamilton 2006, 47). Through the early
twentieth century, James’ brother, E.W. Scripps, exploited the nominal independence of his newspaper chain
to adapt editorial content to market conditions, emphasizing Republican ideas in markets with established
Democratic newspapers, and Democratic ideas when Republicans were entrenched (Baldasty 1999, 139).
     Political affiliations may also have served political aims, but at the time of our study commercial con-
siderations were likely dominant (Baldasty 1992). In related work, we show that newspapers’ affiliations
exerted, on average, at most a small effect on electoral outcomes (Gentzkow et al. 2011), and that in most
times and places incumbent parties exerted at most a limited influence on newspapers’ political affiliations
(Gentzkow et al. 2012). We note, however, that Petrova (2011) provides evidence that political patronage
influenced newspaper affiliations in the late 1800s.
     We exclude unaffiliated newspapers from our analysis. We do this primarily because the group of news-
papers that never declare a Republican or Democratic affiliation includes many specialized commercial
papers (e.g., mining industry trade journals) that can plausibly be treated as separable in demand from af-
filiated newspapers. This decision also has the effect of excluding newspapers that always declared their
affiliation as Independent, some of which may well have competed economically with the newspapers in
our sample. In appendix A we show that our results are robust to excluding from our sample markets in
which affiliated papers may have competed with Independent or unaffiliated papers.
     We model a newspaper’s political affiliation as a binary characteristic. This decision is motivated by
qualitative and quantitative evidence suggesting that papers of the same affiliation were relatively homoge-
neous in their content, hewing closely to the party line. Newspaper proprietor Horace Greeley writes in his
autobiography: “A Democratic, Whig, or Republican journal is generally expected to praise or blame, like or
dislike, eulogize or condemn, in precise accordance with the views and interest of its party” (Greeley 1872,
137). According to Kaplan (2002), “In professing allegiance to a party, the Detroit press assumed specific


                                                       9
obligations. The individual journal was the organ of the political community, and commissioned with the
task of expressing the group’s ideas and its interests” (23). In the rare event that a newspaper deviated from
the party line, they could be severely punished.8 Consistent with this narrative evidence, Gentzkow et al.
(2011) show that the political orientation of voters strongly predicts the affiliations of local papers, but is
only weakly correlated with their content conditional on affiliation.
     We model affiliation as static even though newspapers often switched from declaring a Republican
or Democratic affiliation to declaring an Independent affiliation. We do this because Gentzkow et al.
(2011) show that differences in Republican candidate mentions between originally Republican and origi-
nally Democratic papers is similar whether or not their current affiliation is Independent. That is, formerly
affiliated newspapers do not become noticeably less partisan after dropping their explicit declaration of party
allegiance.
     Although the assumption of fixed, binary affiliations is reasonable in light of the evidence, it is never-
theless an approximation. The historical record provides examples of content differences among papers of
the same affiliation, particularly on issues where disagreements between factions within the party were sig-
nificant (Summers 1994, 43-58). In the supplemental appendix, we present evidence on the extent to which
newspapers of a given affiliation adjust their content in response to changes in consumer preferences or the
competitive landscape. There is qualitative evidence consistent with such adjustment, but the precision of
the exercise is limited so we cannot say confidently that such adjustment took place. To the extent that
binary affiliations are a coarse summary of a more continuous space of political content, caution is needed
in linking our results to effects on underlying content. Our results capture diversity at the level of party
affiliations, not intra-party factions or shadings.


4 Descriptive Evidence
4.1 Partisanship and Newspaper Circulation
In our model, a household’s utility from reading a newspaper will depend on the match between the newspa-
per’s ideology and the household’s ideology and on the presence of substitute newspapers in the household’s
consumption bundle.
    Table 3 shows that both factors play a significant role in driving observed demand. The table presents
OLS regressions of the Republican-Democrat difference in mean log circulation (i.e., the average of log
circulation among Republican papers minus the average log circulation among Democratic papers) on mea-
sures of household ideology and/or the presence of substitutes. Specification (1) includes only household
ideology, specification (2) includes only counts of substitute newspapers, and specification (3) includes both.
Given the construction of the dependent measure, coefficients can be interpreted as the marginal effect of a
given variable on the circulation of Republican papers relative to Democratic papers.
    The greater is the Republican share of households in a town, the greater will be the relative circulation
of Republican newspapers. However, having more Republican newspapers available will tend to depress the
circulation of the average Republican paper due to substitution effects. Because Republican newspapers are

    8 Kaplan (2002, 58-61) discusses the case of the Democratic Detroit Free Press, which in 1872 refused to endorse Horace
Greeley, the Democratic nominee for the presidency. The paper was widely criticized by party leaders, loyal partisan readers, and
competitors. “Influential Democrats” threatened to start a competing Democratic paper in response. Ultimately, the rebellious
owners of the Free Press were bought out by loyal interests, and the paper switched to supporting Greeley.


                                                               10
more likely to be available in towns with more Republican households, these two effects tend to work in
opposite directions. Therefore, we expect that specification (1) understates the effect of household ideology
and specification (2) understates the importance of substitutes. Specification (3) shows that, as expected,
both effects are estimated to be larger when the regression includes measures of both household ideology
and the presence of substitutes.
    In the supplemental appendix, we show that the two effects illustrated by specification (3) are robust to
a number of alternative specifications. We show that both the effect of household ideology and the effect of
substitutes are robust to a specification with both newspaper and town fixed effects, and to controlling for
non-political attributes of both newspapers and towns. We also show that the key qualitative patterns in the
data are present in both large and small towns, and that qualitatively similar patterns emerge when we study
changes in circulation over time rather than in the cross-section.
    The estimated relationships in specification (3) are economically significant. Increasing the fraction
Republican among voters by 10 percentage points increases the relative circulation of Republican papers
by 10 percent. Adding a second Republican paper to a market with one Republican and one Democratic
newspaper reduces the relative circulation of the existing Republican paper by 4 percent.
    Appendix figure 1 illustrates the key patterns in specification (3) of table 3 graphically. The relative
readership of Republican papers is increasing in the Republican vote share. In addition, for any vote share,
the average Republican paper garners more readership when the majority of its competitors are Democratic.

4.2 Determinants of Newspapers’ Affiliation Choices
Given that households demand own-type newspapers and that same-type papers are more substitutable, we
would expect that newspaper affiliation would respond both to household ideology and to market structure.
    Table 4 shows that these expectations are borne out in our data. The table presents OLS regressions of
a dummy for whether a newspaper chooses a Republican affiliation on measures of household ideology and
incumbent affiliations. Specification (1) includes only household ideology, specification (2) includes only
incumbent affiliations, and specification (3) includes both.
    The more Republican are the households in a market, the more likely is an entering paper to choose
a Republican affiliation. However, facing a Republican incumbent reduces the likelihood that an entering
paper affiliates with the Republican party. Because Republican incumbents are more likely in markets with
more Republican households, these two effects tend to work in opposite directions. Therefore, we expect
that specification (1) understates the effect of household ideology, and specification (2) understates the effect
of incumbent affiliation. Specification (3) shows that, as expected, both effects are estimated to be larger
when the regression includes measures of both household ideology and incumbent affiliations.
    In the supplemental appendix we exploit panel structure to show that the correlation between household
ideology and newspaper affiliation decisions is not driven by reverse causality from newspaper content to
voter behavior.
    The effects we estimate in specification (3) are economically significant. A 10 percentage point increase
in the fraction Republican among households increases the likelihood of a Republican affiliation by 23 per-
centage points. Having a Republican incumbent instead of a Democratic incumbent reduces the likelihood
of a Republican affiliation by 28 percentage points.
    Figure 1 illustrates the key patterns in specification (3) of table 4 graphically. Panel A shows that the
probability of the first entrant choosing a Republican affiliation is increasing in the Republican vote share

                                                       11
in the market. Panel B shows that the probability of the second entrant choosing a Republican affiliation is
increasing in the Republican vote share and is lower when the first entrant’s affiliation is Republican.

4.3 Controlling for Unobserved Ideology
Controlling for the Republican vote share greatly affects the strength of the substitution and differentiation
effects we estimate in tables 3 and 4. It remains possible that variation in consumer ideology not captured
by our observable proxy is a source of bias. In this section, we outline an identification strategy that exploits
spatial correlation in consumer ideology to identify the role of unobserved heterogeneity across towns and
markets, much in the way that correlation over time facilitates identification in panel settings (e.g., Collard-
Wexler 2013).
     To illustrate the logic of our strategy, consider newspapers’ affiliation choices. In markets whose first
entrant is Democratic, the second entrant is Republican 48 percent of the time. In markets whose first
entrant is Republican, the second entrant is Republican 51 percent of the time. We interpret this slight
positive correlation as the net effect of negative correlation due to differentiation and positive correlation
due to variation in consumer ideology.
     Now consider the affiliation choices of the second entrant in a neighboring market—defined in section
2.2 as a similar-size market between 100 and 400 kilometers away. In markets whose first entrant is Demo-
cratic, the second entrant in the neighboring market is Republican 31 percent of the time. In markets whose
first entrant is Republican, the second entrant in the neighboring market is Republican 64 percent of the
time. As newspapers at this distance did not compete directly, we interpret this strong positive correlation
as evidence of underlying spatially correlated variation in consumer ideology.
     We show in the supplemental appendix that a similar pattern is present in the circulation data. A town
whose available newspapers are majority Republican exhibits slightly lower relative demand for Republican
newspapers. A town whose neighbor has primarily Republican newspapers exhibits greater relative demand
for Republican newspapers.
     In both cases, comparing the correlation within a location with the correlation across neighboring lo-
cations reveals information about the importance of unobservable variation in consumer ideology. We will
exploit this information to identify our formal model, relying on three key assumptions.
     First, we assume that our pairs of markets and towns are close enough to share similar ideology but far
enough apart that their newspapers do not interact directly. Appendix figure 2 shows direct support for this
assumption. Two counties located 100− 400 kilometers apart have a highly correlated Republican vote share
and fraction white. However, newspapers headquartered in the first county rarely circulate in the second at
such distances. Second, we assume that there are no spatially-correlated supply-side variables that affect the
relative profitability of different affiliations.9 Third, we assume that the correlation of the unobservables is
the same as the correlation of the observables. In appendix A we present evidence on the sensitivity of our
findings to variation in the assumed spatial correlation.


    9 Variable costs such as paper and ink were not affiliation-specific, and in any case these commodities were traded nationally.
The cost of hiring editors or reporters could be affiliation-specific, but the market for such talent was geographically broad. For
example, in 1920, 49 percent of prime-age (25-55) white male journalists lived in a state other than their state of birth, as against
33 percent for all prime-age white males (Ruggles et al. 2010). Common ownership of newspapers in different markets is a final
possible source of correlation. In appendix A we show that removing the small number of market pairs with common ownership
makes little difference to our results.


                                                                12
4.4 Multiple Readership and the Extent of Differentiation
In our model, market performance (the efficiency of entry and pricing decisions) depends on the extent of
differentiation among newspapers. The model estimates reported below imply that this differentiation was
substantial. Several pieces of evidence are consistent with this conclusion, some of which we incorporate in
estimation, and some of which provide independent verification.
     First, newspaper markups were large even in competitive markets. The average newspaper in our sample
earned $4.69 (in 1924 dollars) in circulation revenue and $14.19 in advertising revenue per subscriber, for a
gross margin of $10.09 on variable costs of $8.79 per subscriber. As we show in the supplemental appendix,
newspapers in more competitive markets charged, if anything, higher prices.
     Second, circulation changes around newspaper entry suggest limited substitutability. In the supplemental
appendix, we show that the entry of an average newspaper increases total market circulation by 24 percent. If
there were no substitution with existing newspapers, we estimate that this number would be only moderately
higher, at 28 percent. Put differently, only about 14 percent of the circulation of an entering newspaper comes
at the expense of existing newspapers’ circulation. The rest comes either from households who previously
did not read a newspaper, or from households reading multiple papers.
     Third, multiple readership was quantitatively important at the time of our study. In our 1917-1919
survey data, 15 percent of households that report reading a daily newspaper report reading two or more
newspapers. In our readership survey data, for the average pair of newspapers, 16 percent of households
who read either paper read both. And as we document in the supplemental appendix, overlap was if anything
larger for newspapers with the same political affiliation, suggesting a high degree of differentiation along
non-political dimensions.


5 Model
5.1 Roadmap
The goal of our model is to parsimoniously capture the effect of consumer preferences, price competition,
and advertising competition on equilibrium product diversity. Computational and data limitations mean the
model is necessarily stylized. We approximate a set of economic forces we judge to be most important,
while abstracting from many others.
    In the next two subsections, we define the model and characterize its equilibrium. In the following
subsection, we return to the main assumptions, discussing their limitations, their importance for our main
results, and the evidence that supports them.

5.2 Setup
We consider a cross-section of markets indexed by m ∈ {1, ..., M}. Each market has J max potential newspaper
entrants, a unit mass of homogeneous potential advertisers, and a mass Sm of households indexed by i.
    We index the Jm newspapers that choose to enter market m in equilibrium by j ∈ {1, ..., Jm }. Each
entering newspaper chooses a political affiliation τ jm ∈ {R, D}, a circulation price p jm , and an advertising
price a jm .




                                                      13
    Each household has a political affiliation θim ∈ {R, D}. We denote the share of households with θim = R
by ρm and assume that ρm is common knowledge to market participants but unobserved by the econometri-
cian.
    The Jm newspapers may also be available in one or more hinterland towns, which we index by t ∈
{M + 1, ..., M + T }. A given town t may receive newspapers from more than one market m. We assume
that these towns are sufficiently small that they have a negligible impact on newspaper profits, and thus
do not affect the entry, affiliation, and pricing decisions we model below. We do not explicitly model the
process that determines which newspapers are available in which towns, but we allow in estimation for the
possibility that the choice set may be correlated with unobserved town characteristics.
    The game proceeds in five stages. First, the potential entrants choose sequentially whether or not to
enter. Second, the newspapers that have entered sequentially choose their affiliations in order of their indices
 j. The assignment of these indices is random and not learned until the second stage. Third, newspapers
simultaneously choose their circulation prices. Fourth, newspapers simultaneously choose their advertising
prices, after which each advertiser simultaneously decides whether or not to advertise in each newspaper.
Finally, households choose to consume any bundle of the available newspapers, or no newspaper at all. At
the end of each stage, all newspapers’ choices are observable to all other newspapers.
    The profits of entering newspaper j are given by

(1)                        π jm = Sm [(p jm + ψ jm a jm − MC)q jm − ξ jm (τ jm )] − κm ,

where ψ jm is the mass of advertisers advertising in newspaper j, a jm is newspaper j’s per-copy advertising
price, MC is a marginal cost common to all newspapers and markets, q jm is the share of households purchas-
ing newspaper j, ξ jm (τ jm ) is an affiliation-specific cost, and κm is a market-specific fixed cost. A newspaper
privately observes its own ξ jm after entry decisions are made, at the beginning of the second stage; these
shocks are newspapers’ only private information. We assume that ξ jm (τ jm ) /σξ is distributed mean-zero
type-I extreme value, where σξ > 0 is a constant. We assume that κm /Sm is distributed logistic with scale
parameter σκ and location parameter μκ0 + μκ1 log (Sm ).
    While the cost shocks ξ jm are ultimately a model residual, we present evidence in the supplemental
appendix that the affiliations of co-owned newspapers are correlated, suggesting that these residuals may be
thought of as partly capturing the personal political preferences of owners. We model these cost shocks as
proportional to the number of households. Structurally, this reflects the idea that owners may value greater
reach for their preferred ideologies. Practically, this assumption makes the affiliation choice game neutral to
market scale.
    Each advertiser earns a revenue equal to the integral over i of 1nim ≥1 [ah + (nim − 1) al ], where nim is
the number of newspapers read by i that contain the advertiser’s ad, 1 is the indicator function, al and
ah are the value to the advertiser of first and subsequent impressions respectively, and 0 ≤ al ≤ ah . An
advertiser’s profit is the advertiser’s revenue minus the sum of a jm q jm Sm over all newspapers j in which the
advertiser chooses to advertise. The difference between al and ah captures the extent of diminishing returns
in advertising impressions. The model allows for the case of zero return to duplicate impressions (al = 0)
as well as the case of no diminishing returns (ah = al ).
    Our demand specification follows Gentzkow (2007) in allowing explicitly for multiple readership. The




                                                        14
utility of household i in market m from consuming a bundle of newspapers B is given by
                                                                 
(2)            uim (B) = ∑ β 1 θim =τ jm + β 1 θim =τ jm − α p jm − gs (B) Γs − gd (B)Γd + εim (B) ,
                              j∈B


where gs (B) is the number of distinct two-newspaper subsets of bundle B such that the two newspapers
have the same political affiliation, gd (B) is the number of two-newspaper subsets with different affiliations,
and εim (B) is a type-I extreme value error. Note that the utility from consuming no newspapers is εim (0).   /
A household thus receives per-newspaper utility β for each newspaper in its consumption bundle that has
the same affiliation as the household, and per-newspaper utility β for each newspaper that has a different
affiliation. Utility is diminished by an amount Γs for every pair of newspapers with the same affiliation and
by an amount Γd for every pair with a different affiliation. The specification thus allows that same-affiliation
papers are closer substitutes than opposite-affiliation papers. We assume that this demand specification
applies to both newspaper markets and hinterland towns.

5.3 Equilibrium
We derive a pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the model beginning at the end of the game and
working backward.
    In the final stage of the game, the demands q jm are uniquely determined given the number of newspapers,
their affiliations, and their circulation prices. Integration over εim and θim yields a closed form for q jm as a
sum of familiar logit probabilities.10
    In the fourth stage, newspapers simultaneously choose advertising prices given the number of newspa-
pers, their affiliations, and their circulation prices. In any pure strategy equilibrium of the advertising pricing
stage in market m with affiliations τ and prices p, all advertisers must advertise in all newspapers (ψ jm = 1),
and newspaper j’s advertising price per copy must equal:

(6)                                   a jm (p, τ ) = ah E jm (p, τ ) + al (1 − E jm (p, τ )) ,

where E jm is the share of newspaper j s readers who are “exclusive” in the sense that they read no other
newspaper.11 In equilibrium, each newspaper charges advertisers only for the incremental value of the

      10 Let
                                                                                        
(3)                             uθm (B) =   ∑         β 1 θ =τ jm + β 1 θ =τ jm − α p jm − gs (B) Γs − gd (B) Γd
                                            j∈B

denote the mean utility of households of type θ for bundle B. Then the share of households of type θ who purchase newspaper j is
                                                                               
                                                  θ     ∑{B∈B: j∈B} exp uθm (B)
(4)                                              q jm =                        ,
                                                          ∑B ∈B exp uθm (B )
where B is the set of all bundles of the papers in market m. The market-wide share of households purchasing newspaper j is then

(5)                                                     q jm   =    ρm qRjm + (1 − ρm ) qDjm .

      11 Although
                demand has not yet been realized at the advertising stage, E jm depends only on affiliations and prices, both of which
have been chosen at this stage of the game. Anderson et al. (2011) prove our characterization formally. A proof sketch is as
follows. First, observe that in any equilibrium all advertisers must advertise in all newspapers, since if a newspaper receives no
advertising, there is always some positive advertising price below al that the newspaper would like to charge and that would attract


                                                                         15
impressions the newspaper can deliver, which is reduced if these impressions are duplicated with other
newspapers.
    In the third stage, firms simultaneously choose circulation prices given the number of newspapers and
their affiliations. An equilibrium of this stage in market m with affiliations τ is a vector p∗ such that each
element p∗j satisfies:

(7)                                p∗j ∈ arg max (p j + a jm (p∗ , τ ) − MC)q jm (p∗ , τ ) .
                                             pj


We cannot provide a proof of the uniqueness of the pricing game equilibrium. In estimation we solve numer-
ically for the first-order conditions of the game and we verify that all newspapers’ second-order conditions
hold at the solution. We choose a starting value close to the observed prices and verify that the solution is
not sensitive to local variation (plus or minus $1 per copy) in the choice of starting value at the estimated
parameters.
     In the second stage, firms sequentially choose affiliations given the number of newspapers and their
affiliation-specific shocks ξ jm . An equilibrium
                                                of this
                                                        stage in market
                                                                       m given
                                                                                the
                                                                                   number of newspapers J
is a vector τ ∗ such that each τ ∗j maximizes Eτ ∗+ v jm τ ∗j− , τ ∗j , τ ∗j+ − ξ jm τ ∗j , where τ ∗j− and τ ∗j+ are
                                                    j
vectors of affiliations of the newspapers with indices less than and greater than j, respectively, and v jm (τ )
denotes the equilibrium value of (p jm + a jm − MC)q jm given affiliations τ . For generic realizations of cost
shocks ξ jm there is a unique equilibrium vector of affiliation choices that can be computed by backward
induction.
     In the first stage, potential entrants sequentially choose either to enter or to not enter. At this point in
the game all potential entrants are symmetric and share the same information sets, and since the number
of potential entrants is finite, this stage has a unique equilibrium for generic parameter values. Let Pm (τ )
denote the equilibrium probability that the second-stage affiliation vector is τ conditional on |τ | newspapers
entering. Given affiliations τ , let ξ jm (τ ) denote the expected value of ξ jm (τ j ) conditional on newspaper
 j choosing its affiliation optimally. The per-household expected variable profit of each entering newspaper
given J entrants is:

                                                  1    J                               
(8)                                 Vm (J) =
                                                  J   ∑ ∑          v jm (τ ) − ξ jm (τ ) Pm (τ ) ,
                                                      j=1 τ ∈TJ


where TJ is the set of τ vectors with |τ | = J. If Vm is strictly decreasing in J, the equilibrium number of
firms J ∗ is the unique number such that entering newspapers are profitable but a marginal entrant would not
be. That is,
                                                                  κm
(9)                                               Vm (J ∗ ) ≥        > Vm (J ∗ + 1) ,
                                                                  Sm

for J ∗ ∈ {1, ..., J max − 1}. If Vm (1) < κSmm then J ∗ = 0 is the equilibrium, and if Vm (J max ) > κSmm then J ∗ = J max
is the equilibrium. Though we do not have a formal proof that Vm must be decreasing, this condition is

advertising, thus raising the newspaper’s profits. Second, observe that in any equilibrium each newspaper will charge a price such
that advertisers are indifferent between advertising in that newspaper and not; otherwise the newspaper could raise its advertising
price and increase its profits. With all advertisers advertising in all newspapers, it is straightforward to show that this maximum
price is given by (6) for all newspapers, implying the desired result.


                                                                     16
intuitive: it means that all else equal a firm would rather be in a market with fewer competitors. In repeated
simulations we find that this property holds for all markets in our data at the estimated parameters.

5.4 Discussion
Market Definition

We make two important simplifying assumptions in defining newspaper markets. First, we assume that
newspapers only compete with other newspapers headquartered in the same market, and we ignore circula-
tion in hinterland towns in modeling newspapers’ affiliation, pricing and entry choices. In reality, the 1924
ABC data shows that home-market papers constitute 90 percent of circulation in news markets, and the
average newspaper sold 65 percent of copies in its home market.12 Our definition is thus an approximation
to a reality in which consumers exhibit strong but not exclusive preferences for local papers. To assess ro-
bustness to this assumption, we show results in appendix A from a subsample that excludes markets close to
large cities, and from a specification in which we incorporate hinterland towns into our measure of market
ideology.
    Second, we aggregate all substitutes for daily newspapers into an outside option whose prices and char-
acteristics we do not model explicitly. We deliberately choose a period of study in which there were few
such substitutes that were also significant source of political information. In 1924, television did not exist
and radio was in its infancy as a news source (Sterling and Kittross 2001). Although weekly newspapers and
magazines existed and played an important role in the media market, neither conveyed the news on a daily
basis, and neither weekly newspapers nor weekly magazines achieved total weekly circulation in excess of
the total daily circulation of daily newspapers (Field 2006).

Product Characteristics

Our model endogenizes political affiliation but not other forms of differentiation. This is clearly a dra-
matic simplification, as variation in both quality and non-political horizontal dimensions (such as time of
publication) was clearly important. Estimating consumer preferences for other dimensions is straightfor-
ward, but endogenizing newspapers’ choices of attributes along multiple dimensions would add significant
complexity.
    Failing to account for unobserved vertical differentiation can lead to bias in price coefficients (Berry
et al. 1995). As we detail further below, this concern motivates us to identify the price coefficient α
from the monopoly first-order condition (Gentzkow 2007) rather than from price variation. We present
several additional sensitivity analyses. In appendix A we show results from a model that allows utility
to depend on distance to a newspaper’s headquarters, an important shifter of quality. We also experiment
with specifications that use a newspaper’s price and home market circulation as quality proxies. In the
supplemental appendix, we show explicitly that the crucial cross-sectional patterns that identify our demand
system are robust to allowing flexibly for variation in quality at the newspaper level.


   12 Fan (2013) uses a wider market definition that encapsulates 85 percent of a newspaper’s circulation and includes circulation
outside a newspaper’s home market. Allowing for this additional realism would be difficult in our model as we estimate newspapers’
incentive to enter the market. Doing so in a model with overlapping markets would mean computing post-entry equilibrium
configurations taking account of strategic linkages of distant newspapers through chains of partially overlapping markets.


                                                               17
    Ignoring non-political horizontal differentiation is also an important simplification. The more news-
papers can differentiate on non-political dimensions, the weaker will be their incentive to differentiate on
politics (Irmen and Thisse 1998; Liu and Shuai 2013). We expect our empirical estimates to reflect the
incentive to differentiate on political dimensions given the extent of differentiation on other dimensions.
As we do not treat differentiation on other dimensions as endogenous, we cannot allow it to vary in our
counterfactuals, which could impact our conclusions. For example, we could overstate or understate the
welfare effects of collusion, because collusion can both encourage and discourage non-political differentia-
tion (Sweeting 2010). In addition, we could overstate the value of variety, because we capture non-political
differentiation through a symmetric logit error (Ackerberg and Rysman 2005).
    In the supplemental appendix we present sensitivity analyses related to these concerns. We show that our
finding that variety is undersupplied survives even if we exogenously cap the number of entering newspapers.
We also present results from an experiment in which we simulate data from a model with two types of
horizontal differentiation–politics and time of publication–and estimate a misspecified model that allows
only for political differentiation. We find that the estimated model matches the qualitative counterfactual
predictions of the data-generating model well, although there are some quantitative differences between the
two.

Consumer Preferences

Our demand specification is designed to capture two key elements: consumers’ preferences for like-minded
political news, and the possibility of a given household reading multiple papers. The former is obviously
important given our focus on political differentiation. The latter is equally crucial, because audience duplica-
tion across papers will be the key driver of advertising competition. It is also consistent with our readership
surveys, which show a significant amount of multiple readership.
     Our demand model nests several cases of interest. When β = β and Γd = Γs = 0, it is equivalent to a
model in which each newspaper is a monopolist facing logit demand. When β = β and Γd , Γs → ∞, it is a
standard logit model in which each household reads at most one newspaper. When β → −∞, it is equivalent
to a model in which there are two distinct markets, one for R newspapers and one for D newspapers.
     An important simplifying assumption is that we allow only two types of consumers: Republican and
Democratic. In reality, of course, some consumers in the period we study did not have a definite partisan
affiliation, although this group was likely in a minority.13 In the presence of unmodeled nonpartisan con-
sumers, we expect that the gap β − β that we estimate will measure the “average” level of partisanship in
news preferences, i.e. a value between the preferences of partisans and nonpartisans. The supplemental ap-
pendix presents estimates of an augmented demand system that allows for politically unaffiliated consumers,
and shows how our counterfactual estimates change with the fraction unaffiliated.




   13 Using Burnham’s (1965) index based on aggregate election returns, Rusk (1970) estimates that split-ticket voting in the US

was not more than seven percent during the period 1876-1908. Millspaugh (1918) reports based on actual ballot records that 21.7
percent of votes in Rhode Island in 1906 were split-ticket. Erikson and Tedin (1981) report that 26 percent of voters switched
parties between the 1924 and 1928 elections and that this figure fell to 11 percent by 1944. (The 1924-28 period coincides with a
major shift in US party politics.)


                                                               18
Advertising Game

Our model of advertising competition draws heavily on the theoretical literature on competition in two-sided
markets with multi-homing (Armstrong 2002; Ambrus and Reisinger 2006; Anderson et al. 2011). Allow-
ing for advertising competition is important because advertising accounted for the majority of newspaper
revenue during the period we study.
     The prediction of diminishing returns to duplicate impressions fits with narrative evidence from the
period we study. It was common for advertisers to assess the duplication in readership across publications
when considering where to place ads, and to consider duplicate impressions to the same household to be less
valuable than unique impressions.14 Indeed, these practices explain the existence of the readership surveys
that we use for a portion of our analysis, which were typically sponsored by one or more local newspapers.
     Our advertising model makes several important simplifying assumptions. First, we do not allow the
quantity of ads to affect the utility of a newspaper to consumers. In contrast to the literature on broadcast
media, for print media the evidence is mixed on consumers’ valuations of advertising, with good empirical
support for a positive value to readers in some settings (Bogart 1981; Kaiser and Wright 2006; Sonnac 2000;
Kaiser and Song 2009). Implicitly, our approach follows Dertouzos and Trautman (1990) in assuming the
consumer treats advertising and news content symmetrically. Second, we assume that advertisers’ valuations
are homogeneous and do not depend on consumer types (as they do, for example, in Chandra 2009).
     We impose these restrictions because we do not have reliable cross-sectional data on advertising quan-
tities and rates. The most important consequence of these assumptions is that all advertisers are served in
equilibrium in the model, which means that the advertising side of the market is allocatively efficient even
under imperfect competition. This is a strong assumption. However, we note that because display adver-
tising rates are often negotiated individually, newspapers have substantial scope for price discrimination in
rates, which means that imperfect competition may not lead to quantity restrictions relative to the first-best.
     We also assume that newspaper costs are independent of the number of ads printed. This is primarily for
simplicity. Equilibrium advertising prices and quantities would be unchanged if we allowed for a per-reader
cost of printing each advertiser’s ad, provided the printing cost per reader is less than al .
     For ease of exposition, we assume that circulation prices are fixed at the time firms set advertising rates.
This is consistent with the fact that subscription prices are typically posted (and so adjust relatively infre-
quently), whereas advertising rates are often negotiated. However, because advertising prices do not affect
consumer demand, the equilibria of the game we study are equivalent to those of a game with simultaneous
choice of both circulation and advertising prices.

Entry and Affiliation Games

Our model of entry and affiliation choice is shaped by three main considerations. First, to credibly identify
the strategic interactions of firms that share a market environment, it is important to allow for unobservable
shocks at both the market and individual firm level (Brock and Durlauf 2007; Aguirregabiria and Nevo
2013). Second, to take advantage of our data, we want the model to reflect the reality that entry in these
markets happened sequentially, and that we know the order in which it occurred. Third, as a practical matter,

   14 In his text on advertising campaigns, Martin (1921) writes that “The same advertisement seen in two or three newspapers is
certainly more effective than if seen in one, but some advertisers are convinced that it is not worth three times as much to have an
advertisement seen in three papers, reaching largely the same readers, as to have it seen in one.”


                                                                19
we want to avoid complications related to estimating models with multiple equilibria.
    To meet these goals and still maintain tractability, we combine a relatively rich incomplete information
model of affiliation choice with a more stylized complete-information model of the entry stage in the style
of Bresnahan and Reiss (1991). In the affiliation stage, firms’ decisions are based on both idiosyncratic
and market-level unobservables. They condition on the choices of past movers, and take account of the
way their decisions will affect those who come later. In the entry stage, by contrast, firms do not yet know
their idiosyncratic shocks, and so they are all symmetric. Equilibrium is determined by a simple optimality
condition, though it still requires numerical integration over the market-level shock as in Mazzeo (2002).
    An important departure from Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) is that we allow the distribution of fixed costs
to depend on market size. We do this because newspapers’ fixed investments, notably editorial costs, are
endogenous to the quality of the newspaper and hence to the size of the market served (Berry and Waldfogel
2010). In section 8 we report evidence that our estimates of the fixed costs of newspapers of different size
are a good match to the data. In appendix A we show that our findings are robust to allowing a more flexible
dependence of the distribution of fixed costs on population.
    Among the many restrictive assumptions our model embeds, two are particularly important. First, we
assume that entry decisions precede affiliation decisions, with firms only learning their cost shocks ξ jm
post-entry.15 This is clearly an abstraction. The most important substantive cost is that we shut down entry
deterrence incentives in affiliation choice. The benefits are that we simplify computation dramatically, since
we need only backward induct through the sequential game for the set of actual entrants rather than the full
set of potential entrants, and that our estimates are not sensitive to assumptions about the set of potential
entrants. The latter is particularly important in our case, since we have almost no evidence on the nature of
this pool or the way it varies across markets.
    Second, we approximate a dynamic entry process by a static model. Although we capture some aspects
of the dynamics by making affiliation choice sequential, we abstract from the reality that one entrant typ-
ically operates in the market for a substantial time before the next entrant arrives, that firms do exit, and
that different entrants face different demand conditions when choosing affiliations. The most obvious chal-
lenge in moving to a dynamic model is the computational difficulty of allowing for both market-level and
firm-level unobservables (Aguirregabiria and Nevo 2013).


6 Demand Estimation
We estimate the parameters of equation 2 by maximum likelihood using circulation data from hinterland
towns. We assume that measured circulation Q̂ jt of newspaper j in town t is equal to q jt St ζ jt , where q jt
is the share of households purchasing
                                    newspaper
                                                j, St is the number of households in town t, and ζ jt is a
measurement error with log ζ jt ∼ N 0, σζ2 , i.i.d. across newspapers and towns.
    To implement the spatial identification strategy outlined in section 4.3, we assume that the share ρt of
consumers in town t with θ = R is unobserved and may be correlated within the pairs of neighboring towns
defined in section 2.3. Specifically, we assume that ρt = logit−1 (logit (Zt ) + νt ), where Zt is the observed
   15 The assumption that agents learn their private information after entry is common in the literature on auctions (Levin and Smith

1994; Bajari and Hortaçsu 2003). A related assumption is that firms do not know their order in the affiliation choice game at the
time they enter. This is purely for technical convenience as it allows us to characterize the equilibrium of the entry game succinctly
with equation 9. If we instead assumed that firms chose affiliations in the order in which they entered, conditions on the payoffs of
the marginal entrant would no longer be sufficient.


                                                                 20
Republican vote share in t’s county and νt is a normally distributed unobservable with mean μνtown and
standard deviation σνtown . The logit transformation ensures that ρt ∈ (0, 1) . We assume that ν is correlated
(and jointly normal) between pairs of neighboring towns t and t  , but independent across pairs, with the
within-pair correlation restricted to match that of the observable Z:

                                        Cov (νt , νt  ) Cov (logit (Zt ) , logit (Zt  ))
(10)                                                    =                                  .
                                         Var (νt )            Var (logit (Zt ))

          the endogeneity of the choice set to town ideology, we assume that the probability that τ jt = R
    To model
is logit−1 μρ0 + μρ1 logit (ρt ) , where μρ0 and μρ1 are parameters to be estimated. In our main estimates, we
treat the number of newspapers Jt available in town t as non-stochastic. In appendix A we show that our
results are robust to modeling Jt as a random variable whose distribution depends on ρt and the size of the
town St , and to allowing more flexibility in the dependence of affiliations on ρt .
     As in the descriptive analysis in section 4, we use as our dependent measure the difference between the
mean log circulation of Republican newspapers and the mean log circulation of Democratic newspapers in
each town t. We do this to scale out variation in population, which is likely to be poorly measured.
     In addition to the dependent measure, the econometrician observes Zt and the sets JtR and JtD of
Republican and Democratic papers available in town t, respectively. Given some true ideology ρt , the
conditional likelihood of the data for town t is:
                           ⎛                                                          ⎞
                       1          1                Q̂ jt        1               Q̂ jt ⎠
(11)        Lt (ρt ) = φ ⎝              ∑    log         −            ∑    log           Pr (τt |ρt , Jt )
                      σ̃t     σ̃t Jt j∈J R
                                    R              q jt     σ̃t Jt j∈J D
                                                                  D             q jt
                                                    t                                 t

                                                               
where φ () denotes the standard normal PDF and σ̃t = σζ 1/ JtR + 1/ JtD . The unconditional log
likelihood of the observed data is:
                                       ˆ
(12)                       ln L = ∑ ln   Lt (ρt ) Lt  (ρt  ) dF town (ρt , ρt  |Zt , Zt  )
                                         (t,t  )       ρt ,ρt 


where F town () is the conditional joint distribution of ρt and ρt  and the sum is taken over all pairs of neigh-
boring towns. For towns that do not have at least one paper of each affiliation, the circulation portion of the
likelihood σ̃1t φ (...) is unity; these towns contribute to identification only via Pr (τt |ρt , Jt ).
    We introduce additional data moments to complete identification of our model. Using our cost and
revenue data, we calibrate the marginal cost MC and the monopoly advertising revenue per reader ah to
match their sample analogues in monopoly newspaper markets with Zm ∈ [0.45, 0.55]. For any candidate
value of the other parameters of the model, we choose the price coefficient α and the utility shifter β so that
the predicted average price and circulation per household of monopoly newspapers in markets with equal
shares of Republicans and Democrats matches the observed average price and circulation per household of
monopoly newspapers in markets with Zm ∈ [0.45, 0.55].16 We also choose the substitution parameter Γd so
that the predicted overlap in readership in a market with equal shares of Republicans and Democrats, one
paper of each affiliation, and average prices, matches the average overlap in readership among different-
   16 Discountsto subscribers mean that circulation revenue per copy may be below posted subscription prices. We compute the
average discount as the average ratio of subscription price to annual circulation revenue, and apply this discount to all subscription
prices to compute the effective price of each newspaper.


                                                                   21
affiliation newspapers in our readership survey data. In appendix A we present evidence on the sensitivity
of our estimates to changes in the empiricalmoments used in calibration. 
     We estimate the remaining parameters β , Γs , σζ , μνtown , σνtown , μρ0 , μρ1 by maximizing equation 12.17

Identification
Fixing the affiliations of available newspapers, the correlation shown in table 3 between the relative demand
for Republican newspapers and the observed fraction Republican Zt identifies β relative to β . The share
of households reading the newspaper then pins down the levels of β and β . Given these two parameters,
observed monopoly markups identify the price sensitivity parameter α as in Gentzkow (2007). We use
the monopoly first-order condition to identify the price coefficient because we lack compelling exclusion
restrictions but we have reasonably good information on variable markups for the typical newspaper.
    The relationship between the share of a town’s available newspapers that are Republican and Zt identifies
the parameters μρ0 and μρ1 .
    The variance of unobserved ideology σνtown is identified by spatial correlation in circulation as outlined
in section 4.3. The higher the correlation between the relative circulation of Republican papers in town t and
the relative number of Republican newspapers available in neighboring town t  , the higher the inferred value
of σνtown . Given this parameter, the within-town relationship between the relative circulation of Republican
papers and the relative number of Republican newspapers identifies Γs . This reduced-form relationship
is shown in table 3. The more increasing the number of Republican newspapers decreases the relative
circulation of the average Republican paper, the more substitutable we infer same-type papers to be, and
the higher the value we assign to Γs . Given the other parameters, the parameter Γd is then identified by the
extent of overlap in the readership of newspapers with different affiliations.
    The average relative circulation of Republican papers identifies μνtown . The parameter σζ , which governs
the importance of measurement error in circulation, is then identified by the variance of residual circulation.
    Although this heuristic discussion of identification treats the different steps as separable, the demand
parameters are in fact jointly determined and jointly estimated.


7 Supply Estimation
Taking the demand parameters estimated in section 6 as given, we estimate the remaining parameters by
maximum likelihood using our market-level data on newspaper entry and affiliation choices.
    To implement the spatial identification strategy outlined in section 4.3, we assume that ρm is unobserved
and may be correlated within the pairs of neighboring markets defined in section 2.2. We assume that
ρm = logit−1 (logit (Zm ) + νm ), with νm distributed normally with mean μνmkt and standard deviation σνmkt .
We assume that the analogue of equation 10 holds for νm and Zm .
    We set the number of potential entrants J max to 6, which is one more than the maximum number of
newspapers observed in any market in our data. In simulations of our baseline model with J max = 10, we
find that fewer than one percent of markets have more than 6 entrants.


   17 We approximate the integral in the likelihood using sparse grid integration with Gaussian kernel and accuracy 3 (Heiss and
Winschel 2008; Skrainka and Judd 2011). In the supplemental appendix, we present estimates of the model in which we reduce
and increase the accuracy by 1.


                                                              22
    The econometrician observes Zm , population Sm , the number of entering newspapers Jm , and the affilia-
tion choices τm . The conditional likelihood of the data for market m given ρm and Jm < J max is:
                             ⎧
                             ⎨1 − G (V (J + 1, ρ ))                                   if Jm = 0
                                     m      m       m
(13)              Lm (ρm ) =
                             ⎩[Gm (V (Jm , ρm )) − Gm (V (Jm + 1, ρm ))] P (τm , ρm ) if Jm > 0

where Gm is the CDF of κm /Sm . Here we make explicit that both V () and P () depend on ρm and so drop
the m subscripts. The unconditional log likelihood of the data is:
                                     ˆ
(14)                   ln L = ∑ ln          Lm (ρm ) Lm (ρm ) dF mkt (ρm , ρm |Zm , Zm )
                                   (m,m )   ρm ,ρm


where F mkt () is the conditional joint distribution of ρm and ρm and the sum is taken over all pairs of
neighboring markets.
                                                                                
    We estimate the remaining parameters al , σξ , μνmkt , σνmkt , μκ0 , μκ1 , σκ by maximizing equation 14, tak-
                                                     
ing as given the demand parameters α , β , β , Γd , Γs estimated as described in section 6.18

Identification
The variance of unobserved ideology σνmkt is identified by spatial correlation in affiliation choices as outlined
in section 4.3. The higher the correlation between the affiliation choices of newspapers in neighboring
markets, the higher is the inferred value of σνmkt . The overall share of newspapers choosing a Republican
affiliation pins down μνmkt .
     Given these parameters, the relationship shown in table 4 between the numbers of Republican and Demo-
cratic incumbents and the choices of entrants identifies the advertising parameter al . This parameter captures
the extent of diminishing returns in advertising, and thus the extent to which newspapers earn less on over-
lapping readers than singleton readers.
     The demand estimates reported below imply that overlap in readership is greater between newspapers of
the same affiliation than newspapers of a different affiliation. Given this fact, lower values of al correspond
to a stronger incentive to differentiate in order to soften advertising competition, so al is identified by the
extent to which newspapers differentiate more than would be expected from the demand system alone,
along with information from the entry patterns on the extent to which per-newspaper profits decline with the
number of newspapers.
     The scale term σξ is identified by residual variation in newspapers’ affiliation choices.
     The parameters of the fixed cost distribution are then pinned down by correlation between the number
of newspapers and the market’s population, which determines μ 0κ and μ 1κ , and the extent of variation in
the number of newspapers conditional on population, which determines σκ . The dispersion parameter σκ
determines how much the equilibrium number of newspapers responds to changes in profits induced by the
counterfactuals we consider.


   18 We approximate the integral in the likelihood using sparse grid integration with Gaussian kernel and accuracy 3 (Heiss and
Winschel 2008; Skrainka and Judd 2011). In the supplemental appendix, we present estimates of the model in which we reduce
and increase the accuracy by 1.


                                                              23
    Although this heuristic discussion of identification treats the different steps as separable, the supply
parameters are in fact jointly determined and jointly estimated.


8 Results
8.1 Parameter Estimates and Determinants of Diversity
Tables 5 and 6 report estimates of demand and supply parameters, respectively, along with asymptotic
standard errors. In the supplemental appendix, we present Monte Carlo experiments and experiments with
random starting values for both sets of parameters.
     The qualitative patterns in both sets of parameters accord with economic intuition and the descriptive
evidence in tables 3 and 4. On the demand side, households prefer newspapers whose affiliations match their
own. Bundles of newspapers produce less utility than the sum of the utilities produced by the component
papers alone, and these diminishing returns are greater for same-type newspapers than for opposite-type
newspapers. There is substantial unobserved heterogeneity in household ideology across towns, which
in turn is correlated with the fraction of available newspapers that are Republican. On the supply side,
advertising rates are lower for overlapping readers than for singleton readers, and unobserved heterogeneity
is less important.19
     Our model implies that readership overlaps more between papers of the same affiliation than papers of
different affiliations, a fact consistent with evidence reported in the supplemental appendix from our reader-
ship surveys. For example, in data simulated from our model for two-paper markets, the average readership
overlap for same-affiliation papers is 17 percent, compared to 14 percent for opposite-affiliation papers.
This results from the strong taste for like-minded news (β − β ) outweighing the greater substitutability of
same-affiliation papers (Γs > Γd ).20 As noted above, it implies that advertising competition will increase
incentives to differentiate politically.
     The estimated parameters of the fixed cost distribution appear reasonable. In simulation we find that the
mean fixed cost of monopoly newspapers is $9.03 per copy, as against $7.73 in the Inland Press data. The
concept measured by the model incorporates sunk costs and opportunity costs that may not be reflected in
financial data, so it is intuitive that the estimated fixed costs are somewhat higher than those in the Inland
Press data. The model implies that fixed costs per capita decline very slowly with the size of the market: a
ten percent increase in population reduces fixed costs per capita by only 6 cents. This is consistent with the
Inland Press data, which show essentially no relationship between fixed costs per copy and the number of
copies sold.
     In the supplemental appendix, we present estimates of the main regression specifications in tables 3 and
4 using data simulated from the model at the estimated parameters. We also present a figure illustrating the
fit of the entry model. These regressions and figure show that the estimated model fits key features of the
data well on the whole. An important exception is that the model under-predicts the number of large markets
with two papers relative to the number with one or three, possibly due to the functional form imposed by
    19 The fact that unobservables are less important in the supply model than in the demand model may come from the fact that

county vote share is a better proxy for the ideology of large markets than of small towns. In the supplemental appendix we show
that unobserved heterogeneity matters in the sense that estimates of key demand parameters change meaningfully when we omit
unobservable heterogeneity from the model.
    20 The large difference between β and β is in turn driven by the strong relationship between vote shares and the relative circula-

tion of Republican papers.


                                                                 24
the symmetric logit error in the demand system. The supplemental appendix also presents evidence on the
model’s out-of-sample fit to the distribution of subscription prices across market configurations, and to the
effect of long-term changes in marginal cost on newspaper market structure.
     To interpret the magnitude of the parameter estimates and to study the drivers of ideological diversity,
table 7 shows the estimated model’s prediction of the level of diversity at baseline and under three counter-
factual scenarios. We measure diversity in three ways: the number of markets with diverse papers (at least
one paper of each type), the share of households in a market with diverse papers, and the share of households
reading at least one paper of each type.
     In our first counterfactual, we assume that each entering newspaper chooses its affiliation as if it ex-
pected to be the only newspaper in the market. In our second counterfactual, we assume that each newspa-
per chooses its affiliation as if its market had equal numbers of Republican and Democratic households. In
our third counterfactual, we assume that each entering newspaper chooses its affiliation as if there are no
idiosyncratic affiliation-specific cost shocks ξ . These counterfactuals can be thought of as measuring the im-
portance of competition, consumer tastes, and idiosyncratic factors, respectively, in determining equilibrium
diversity.
     We find that competition exerts a large effect on diversity: when competitive effects are absent, diversity
falls by half. Eliminating catering to consumer tastes increases diversity by about as much as competition
reduces it. Eliminating the role of idiosyncratic factors matters less than eliminating competition.

8.2 Equilibrium and Welfare-Maximizing Outcomes
In the first column of table 8, we report market structure, prices, and welfare for our baseline model.21 As
in table 7, each reported value is the average over five simulations. We also repeat the baseline diversity
statistics from table 7 in the final three rows for comparison with what follows.
     Of the 951 markets in our baseline simulation with at least one newspaper, 256 have two or more.
Thirty-nine percent of households read at least one newspaper. In multi-paper markets, the average annual
subscription price of competitive newspapers is $5.48 (in 1924 dollars), and the average advertising revenue
per reader per year is $11.24. Total surplus is $4.24 per household per year, which breaks down into $3.44
of consumer surplus, $0.41 of newspaper profit, and $0.39 of advertiser profit.
     In the final two columns of table 8, we compare these equilibrium outcomes to those that would be
chosen by a social planner whose goal is to maximize total surplus. Importantly, we do not assume that the
social planner internalizes any political externalities associated with ideological diversity. These simulations
therefore allow us to evaluate whether there is any tradeoff between the objectives of maximizing economic

   21 We   define consumer surplus in market m as total realized utility divided by the marginal utility of money:
                                                            Sm
(15)                                                        ∑ uim (Bi ) /α
                                                            i=1

where Bi is the utility-maximizing bundle for household i and α is the price coefficient in our demand system. We define advertiser
surplus in market m as the total value of advertisements placed less total advertising expenditures:
                                                                      Jm             
(16)                                       Sm (1 − q0m ) (ah − al ) + ∑ q jm al − a jm ,
                                                                       j=1

where q0m is the share of households purchasing no newspaper. We define total surplus as the sum of consumer surplus, advertiser
surplus, and newspaper profits.


                                                                  25
welfare and preserving diversity in the marketplace of ideas.
     The second column of table 8 holds the number of newspapers fixed at baseline values, but allows the
social planner to choose affiliations, circulation prices, and advertising prices. Because we estimate that
newspapers exercise substantial market power, the social planner chooses substantially lower prices than
occur in market equilibrium, with an average price in multi-paper markets of only $0.04, leading the share
of households reading newspapers to increase by about half. As in Steiner (1952), the social planner also
chooses more ideological diversity than occurs in market equilibrium: the number of markets with diverse
papers increases from 143 to 175. This occurs because newspapers do not capture the full surplus from
greater diversity. We show in the supplemental appendix that this distortion is most important in markets
in which consumers’ affiliations are about evenly split. The combined effect of the reduction in prices and
the increase in the diversity of newspapers is to increase the share of households reading diverse papers by
a factor of three.
     The third column of table 8 allows the social planner to control newspapers’ entry decisions as well as
post-entry outcomes. The results show that in market equilibrium the number of newspapers falls well short
of the social optimum. The social planner increases the number of markets with at least one paper from 951
to 1910 and the number of markets with multiple papers from 256 to 1845. Increased entry further increases
diversity: the number of households in markets with diverse papers rises to 84 percent, and one-third of
households read diverse papers on any given day.
     The source of insufficient entry here is the distortion formalized by Spence (1975): in markets with
fixed costs, entrants do not internalize the effect of entry on the surplus of inframarginal consumers.22 The
result is not mechanical. In the standard symmetric logit model, which our model nests as a limit case,
the number of firms in the free entry equilibrium can be greater or fewer than the first-best (Anderson et
al. 1992). Insufficient entry arises at the estimated parameters because consumers capture a large share
of surplus and because the significant (and empirically realistic) amount of multiple readership means the
business-stealing externality highlighted in Mankiw and Whinson (1986) is relatively small. This contrasts
with the results of Berry and Waldfogel (1999) for radio, where the estimated business-stealing externality
is large, and equilibrium entry is consequently found to be excessive.
     Because the use of a symmetric logit error is known to exaggerate the benefits from additional variety, in
the supplemental appendix we show that the gains from moving to the social optimum are large even when
we severely cap the number of potential entrants to each market.
     The results in table 8 show that there is no conflict between the goal of maximizing economic welfare
and the goal of maintaining diversity in the marketplace of ideas. Policies that increase entry, as well as
policies which promote diversity conditional on entry, would likely increase economic welfare even if the
political externalities to diversity were small.

8.3 Policy Experiments
Table 9 presents a series of policy experiments based on the model. The first column shows baseline results
for reference. The second through fourth columns relax competition policy by allowing newspapers to col-



   22 Forearly discussions of the tendency toward inefficient entry in concentrated markets see Hotelling (1938) and the work of
Jules Dupuit as summarized in Ekelund and Hebert (1999, 159-191).


                                                              26
lude on prices only, advertising only, and both prices and advertising.23 In all of these columns newspapers
continue to make non-cooperative entry and affiliation decisions. Arrangements in which newspapers col-
lude on prices and advertising but remain editorially separate are called “joint operating agreements” and
have existed in the United States since 1933 (Busterna and Picard, 1993).24
    Allowing price collusion reduces economic welfare and has little effect on diversity. Average prices
in multi-paper markets rise significantly, from $5.48 to $7.53. Advertising revenue per reader increases
slightly, as a consequence of less overlap in newspaper readership. The number of markets with two or
more newspapers rises modestly from 256 to 290. Most of the gain to newspapers is offset by this increase
in competitiveness, so total newspaper profit increases only slightly, while consumer surplus and advertiser
profit both fall. Additional entry also offsets the reduced incentive to differentiate due to softer price com-
petition, and so effects on diversity are modest: the share of households with access to diverse papers rises
slightly, while the share reading them falls.
    Advertising collusion, on the other hand, causes large increases in both economic welfare and diversity.
Because our baseline estimates imply significant competition in the advertising market (al < ah ), advertising
collusion increases advertising revenue per reader from $11.24 to $12.14. The increase in advertising rev-
enue leads newspapers to reduce circulation prices to consumers, consistent with the well-known “seesaw
principle” in two-sided markets (Rochet and Tirole 2006; Dewenter et al. 2011). Entry increases dramati-
cally, with the number of markets with multiple papers going from 256 to 400. These factors together cause
consumer surplus to increase significantly, and total surplus increases increases from $4.24 to $4.90 per
household per year. The large increase in entry more than offsets the reduced incentive to differentiate due
to reduced advertising competition, and so diversity rises by about half on all measures.
    Joint operating agreements combine the effects of price and advertising collusion. The effects of ad-
vertising collusion dominate the effect on diversity, which remains positive on all measures. The two types
of collusion essentially cancel in terms of welfare impact, with a small net gain in total surplus relative to
baseline.
    An important take-away from these results is that the two-sided nature of media markets substantially
changes the evaluation of policy instruments. Price and advertising collusion are frequently treated as sym-
metric in the policy debate,25 while in fact the two are very different. Joint setting of prices amounts to a

   23 We   define a collusive price of newspaper j as the jth element of a price vector p∗ that solves
                                                       Jm                      
(17)                                      p∗ ∈ arg max ∑ p j + a jm (p, τ ) − MC q jm (p, τ ) .
                                                   p    j=1

We define the collusive per-reader advertising revenue of newspaper j as

                                                         1 − q0m                 1 − q0m
(18)                                        a jm = ah    Jm
                                                                     + al   1−    J
                                                        ∑k=1 qkm                 ∑k=1
                                                                                   m
                                                                                      qkm

where q0m is the share of households purchasing no newspaper.
   24 We assume that papers in joint operating agreements keep all of their own subscription revenue and that they share advertising

revenue in proportion to their circulations. These assumptions are a reasonable match to the revenue-sharing arrangements of joint
operating agreements authorized under the Newspaper Preservation Act of 1970 (Busterna and Picard, 1993). In some cases a
newspaper’s share of revenue is a “sliding” function of the newspaper’s contribution to revenue or to total advertising sales. In
other cases, the revenue sharing rule is fixed in advance, but in such cases is usually related to the initial capital investment of the
newspapers, and hence to their financial health at the time of the agreement. In both types of arrangements, a newspaper with a
greater circulation will generally be entitled to a greater share of the joint venture’s revenue.
   25 See, e.g., the discussion of the debate surrounding the Newspaper Preservation Act of 1970 in Oppenheim and Shields (1981,



                                                                   27
tax on marginal readership and only a modest spur to entry, while joint setting of advertising rates amounts
to a subsidy to marginal readership and a massive spur to entry. In a world where entry, readership, and
diversity are all inefficiently low, permitting advertising collusion may be a surprisingly attractive policy to
a regulator concerned with both economic welfare and diversity per se.
    In the fifth column of table 9, we evaluate the effect of relaxing ownership regulation by assuming that all
newspapers in a market are jointly owned. Federal oversight of broadcast media ownership began in the US
with the Communications Act of 1934 (Candeub 2007) and continues today.26 We model joint ownership
by assuming that entering newspapers set collusive circulation and advertising prices as in joint operating
agreements, that the number of entering newspapers is chosen to maximize total expected newspaper profits,
and that newspapers choose affiliations to maximize total newspaper profits subject to a common affiliation-
specific cost shock ξ .27
    Joint ownership significantly reduces welfare, diversity, and the number of newspapers. Circulation and
advertising prices both rise, and newspaper readership falls. Most of the drop in diversity is a consequence
of reduced entry; the share of multi-paper markets with diverse papers remains roughly stable. This reflects
two offsetting effects on differentiation. On the one hand, allowing newspapers to internalize the effect of
their affiliation choices on their competitors significantly increases the incentive to differentiate (Sweeting
2010). On the other hand, the fact that we assume jointly owned newspapers share a common cost shock
ξ significantly increases the within-market correlation of affiliation choices, providing a strong force in the
other direction.
    In the sixth and final column of table 9 we evaluate a marginal cost subsidy to newspapers. In the 1920s,
postal subsidies offset a meaningful fraction of newspaper delivery costs for many newspapers (Kielbowicz
1994). We allow the government to transfer K dollars per newspaper sold to the newspaper’s owner, at a
cost of (1 + λ ) per dollar transferred. We set the marginal cost λ of public funds to 0.3 (Einav et al. 2010;
Poterba 1996). We compute the level of K that maximizes total surplus.
    The surplus-maximizing marginal cost subsidy amounts to an average payment of $4.00 per copy per
year, equivalent to a 49 percent reduction in marginal cost. For comparison, the US postal subsidy amounted
to a roughly 12 percent reduction in marginal cost.28 Of all the policies we consider, this one is the most
effective in increasing economic welfare and diversity, both because it promotes entry in markets that previ-
ously had no papers, and because it increases readership conditional on the number of papers.


9 Conclusions
We estimate a model of newspapers’ entry and choice of political affiliation that matches key facts from
novel data on US daily newspapers in 1924. We use the model to evaluate the economic determinants of

187-189).
    26 For example, in the US today, the FCC limits ownership of a daily newspaper and a TV or radio station in the same local

market, as well as ownership of multiple radio or television stations in the same market. Direct regulation of newpaper ownership
is less common, though it does exist. In France, for example, no newspaper acquisition will be approved if the combined entity will
have a circulation share greater than
                                     30 percent(McEwen      2007).
    27 That is, we assume that ξ                                
                                  jm τ jm = ξ j m τ j m ∀ j, j s.t.τ jm = τ j m . We continue to assume that the draw on ξ is not known
at the entry stage, and compute the expected values V (J) by numerically integrating over the ξ via Monte Carlo simulation.
    28 In 1924, the post office’s cost of publication delivery exceeded its revenue by a factor of more than three (Kielbowicz 1994).

We estimate that postage accounted for 6 percent of variable costs, so the implicit subsidy was approximately 12 percent of variable
costs.


                                                                   28
ideological diversity and to evaluate several important policies. We find that competitive incentives are a
crucial driver of ideological diversity. We show that there is no conflict between the goal of maximizing
economic welfare and the goal of preserving ideological diversity. We find that accounting for the two-sided
nature of the market is critical for evaluating competition policies, in that permitting advertising collusion
increases both welfare and diversity, whereas permitting price collusion reduces welfare and has mixed
effects on diversity. We evaluate other prominent media policies such as ownership regulation and explicit
subsidies.


References
Ackerberg, Daniel A. and Marc Rysman. 2005. Unobserved product differentiation in discrete-choice
        models: Estimating price elasticities and welfare effects. RAND Journal of Economics 36(4): 771-
        788.
Aguirregabiria, Victor and Aviv Nevo. 2013. Recent developments in empirical IO: Dynamic demand and
        dynamic games. In D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano and E. Deckel, eds., Advances in Economics and
        Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, Vol. 3 (Econometrics).
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. Selection on observed and unobserved
        variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy 113(1):
        151-184.
Ambrus, Attila and Markus Reisinger. 2006. Exclusive vs overlapping viewers in media markets. Harvard
        University mimeograph.
Anderson, Simon P., Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse. 1992. Discrete-choice Theory of Prod-
        uct Differentiation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Anderson, Simon P., Øystein Foros, and Hans Jarle Kind. 2010. Hotelling competition with multi-purchasing:
        Time magazine, Newsweek, or both? CESIFO Working Paper Industrial Organization No. 3096.
———. 2011. Competition for advertisers in media markets. University of Virginia mimeograph.
Anderson, Simon P., and John McLaren. 2012. Media mergers and media bias with rational consumers.
        Journal of the European Economic Association 10(4): 831-859.
Antonielli, Marco and Lapo Filistrucchi. 2012. Collusion and the political differentiation of newspapers.
        TILEC Discussion Paper No. 2012-014.
Argentesi, Elena and Lapo Filistrucchi. 2007. Estimating market power in a two-sided market: The case of
        newspapers. Journal of Applied Econometrics 22(7): 1247-1266.
Arcidiacono, Peter and Robert A. Miller. 2011. Conditional choice probability estimation of dynamic
        discrete choice models with unobserved heterogeneity. Econometrica 79(6): 1823-1867.
Armstrong, Mark. 2002. Competition in two-sided markets. Nuffield College mimeograph.
Associated Press v. United States, 326 US 1 (1945).
Bajari, Patrick and Ali Hortaçsu. 2003. The winner’s curse, reserve prices, and endogenous entry: Empirical
        insights from eBay auctions. RAND Journal of Economics 34(2): 329-355.
Baldasty, Gerald J. 1992. The Commercialization of News in the Nineteenth Century. Madison, WI: Univer-
        sity of Wisconsin Press.
———. 1999. E.W. Scripps and the Business of Newspapers. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Becker, Gary S. 1958. Competition and democracy. Journal of Law and Economics 1, 105-109.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn and Ariel Pakes. 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econo-
        metrica 63(4): 841-890.
Berry, Steven and Joel Waldfogel. 1999. Free entry and social inefficiency in radio broadcasting. RAND
        Journal of Economics 30(3): 397-420.


                                                     29
———. 2001. Do mergers increase product variety? Evidence from radio broadcasting. Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 116(3): 1009-1025.
———. 2010. Product quality and market size. Journal of Industrial Economics 58(1): 1-31.
Berry, Steven, Alon Eizenberg and Joel Waldfogel. 2013. Optimal product variety in radio markets. Yale
        University Working Paper.
Bogart, Leo. 1981. Press and Public: Who Reads What, When, Where and Why in American Newspapers.
        Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Borenstein, Severin and Janet Netz. 1999. Why do all the flights leave at 8am? Competition and departure-
        time differentiation in airline markets. International Journal of Industrial Organization 17(5): 611-
        640.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss. 1991. Entry and competition in concentrated markets. Journal
        of Political Economy 99(5): 977-1009.
Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf. 2007. Identification of binary choice models with social interac-
        tions. Journal of Econometrics 140(1): 52-75.
Burnham, Walter D. 1965. The changing shape of the American political universe. American Political
        Science Review 59(1): 7-28.
Busterna, John C. and Robert G. Picard. 1993. Joint Operating Agreements: The Newspaper Preservation
        Act and its Application. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Candeub, Adam. 2007. Media ownership regulation, the First Amendment, and democracy’s future. UC
        Davis Law Review 41(4): 1547-1611.
Chandra, Ambarish. 2009. Targeted advertising: The role of subscriber characteristics in media markets.
        Journal of Industrial Economics 57(1): 58-84.
Chandra, Ambarish and Allan Collard-Wexler. 2009. Mergers in two-sided markets: An application to the
        Canadian newspaper industry. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 18(4): 1045-1070.
Chiang, Chun-Fang. 2010. Political differentiation in newspaper markets. National Taiwan University
        mimeograph.
Chiang, Chun-Fang and Brian Knight. 2011. Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper endorse-
        ments. Review of Economic Studies 78(3): 795-820.
Collard-Wexler, Allan. 2013. Mergers and sunk costs: An application to the ready-mix concrete industry.
        NYU Working Paper.
Costa, Dora L. 2001. Estimating real income in the United States from 1888 to 1994: Correcting CPI bias
        using Engel curves. Journal of Political Economy 109(6): 1288-1310.
Dertouzos, James N., and William B. Trautman. 1990. Economic effects of media concentration: Estimates
        from a model of the newspaper firm. Journal of Industrial Economics 39 (1): 1-14.
Dewenter, Ralf, Justus Haucap and Tobias Wenzel. 2011. Semi-collusion in media markets. International
        Review of Law and Economics 31(2): 92-98.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity.
        American Economic Review 67(3): 297-308.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An economic theory of political action in a democracy. Journal of Political
        Economy 65(2): 135-150.
Draganska, Michaela, Michael Mazzeo, and Katja Seim. 2009. Beyond plain vanilla: Modeling joint
        product assortment and pricing decisions. Quantitative Marketing and Economics 7(2): 105-146.
Einav, Liran. 2007. Seasonality in the US motion picture industry. RAND Journal of Economics 38(1):
        127-145.
———. 2010. Not all rivals look alike: Estimating an equilibrium model of the release date timing game.
        Economic Inquiry 48(2): 369-390.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. Estimating welfare in insurance markets using
        variation in prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3): 877-921.

                                                     30
Ekelund, Robert Burton and Robert F. Hebert. 1999. Secret Origins of Modern Microeconomics: Dupuit
        and the engineers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Erikson, Robert S., and Kent L. Tedin. 1981. The 1928-1936 partisan realignment: The case for the
        conversion hypothesis. American Political Science Review 75 (4): 951-962.
Fan, Ying. 2013. Ownership consolidation and product quality: A study of the US daily newspaper market.
        American Economic Review 103(5): 1598-1628.
Federal Communications Commission. 2010. Notice of inquiry. FCC 10-92. Washington, DC: Federal
        Communications Commission.
Field, Alexander J. 2006. Newspapers and periodicals – number and circulation, by type: 1850–1967.
        In Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch,
        and Gavin Wright, eds., Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the Present:
        Millennial Edition, Table Dg253-266. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gabszewicz, Jean J., Didier Laussel, and Nathalie Sonnac. 2001. Press advertising and the ascent of the
        ’Pensée Unique.’ European Economic Review 45(4-6): 641-651.
——–. 2002. Press advertising and the political differentiation of newspapers. Journal of Public Economic
        Theory 4(3): 317-334.
Galvis, Ángela Fonseca, James M. Snyder and B. K. Song. 2012. Newspaper market structure and behavior:
        Partisan coverage of political scandals in the US from 1870 to 1910. Harvard University Working
        Paper.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2007. Valuing new goods in a model with complementarity: Online newspapers.
        American Economic Review 97(3): 713-744.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin. 2006. The rise of the fourth estate: How
        newspapers became informative and why it mattered. In E.L. Glaeser and C. Goldin, eds., Corrup-
        tion and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, 187-230. Chicago, IL: University of
        Chicago Press.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from US daily
        newspapers. Econometrica 78(1): 35-71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. 2011. The effect of newspaper entry and
        exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review 101(7): 2980-3018.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Nathan Petek, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. 2012. Do newspapers serve
        the state? Incumbent party influence on the US press, 1869-1928. NBER Working Paper No. 18164.
George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel. 2003. Who affects whom in daily newspaper markets? Journal of Political
        Economy 111(4): 765-784.
Greeley, Horace. 1872. Autobiography of Horace Greeley or Recollections of a Busy Life. New York: E.B.
        Treat.
Hamilton, James T. 2006. All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information into
        News. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Heiss, Florian and Viktor Winschel. 2008. Likelihood approximation by numerical integration on sparse
        grids. Journal of Econometrics 144(1): 62-80.
Hotelling, Harold. 1938. The general welfare in relation to problems of taxation and of railway and utility
        rates. Econometrica 6(3): 242-269.
Irmen, Andreas, and Jacques-François Thisse. 1998. Competition in multi-characteristics spaces: Hotelling
        was almost right. Journal of Economic Theory 78 (1): 76-102.
Jeziorski, Przemysław. 2012. Effects of mergers in two-sided markets: Examination of the U.S. radio
        industry. University of California Berkeley mimeograph.
John, Richard R. 2009. Spreading the News: The American Postal System from Franklin to Morse. Cam-
        bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



                                                    31
Kaiser, Ulrich and Minjae Song. 2009. Do media consumers really dislike advertising? An empirical
        assessment of the role of advertising in print media markets. International Journal of Industrial
        Organization 27(2): 292-301.
Kaiser, Ulrich and Julian Wright. 2006. Price structure in two-sided markets: Evidence from the magazine
        industry. International Journal of Industrial Organization 24(1): 1-28.
Kaplan, Richard L. 2002. Politics and the American Press: The Rise of Objectivity, 1865-1920. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Kielbowicz, Richard B. 1983. The press, post office, and flow of news in the early republic. Journal of the
        Early Republic 3(3): 255-280.
———. 1990. Postal subsidies for the press and the business of mass culture, 1880-1920. Business History
        Review 64(3): 451-488.
———. 1994. Cost accounting in the service of policy reform: Postal rate making, 1875-1926. Social
        Science Quarterly 75(2): 284-299.
Kind, Hans Jarle, Guttorm Schjelderup, and Frank Stähler. 2013. Newspaper differentiation and investments
        in journalism: The role of tax policy. Economica 80(317): 131-148.
Levin, Dan and James L. Smith. 1994. Equilibrium in auctions with entry. American Economic Review
        84(3): 585-599.
Liu, Qihong, and Jie Shuai. 2013. Multi-dimensional product differentiation. University of Oklahoma
        Mimeograph.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston. 1986. Free entry and social inefficiency. RAND Journal of
        Economics 17(1): 48-58.
Martin, Mac. 1921. Modern Business Vol. 13: Advertising Campaigns. New York: Alexander Hamilton
        Institute.
Mazzeo, Michael J. 2002. Product choice and oligopoly market structure. RAND Journal of Economics
        33(2): 221-242.
McEwen, Michael. 2007. Media ownership; Rules regulations and practices in selected countries and their
        potential relevance to Canada. Report to Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Com-
        mission. Accessed 10/29/2012 at http://www.crtc.gc.ca/eng/publications/reports/mcewen07.htm.
Millspaugh, A. C. 1918. Irregular voting in the United States. Political Science Quarterly 33(2): 230-254.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 1985. Estimation and inference in two-step econometric models.
        Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3(4): 370-379.
———. 1990. Efficiency wages reconsidered: Theory and evidence. In Y. Weiss and G. Fishelson, eds.,
        Advances in the Theory and Measurement of Unemployment. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Murschetz, Paul. 1998. State support for the daily press in Europe: A critical appraisal. European Journal
        of Communication 13(3): 291-313.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. The market for news. American Economic Review 95(4):
        1031-1053.
Newspaper Preservation Act § 15, USC § 1801 (1970).
Oppenheim, S. Chesterfield and Carrington Shields. 1981. Newspapers and the Antitrust Laws. Char-
        lottesville, VA: The Michie Company.
Pelosi, Nancy. Letter to Eric Holder. 2009. Accessed 8/19/2013 at http://www.sfbg.com/PDFs/politics/PelosiHolder.pdf.
Petrova, Maria. 2011. Newspapers and parties: How advertising revenues created an independent press.
        American Political Science Review 105(4): 790-808.
Prat, Andrea and David Strömberg. 2011. The political economy of mass media. Stockholm University
        Working Paper.
Priest, Andrea. 2011. Turning the watchdog into a lapdog: Why the proposed newspaper bailout is the
        wrong solution for a failing industry. William and Mary Business Law Review 2(2): 401-436.



                                                   32
Poterba, James. 1996. Government intervention in the markets for education and health care: How and
        why? In Victor Fuchs ed., Individual and Social Responsibility, 277-308. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Reiss, Peter C. and Pablo T. Spiller. 1989. Competition and entry in small airline markets. Journal of Law
        & Economics 32(2): S179-S202.
Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole. 2006. Two-Sided Markets: A Progress Report. RAND Journal of
        Economics 37(3): 645-667.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew
        Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database].
        Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Rusk, Jerrold G. 1970. The effect of the Australian ballot reform on split ticket voting: 1876-1908. American
        Political Science Review 64 (4): 1220-1238.
Rysman, Marc. 2004. Competition between networks: A study of the market for yellow pages. The Review
        of Economic Studies 71(2): 483-512.
Skrainka, Benjamin S. and Kenneth L. Judd. 2011. High performance quadrature rules: How numerical
        integration affects a popular model of product differentiation. CeMMAP Working Paper CWP03/11.
Seim, Katja and Joel Waldfogel. 2013. Public monopoly and economic efficiency: Evidence from the
        Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board’s entry decisions. American Economic Review 103(2): 831-
        862.
Sonnac, Nathalie. 2000. Readers’ attitudes toward press advertising: Are they ad-lovers or ad-averse?
        Journal of Media Economics 13(4): 249-259.
Spence, Michael A. 1975. Monopoly, quality, and regulation. Bell Journal of Economics 6(2): 417-429.
Steiner, Peter O. 1952. Program patterns and preferences, and the workability of competition in radio
        broadcasting. Quarterly Journal of Economics 66(2): 194-223.
Sterling, Christopher H. and John M. Kittross. 2001. Stay Tuned: A History of American Broadcasting, 3rd
        ed., LEA’s Communication Series. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Summers, Mark Wahlgren. 1994. The Press Gang: Newspapers and Politics, 1865-1878. Chapel Hill, NC:
        University of North Carolina Press.
Sweeting, Andrew. 2010. The effects of horizontal mergers on product positioning: Evidence from the
        music radio industry. RAND Journal of Economics 41(2): 372-397.
U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1986. Cost of living in the United States, 1917-1919.
        ICPSR Study No. 8299.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2011. Station ownership and the provision and consumption of radio news. FCC Media
        Ownership Study 5. Accessed 8/15/2013 at http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/2010-media-ownership-
        studies.
Wilbur, Kenneth C. 2008. A two-sided, empirical model of television advertising and viewing markets.
        Marketing Science 27(3): 356-378.
Yewdall, Clifford. 1928. Report of the Cost Finding Committee. Des Plaines, Indiana: Inland Daily Press
        Association.




                                                    33
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics for Newspaper Markets

Number of Newspapers                                       0             1             2            3+            All
Mean population                                        5944            10688         24049         36832         10943
Share of newspapers that are Republican                                0.60          0.50          0.68          0.57
Share of multi-paper markets that are diverse                                        0.53          0.61          0.54
Republican vote share
 Mean                                                  0.52            0.51          0.50          0.55          0.51
 Standard deviation                                    0.15            0.15          0.12          0.09          0.15
Number of markets                                         960           612           297           41           1910
Number of diverse markets                                                             158           25            183
Number of newspapers                                                    612           594          132           1338
 Notes: Data are from the cross-section of daily newspaper markets in 1924 defined in section 2.2. Diverse
 markets are those with at least one Republican and at least one Democratic newspaper. Republican vote
 share is the average Republican share of the two-party vote in presidential elections from 1868-1928.




                     Table 2: Summary Statistics for Towns with Circulation Data

      Number of Circulating Newspapers                           1             2             3+           All
      Mean population                                           447           390           566           472
      Share of newspapers that are Republican                   0.52          0.54          0.57          0.55
      Share of multi-paper towns that are diverse                             0.38          0.67          0.53
      Republican vote share
       Mean                                                     0.49          0.51          0.54          0.51
       Standard deviation                                       0.16          0.16          0.15          0.16
      Number of towns                                           4144          3737          4307         12188
      Number of diverse towns                                                 1418          2876         4294
      Number of newspaper-towns                                 4144          7474         17161         28779
     Notes: Data are from the cross-section of news-reading towns in 1924 defined in section 2.3.
     Diverse towns are those with at least one Republican and at least one Democratic newspaper.
     Republican vote share is the average Republican share of the two-party vote in presidential
     elections from 1868-1928.




                                                     34
                           Table 3: Demand for Partisanship

Dependent variable: Average log(circ) of R papers - Average log(circ) of D papers
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)
          Republican vote share                    0.8517                  0.9510
                                                  (0.1910)                (0.1980)
          Number of Republican papers                          -0.0187 -0.0360
                                                               (0.0134) (0.0136)
          Number of Democratic papers                           0.0066   0.0174
                                                               (0.0152) (0.0154)
          R2                                      0.0101       0.0007     0.0127
          Number of counties                       1219         1219       1219
          Number of towns                          4294         4294       4294
Notes: Data are from the cross-section of news-reading towns in 1924 defined in section
2.3. The dependent variable is the difference in mean log circulation of Republican and
Democrat newspapers. Republican vote share is the average Republican share of the
two-party vote in the county in presidential elections from 1868-1928. Sample is all towns
with at least one paper of each affiliation. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
the county level.




                   Table 4: Determinants of Newspaper Affiliation

         Dependent variable: Dummy for newspaper choosing R affiliation
                                            (1)        (2)         (3)
       Republican vote share                         2.1824                  2.3356
                                                    (0.0557)                (0.0611)
       Number of Republican incumbents                           -0.0168 -0.1525
                                                                 (0.0318) (0.0342)
       Number of Democratic incumbents                           -0.0190   0.1260
                                                                 (0.0377) (0.0297)
       R2                                            0.3561      0.0004      0.3819
       Number of markets                               950        950          950
       Number of newspapers                           1338        1338        1338
Notes: Data are from the cross-section of daily newspaper markets in 1924 defined in
section 2.2. The unit of analysis is the newspaper. Republican vote share is the average
Republican share of the two-party vote in presidential elections from 1868-1928. The
number of Republican/Democratic incumbents is the number of sample newspapers of the
given affiliation that entered prior to the newspaper in question. Sample is all markets with
at least one paper. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the market level.




                                             35
                  Table 5: Parameter Estimates (Demand Model)


Price coefficient (α )                                                    0.1798
                                                                         (0.0032)
Mean utility for different-affiliation paper (β )                         -0.2906
                                                                         (0.0676)
Mean utility for same-affiliation paper (β )                              0.8137
                                                                         (0.0759)
Substitutability between same-type papers (Γs )                           0.5645
                                                                         (0.0669)
Substitutability between different-type papers (Γd )                      0.3004
                                                                         (0.0469)
Standard deviation of log of measurement error (σζ )                      0.7017
                                                                         (0.0077)
Mean of unobservable shifter of fraction Republican (μνtown )             0.0466
                                                                         (0.0422)
Standard deviation of unobservable (σνtown )                              0.2783
                                                                         (0.0135)
Parameters governing share of town’s newspapers that are Republican
μρ0                                                                       -0.0714
                                                                         (0.0850)
μρ1                                                                        1.9952
                                                                         (0.0336)
Calibrated parameters:
     Marginal cost (MC)                                                 8.1749
                                                Cov(νt ,νt  )
      Spatial correlation of unobservable         Var(νt )                0.7233
Number of towns                                                           12188
Number of newspapers                                                       670
Number of newspaper-towns                                                 28779
Notes: Table shows maximum likelihood estimates of demand model parameters with
asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. See section 6 for details.




                                          36
                             Table 6: Parameter Estimates (Supply Model)


              Advertising revenue per reader of non-singleton bundles (al )             7.4447
                                                                                      (1.2626)
              Standard deviation of affiliation cost shocks (σξ )                       0.2277
                                                                                      (0.0298)
              Mean of unobservable shifter of fraction Republican (μνmkt )             -0.0114
                                                                                      (0.0184)
              Standard deviation of unobservable (σνmkt )                               0.1523
                                                                                      (0.0684)
              Parameters governing the distribution of fixed costs
              μκ0                                                                       8.7354
                                                                                      (0.4860)
              μκ1                                                                      -0.6448
                                                                                      (0.0618)
              σκ                                                                        0.3607
                                                                                      (0.0345)
              Calibrated parameters:
                   Advertising revenue per reader of singleton
                                                               bundles (ah )        13.4707
                                                         Cov(νm ,ν  )
                   Spatial correlation of unobservable            m
                                                           Var(νm )                   0.7217
              Number of markets                                                         1910
              Number of newspapers                                                      1338
             Notes: Table shows maximum likelihood estimates of supply model parameters
             with asymptotic standard errors in parentheses adjusted for the uncertainty in
             demand parameters (Murphy and Topel 1985). See section 7 for details.


                            Table 7: Determinants of Equilibrium Diversity

                                               Markets with       Share of hhlds     Share of hhlds
                                                 diverse         in markets with        reading
                                                 papers           diverse papers     diverse papers
        Baseline                                   143                 0.22              0.029
        Ignore competitors’ choices                68                  0.11              0.014
        Ignore household ideology                  211                 0.31              0.038
        Ignore idiosyncratic cost shocks           110                 0.18              0.024
Notes: Table shows averages over 5 counterfactual simulations at the parameters reported in tables 5 and 6.
A market has diverse papers if it has at least one Republican and one Democratic paper, and a household
reads diverse papers if it reads at least one Republican and one Democratic paper. “Baseline” is simulation
of the estimated model. “Ignore competitors’ choices” is a counterfactual in which each paper chooses its
affiliation as if it will be the only paper in the market. “Ignore household ideology” is a counterfactual in
which each paper chooses its affiliation as if its market were 50 percent Republican (ρ = 0.5). “Ignore
idiosyncratic cost shocks” is a counterfactual in which each paper chooses its affiliation as if ξ = 0. The
number of newspapers is fixed at its baseline value in all counterfactuals.



                                                     37
                          Table 8: Equilibrium and Surplus-Maximizing Outcomes

                                                                                   Chosen to Maximize Total Surplus:
                                                                 Baseline            Post-Entry        Entry and
                                                                                     Outcomes         Post-Entry
                                                                                                       Outcomes
Markets with newspapers                                             951                 951              1910
Markets with multiple newspapers                                    256                 256              1845
Share of hhlds reading a newspaper                                  0.39                0.53             0.91
Avg. price in multi-paper markets                                   5.48                 0.04                   0.05
Avg. ad rev. per reader in multi-paper markets                     11.24                 11.55                 11.31
Per household:
  Consumer surplus                                                  3.44                 6.55                 15.69
  Newspaper profit                                                  0.41                 -6.27                -17.51
  Advertiser profit                                                 0.39                 6.86                  10.39
  Total surplus                                                     4.24                 7.15                   8.56

Diversity
  Markets with diverse papers                                       143                   175                  1370
  Share of hhlds in markets with diverse papers                     0.22                  0.27                  0.84
  Share of hhlds reading diverse papers                            0.029                 0.091                 0.334
Notes: Table shows averages over 5 counterfactual simulations at the parameters reported in tables 5 and 6. The
distribution of profits between newspapers and advertisers is indeterminate in the two counterfactuals shown; we
assume that advertisers capture all surplus from advertising. A market has diverse papers if it has at least one
Republican and one Democratic paper, and a household reads diverse papers if it reads at least one Republican and
one Democratic paper. “Baseline” is simulation of the estimated model. In column (2), the number of newspapers is
fixed at its baseline value and a social planner chooses affiliations, ad prices, and circulation prices to maximize total
surplus, with the constraint that all prices must be weakly positive. In column (3), the social planner also chooses the
number of papers in each market. Average price is an annual subscription price. Average ad revenue is reported per
reader per year. Surplus and profit numbers are reported in annual dollars per household.




                                                          38
                                                                   Table 9: Policy Experiments

                                                                  Baseline       Allow Price        Allow          Allow Joint      Allow Joint        Optimal
                                                                                  Collusion       Advertising       Operating       Ownership          Subsidy
                                                                                                   Collusion       Agreements
     Markets with newspapers                                         951              951            951               951               954             1883
     Markets with multiple newspapers                                256              290            400               415               126             1253
     Share of hhlds reading a newspaper                              0.39             0.36           0.44             0.42               0.33            0.74
     Avg. price in multi-paper markets                               5.48             7.53             5.07            6.61              6.13             3.21
     Avg. ad rev. per reader in multi-paper markets                 11.24            11.60            12.14            12.30            12.54            10.60
     Per household:
       Consumer surplus                                              3.44             2.98             4.46             3.79             2.63             8.93
       Newspaper profit                                              0.41             0.42             0.44             0.50             0.86             1.07
       Advertiser profit                                             0.39             0.29               0                0                0              1.68




39
       Cost of subsidy                                                                                                                                    5.63
       Total surplus                                                 4.24             3.69             4.90             4.29             3.49             6.05

     Diversity
       Markets with diverse papers                                   143              157              225              238               62              704
       Share of hhlds in markets with diverse papers                 0.22             0.24             0.31             0.32             0.11             0.57
       Share of hhlds reading diverse papers                        0.029            0.021            0.052            0.039            0.011            0.133
     Notes: Table shows averages over 5 counterfactual simulations at the parameters reported in tables 5 and 6. A market has diverse papers if it has at least
     one Republican and one Democratic paper, and a household reads diverse papers if it reads at least one Republican and one Democratic paper. “Baseline”
     is simulation of the estimated model. Columns (2)-(4) are counterfactuals in which entering papers set prices, ad rates, or prices and ad rates, respectively,
     to maximize their total profits. Column (5) is a counterfactual in which all potential entrants in a given market are jointly owned. Joint ownership means
     that newspapers make entry, affiliation, pricing, and ad rate decisions to maximize joint profits subject to a common affiliation cost shock ξ . Column (6)
     is a counterfactual which provides a payment per copy sold to all papers. Average price is an annual subscription price. Average ad revenue is reported
     per reader per year. Surplus and profit numbers are reported in annual dollars per household. Cost of subsidy includes a 30% cost of public funds.
                                                                            Figure 1: Determinants of Newspaper Affiliations
                                                                                Panel A: First Entrant Affiliation Choice

                                                                        1
                    Share of first entrants with Republican affiliation
                           .2          .4     0   .6       .8




                                                   0.40−0.45                             0.45−0.50               0.50−0.55              0.55−0.60
                                                                                               Republican vote share


                                                                               Panel B: Second Entrant Affiliation Choice
                    Share of second entrants with Republican affiliation
                     0        .2      .4       .6      .8          1




                                                                            0.40−0.45        0.45−0.50       0.50−0.55         0.55−0.60
                                                                                               Republican vote share
                                                                                 Democratic First Entrant           Republican First Entrant


Notes: Data are from the cross-section of daily newspaper markets in 1924 defined in section 2.2. Republican vote
share is the average Republican share of the two-party vote in presidential elections from 1868-1928. The sample
includes all markets with two or more newspapers in which the Republican vote share is between 0.4 and 0.6.




                                                                                                      40
                              Appendix (For Online Publication)

A      Alternative Specifications
In appendix tables 1 and 2, we show how our key results vary with alternative specifications of the model.
Appendix table 1 reports, for each specification and counterfactual, the share of households reading at least
one paper of each affiliation, averaged over five simulations. Appendix table 2 reports, for each specifica-
tion and counterfactual, the total surplus per household, averaged over five simulations. Each table has five
columns. The first column reports results for the baseline model. The second column reports results assum-
ing that the social planner chooses all entry and post-entry decisions as in the final column of table 8. The
third and fourth columns report results with joint operating agreements and joint ownership, respectively, as
in the fourth and fifth columns of table 9. The fifth column reports results assuming the optimal marginal
cost subsidy is in place, at the value computed for the case shown in the final column of table 9.
      The first row of the table repeats the results from our main specification for reference. In parenthe-
ses, we show standard errors for each counterfactual, computed as the standard deviation across 5 sets of
parameters, each drawn from the asymptotic (joint) distribution of the demand and supply parameters. In
brackets, we show the simulation error for each counterfactual, computed as the standard deviation across 5
                                                             √
simulation draws from the baseline parameters divided by 5.
      The second through ninth rows explore changes to the moments we use to calibrate parameters in the
model. In each case we change a single moment (increasing or decreasing by 25 percent), re-estimate the
model, and recompute counterfactuals. The second and third specifications show results for the marginal
cost. The fourth and fifth specifications show results for monopoly advertising revenue per reader. The sixth
and seventh specifications show results for the average overlap in readership among different-affiliation
newspapers. These changes leave our key qualitative conclusions unchanged. Not surprisingly, as these
parameters directly affect the economic efficiency of newspaper readership, changing them has some quan-
titative effect on the welfare calculations and hence the scope for welfare-improving changes.
                                                                                                Cov(ν ,ν )
      The eighth and ninth specifications increase and decrease the calibrated values of both Var(tνt )t  and
Cov(νm ,νm )
  Var(νm )      by 25 percent relative to their baseline values. These changes have little effect on our quantitative
results.
      The tenth through seveneenth rows explore changes to model specification. In each case we change a
feature of the model, estimate the modified model, and recompute counterfactuals.
      The tenth row presents estimates from a specification in which we modify the demand model to treat the
number of newspapers available in a town as endogenous. In particular, we model the number of newspapers
Jt in a town t as a Poisson random variable whose log mean is a linear function of log (St ), ρt , ρt2 .
      The eleventh row adds flexibility to the fixed cost distribution in the supply model by allowing κSmm to be
distributed logistic with location parameter μκ0 + μκ1 log (Sm ) + μκ2 log(Sm )2 .
      The twelfth row presents estimates from a specification in which we allow greater flexibility in the
way in which consumer ideology affects the affiliations of newspapers that are available in a given town.
In particular,
              we assume that the probability    that a given newspaper available in town t is Republican is
      −1    0    1                2
logit      μρ + μρ logit (ρt ) + μρ logit (ρt ) .
      The thirteenth and fourteenth rows extend the demand model to allow the utility from reading a news-
paper to depend on a quality shifter. In particular, we assume that the utility of bundle B is shifted by

                                                           41
∑ j∈B αd d j , where d j is a quality shifter and αd is a parameter that we estimate. In the thirteenth row, d j is
the distance from the town to the newspaper’s home market. In the fourteenth row, d j is the circulation of
the newspaper in its home market.
     The fifteenth row replaces our measure of consumer ideology for each market, the average share of
the two-party presidential vote going to Republicans over the period 1868 to 1928, with the population-
weighted average of the measure across the market and all of the hinterland towns served by newspapers
headquartered in the market. For towns with no hinterland circulation, this corresponds to our usual measure
of consumer ideology.
     The sixteenth row replaces all prices in our demand data with the mean price. The seventeenth row
allows price to enter as a quality shifter.
     None of these changes to model specification changes the qualitative conclusions from comparing
across counterfactuals.
     The remaining rows of the table present estimates from various subsets of the main estimation sample.
The sample in the eighteenth row tightens the population restrictions defining the universe of potential daily
newspaper markets by 25 percent, by excluding all market pairs containing a market with population smaller
than 3,750 or larger than 75,000. The sample in the nineteenth row excludes any market pair containing
one or more independent newspapers in 1924. The sample in the twentieth row excludes any market pair
containing one or more unaffiliated newspapers as of 1924. The sample in the twenty-first row excludes any
market pair containing a market within 100km of any of the ten most populous cities as of the 1920 Census.
The sample in the twenty-second row drops any town pair for which our town-level circulation data omit
a newspaper in at least one town’s nearest news market. The sample in the twenty-third row excludes any
market pair containing a pair of papers in different markets that are owned by the same chain as of 1932.
(Our ownership data are from the 1932 Editor and Publisher Yearbook. The earlier annual directories that
we use to construct our main sample do not include lists of chain-owned newspapers.) The sample in the
twenty-fourth row excludes any town pair for which a town’s population is in the top 10 percent. The sample
in the twenty-fifth row excludes any town pair for which a town’s population is in the bottom 10 percent.
The sample in the twenty-sixth row excludes any market pair containing a market in the South.
     None of these changes to the sample changes our qualitative conclusions. As we would expect, re-
moving markets in the South meaningfully affects our quantitative results. Because of the dominance of
the Democratic party, Southern markets demand (and receive) little diversity, so removing Southern markets
increases baseline diversity and increases the scope for welfare gains from improving diversity.




                                                        42
                                      Appendix Table 1: Alternative Specifications (Households Reading Diverse Papers)

                                                                              Baseline      Social      Allow Joint      Allow Joint   Optimal
                                                                                           Planner       Operating       Ownership     Marginal-
                                                                                                        Agreements                       Cost
                                                                                                                                       Subsidy
     (1)    Preferred estimate                                                 0.029        0.334          0.039            0.011        0.133
            (Standard Errors)                                                 (0.001)      (0.049)        (0.001)          (0.001)      (0.019)
            [Simulation Error]                                                [0.002]      [0.001]        [0.001]          [0.001]      [0.001]
     Changing Calibrated Values
     (2)    Increase marginal cost by 25%                                      0.029        0.324          0.040           0.012        0.171
     (3)    Decrease marginal cost by 25%                                      0.029        0.334          0.038           0.009        0.119
     (4)    Increase ah by 25%                                                 0.028        0.356          0.035           0.007        0.133
     (5)    Decrease ah by 25%                                                 0.029        0.321          0.041           0.013        0.222
     (6)    Increase average readership overlap by 25%                         0.033        0.373          0.056           0.019        0.141
     (7)    Decrease average readership overlap by 25%                         0.024        0.236          0.025           0.006        0.116
     (8)    Increase spatial correlation of unobservables by 25%               0.029        0.346          0.039           0.010        0.139
     (9)    Decrease spatial correlation of unobservables by 25%               0.029        0.326          0.039           0.011        0.131
     Modifying Model Specification
     (10)   Endogenous Jt in demand model                                      0.029        0.325          0.039           0.011        0.130




43
     (11)   Add flexibility to fixed cost distribution                         0.023        0.324          0.033           0.007        0.126
     (12)   Add flexibility to affiliation choice in demand model              0.029        0.344          0.039           0.010        0.137
     (13)   Add distance to headquarters as utility shifter in demand model    0.029        0.376          0.039           0.009        0.161
     (14)   Add headquarters circulation as utility shifter in demand model    0.028        0.353          0.038           0.009        0.144
     (15)   Incorporate hinterland towns in market ideology                    0.024        0.398          0.032           0.003        0.185
     (16)   Fix all prices to mean price                                       0.030        0.389          0.038           0.008        0.176
     (17)   Add price as utility shifter in demand model                       0.025        0.266          0.040           0.016        0.102
     Modifying Estimation Sample
     (18)   Tighten population cut-offs for markets                            0.024        0.362          0.035           0.008        0.142
     (19)   Remove markets with independent papers                             0.029        0.304          0.038           0.011        0.124
     (20)   Remove markets with unaffiliated papers                            0.027        0.319          0.036           0.010        0.125
     (21)   Remove markets near major cities                                   0.029        0.225          0.038           0.012        0.099
     (22)   Remove towns with missing data for nearby newspapers               0.030        0.351          0.040           0.011        0.142
     (23)   Remove market pairs with cross-market co-ownership                 0.027        0.327          0.038           0.011        0.131
     (24)   Remove towns in the top 10% by population                          0.029        0.342          0.039           0.011        0.137
     (25)   Remove towns in the bottom 10% by population                       0.029        0.337          0.039           0.011        0.135
     (26)   Remove towns and markets in the South                              0.036        0.470          0.040           0.008        0.285
                Notes: See appendix A for details.
                                                   Appendix Table 2: Alternative Specifications (Total Surplus)

                                                                               Baseline         Social      Allow Joint   Allow Joint   Optimal
                                                                                               Planner       Operating    Ownership     Marginal-
                                                                                                            Agreements                    Cost
                                                                                                                                        Subsidy
     (1)    Preferred estimate                                                  4.24            8.56            4.29         3.49         6.05
            (Standard Errors)                                                  (0.079)         (0.225)        (0.049)       (0.100)      (0.242)
            [Simulation Error]                                                 [0.071]         [0.064]        [0.061]       [0.049]      [0.059]
     Changing Calibrated Values
     (2)    Increase marginal cost by 25%                                        3.37           6.63              3.42       2.81         4.54
     (3)    Decrease marginal cost by 25%                                        5.05           10.76             5.10       4.06         7.53
     (4)    Increase ah by 25%                                                   5.37          12.80              5.44       4.18         8.91
     (5)    Decrease ah by 25%                                                   2.79           5.45              2.85       2.34         3.42
     (6)    Increase average readership overlap by 25%                           4.37           8.92              4.81       3.90         6.14
     (7)    Decrease average readership overlap by 25%                           4.18           8.03              3.92       3.26         5.93
     (8)    Increase spatial correlation of unobservables by 25%                 4.23           8.69              4.27       3.46         6.11
     (9)    Decrease spatial correlation of unobservables by 25%                 4.25           8.50              4.30       3.51         6.02
     Modifying Model Specification
     (10)   Endogenous Jt in demand model                                        4.25           8.50              4.30       3.51         6.02




44
     (11)   Add flexibility to fixed cost distribution                           3.95           8.22              4.06       3.29         5.76
     (12)   Add flexibility to affiliation choice in demand model                4.23           8.69              4.28       3.46         6.12
     (13)   Add distance to headquarters as utility shifter in demand model      4.17           9.14              4.20       3.34         6.40
     (14)   Add headquarters circulation as utility shifter in demand model      4.20           8.94              4.26       3.41         6.26
     (15)   Incorporate hinterland towns in market ideology                      4.20           10.48             4.28       3.20         7.22
     (16)   Fix all prices to mean price                                         4.14           9.49              4.16       3.26         6.64
     (17)   Add price as utility shifter in demand model                         4.27           8.39              4.82       3.95         5.61
     Modifying Estimation Sample
     (18)   Tighten population cut-offs for markets                              4.05           8.71              4.18       3.35         6.06
     (19)   Remove markets with independent papers                               4.20           8.24              4.22       3.48         5.87
     (20)   Remove markets with unaffiliated papers                              4.12           8.34              4.17       3.41         5.90
     (21)   Remove markets near major cities                                     4.68           7.90              4.64       3.99         5.89
     (22)   Remove towns with missing data for nearby newspapers                 4.24           8.62              4.25       3.46         6.08
     (23)   Remove market pairs with cross-market co-ownership                   4.14           8.42              4.20       3.44         5.95
     (24)   Remove towns in the top 10% by population                            4.23           8.64              4.27       3.47         6.09
     (25)   Remove towns in the bottom 10% by population                         4.24           8.57              4.28       3.49         6.05
     (26)   Remove towns and markets in the South                                3.99           10.45             3.90       2.93         7.50
                Notes: See appendix A for details.
                                                            Appendix Figure 1: Demand for Partisanship



           Mean log circulation: R papers − D papers
           −.2      −.1         0       .1       .2




                                                       .4        .45              .5                .55   .6
                                                                         Republican vote share

                                                                                All towns
                                                                                Majority D papers
                                                                                Majority R papers


Notes: Data are from the cross-section of news-reading towns in 1924 defined in section 2.3. Republican vote share is
the average Republican share of the two-party vote in presidential elections from 1868-1928. The sample includes all
towns with at least one Democratic newspaper and at least one Republican newspaper in which the Republican vote
share is between 0.4 and 0.6. “Majority R papers” refers to the set of towns in which there are more Republican than
Democratic newspapers available. “Majority D papers” refers to the set of towns in which there are more Democratic
than Republican newspapers available. The plot is a local polynomial plot of degree 0, using the Epanechnikov kernel
with a bandwidth of .03 for the full sample and .07 for the majority R / majority D samples.




                                                                               45
        Appendix Figure 2: Spatial Decay in Newspaper Shipments and Demographic Correlations
                          1
           Correlation Coefficient / Share
             .2      .4   0  .6       .8




                                             0   100                 200                     300        400
                                                                Distance (km)

                                                       Correlation of % Republican
                                                       Correlation of % White, 1924
                                                       Share of Circulation in County 2 from County 1



Notes: Data are from the US Census and the Audit Bureau of Circulation data described in section 2.3. The first
two lines show the correlation coefficient of fraction Republican and fraction white for counties located in the same
state, at different centroid distances. Republican vote share is the average Republican share of the two-party vote in
presidential elections from 1868-1928. The third line shows the share of newspaper circulation in county 2 accounted
for by newspapers headquartered in county 1, for counties located at different centroid distances. Only counties
containing at least one market in the sample described in section 2.2 are included.




                                                                   46
