                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  USING DIFFERENCES IN KNOWLEDGE ACROSS NEIGHBORHOODS TO UNCOVER
                 THE IMPACTS OF THE EITC ON EARNINGS

                                               Raj Chetty
                                            John N. Friedman
                                             Emmanuel Saez

                                         Working Paper 18232
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18232


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2012




We thank Josh Angrist, Joseph Altonji, Richard Blundell, David Card, Alex Gelber, Adam Guren,
Steven Haider, Nathaniel Hilger, Joseph Hotz, Hilary Hoynes, Lawrence Katz, Kara Leibel, Bruce
Meyer, Sendhil Mullainathan, Luigi Pistaferri, Alan Plumley, Karl Scholz, Jesse Shapiro, Monica
Singhal, Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, Danny Yagan, anonymous referees, and numerous seminar participants
for helpful discussions and comments. The tax data were accessed through contract TIRNO-09-R-00007
with the Statistics of Income (SOI) Division at the US Internal Revenue Service. The results in this
paper do not necessarily re‡ect the official views of the IRS. Itzik Fadlon, Peter Ganong, Sarah Griffis,
Jessica Laird, Shelby Lin, Heather Sarsons, Michael Stepner, and Clara Zverina provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy at Harvard,
the Center for Equitable Growth at Berkeley, and the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Differences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC
on Earnings
Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 18232
July 2012, Revised February 2013
JEL No. H26,H31

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop a new method of estimating the impacts of tax policies that uses areas with little knowledge
about the policy’s marginal incentives as counterfactuals for behavior in the absence of the policy.
We apply this method to characterize the impacts of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) on earnings
using administrative tax records covering all EITC-eligible filers from 1996-2009. We begin by developing
a proxy for local knowledge about the EITC schedule –the degree of “sharp bunching”at the exact
income level that maximizes EITC refunds by individuals who report self-employment income. The
degree of self-employed sharp bunching varies significantly across geographical areas in a manner
consistent with differences in knowledge. For instance, individuals who move to higher-bunching
areas start to report incomes closer to the refund-maximizing level themselves, while those who move
to lower-bunching areas do not. Using this proxy for knowledge, we compare W-2 wage earnings
distributions across neighborhoods to uncover the impact of the EITC on real earnings. Areas with
high self-employed sharp bunching (i.e., high knowledge) exhibit more mass in their W-2 wage earnings
distributions around the EITC plateau. Using a quasi-experimental design that accounts for unobservable
differences across neighborhoods, we find that changes in EITC incentives triggered by the birth of
a child lead to larger wage earnings responses in higher bunching neighborhoods. The increase in EITC
refunds comes primarily from intensive-margin increases in earnings in the phase-in region rather
than reductions in earnings in the phase-out region. The increase in EITC refunds is commensurate
to a phase-in earnings elasticity of 0.21 on average across the U.S. and 0.58 in high-knowledge neighborhoods.


Raj Chetty                                            Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    University of California, Berkeley
1805 Cambridge St.                                    530 Evans Hall #3880
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                              and NBER
chetty@fas.harvard.edu                                saez@econ.berkeley.edu

John N. Friedman
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 356
79 JFK St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_friedman@harvard.edu
                                           I    Introduction

Research on the impacts of tax policies on economic behavior has confronted two important empiri-
cal challenges. First, because federal tax policies often do not vary cross-sectionally, it is di¢ cult to
…nd counterfactuals that permit credible estimation of the policies’causal e¤ects (Meyer 1995, Saez
et al. 2012). Second, many individuals may respond slowly to tax changes because of inattention
to the tax code and other adjustment frictions (Brown 1968, Fujii and Hawley 1988, Bises 1990).
This makes it di¢ cult to identify steady-state behavioral responses using short-run comparisons
before and after a tax reform (Chetty et al. 2011, Chetty 2012).
       We develop a research design that addresses these challenges by exploiting di¤erences across
neighborhoods in knowledge about the tax code. Our method is based on a simple idea: individuals
with no knowledge of a tax policy’s marginal incentives will behave as they would in the absence
of the policy.1 Hence, one can identify the causal e¤ect of a policy by comparing behavior across
cities that di¤er in knowledge about the policy but are otherwise comparable.                    We apply this
method to analyze the impacts of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), the largest means-tested
cash transfer program in the United States, on earnings behavior and inequality. We exploit …ne
geographical heterogeneity across ZIP codes by using selected data from U.S. population tax records
spanning 1996-2009, which include over 75 million unique EITC eligible individuals with children
and 1 billion observations on their annual earnings.             Our method uncovers signi…cant impacts
of the EITC on earnings behavior.          The intensive-margin responses we document are masked in
aggregate data and cannot be easily detected using traditional research designs because of their
di¤use nature, potentially explaining why prior studies …nd mixed evidence of intensive margin
responses to the EITC and other tax policies.
       Our empirical analysis proceeds in two steps.        First, we develop a proxy for local knowledge
about the marginal rate structure of the EITC schedule.2 Ideally, one would measure knowledge
directly using data on individuals’perceptions of the EITC schedule. Lacking such data, we proxy
for knowledge using the extent to which individuals manipulate their reported income to maximize
their EITC refunds by reporting self-employment income. Self-employed tax …lers have a propensity
   1
     As we discuss in Section 2 below, this equivalence holds in the absence of income e¤ects. With income e¤ects,
our technique recovers compensated elasticities under the assumption that uninformed individuals believe that the
tax credit is a lump-sum subsidy.
   2
     Throughout the paper, we use the term “knowledge” or “information” about the EITC to refer to knowledge
about the program’s marginal incentive structure rather than awareness of the program’s existence. Surveys of low
income families and ethnographic interviews show that most EITC-eligible individuals are aware of the program’s
existence (as evidenced by high take-up rates), but much fewer understand the details of its structure (e.g., Ross
Phillips 2001, Smeeding, Ross Phillips, and O’Connor 2002).


                                                        1
to report income exactly at the …rst kink of the EITC schedule, the point that maximizes net tax
refunds (Saez 2010).3 We show that the degree of “sharp bunching” by self-employed individuals
at the …rst kink varies substantially across ZIP codes in the U.S. For example, 6.5% of EITC
claimants in Chicago, IL in 2008 are self-employed and report total earnings exactly at the refund-
maximizing level, compared with 0.6% in Rapid City, SD. Bunching spreads across the U.S. and
increases sharply over time: the degree of bunching is almost 3 times larger in 2009 than in 1996.
    The key assumption needed to use sharp bunching as a proxy for knowledge about the EITC
schedule is that individuals in low-bunching neighborhoods believe that the EITC has no impact
on their marginal tax rates. We present evidence supporting this assumption in two steps. First,
we show that the spatial heterogeneity in bunching is driven primarily by di¤erences in knowledge
about the …rst kink of the EITC schedule.               We …nd that those who move from low-bunching
to high-bunching neighborhoods are much more likely to report incomes that yield larger EITC
refunds after they move. In contrast, those who move from high-bunching to low-bunching neigh-
borhoods continue to obtain larger EITC refunds even after they move.                      The persistent e¤ects
of high-bunching (but not low-bunching) neighborhoods after individuals move strongly suggests
that neighborhoods a¤ect bunching via learning, as other factors would be unlikely to have such
asymmetric impacts.         Moreover, we …nd that bunching is highly correlated with predictors of
information di¤usion, such as the density of EITC recipients, the availability of professional tax
preparers, and the frequency of Google searches for phrases including the word “tax” (e.g., “tax
refund” or “Earned Income Tax Credit”) in a neighborhood.                   In contrast, variation in local tax
compliance rates or state policies explain little of the variation in bunching.                 Second, we show
that individuals in low-bunching areas are unaware not just about the refund-maximizing kink but
about the EITC schedule more broadly. In particular, when individuals become eligible for a much
larger EITC refund after having their …rst child, the distribution of their reported self employment
income remains virtually unchanged in low-bunching areas. This result establishes that individuals
in low-bunching areas behave as if the EITC does not a¤ect their marginal incentives, as required
for our approach.4
    In the second half of the paper, we use neighborhoods with low levels of sharp bunching among
the self-employed (i.e., low-knowledge neighborhoods) as counterfactuals to identify the causal
   3
     In Chetty et al. (2012), we use data from tax audits to show that this sharp bunching among the self-employed is
driven primarily by non-compliance. For the analysis in this paper, it does not matter whether self-employed sharp
bunching is due to manipulation of reported income or changes in real earnings.
   4
     If individuals in low-bunching areas have some knowledge of the EITC schedule, our approach underestimates
the impact of the EITC on earnings behavior.


                                                         2
impact of the EITC on the wage earnings distribution.        Unlike self-employment income, wage
earnings are double reported by employers to the IRS on W-2 forms. The degree of misreporting of
wage earnings is therefore minimal and changes in wage earnings primarily re‡ect changes in “real”
choices rather than non-compliance (Andreoni et al. 1998, Slemrod 2007, Chetty et al. 2012). We
…nd that the wage earnings distribution exhibits more mass around the refund-maximizing EITC
plateau in neighborhoods with high self-employed sharp bunching. Wage-earners’ EITC refunds
are on average 20% higher in neighborhoods in the highest sharp bunching decile relative to the
lowest bunching decile. EITC refund amounts rise when wage-earners move to neighborhoods with
high self-employment bunching. In contrast, moving from a high to a low bunching neighborhood
does not decrease refund amounts, con…rming that these e¤ects on wage earnings are driven by
learning.
   The cross-neighborhood comparisons of wage earnings distributions do not de…nitively establish
that the EITC has a causal e¤ect on earnings because there could be other confounding di¤erences
across neighborhoods, such as di¤erences in industrial structure or the supply of jobs. To account
for omitted variable biases, we exploit the fact that individuals with no children are essentially
ineligible for the EITC, thus creating a natural “control group”that can be used to account for any
di¤erences across neighborhoods that are not caused by the EITC. We implement this strategy
using event studies of earnings around the birth of a …rst child, which e¤ectively makes a household
eligible for the EITC. The challenge in using child birth as an instrument for tax incentives is that
it a¤ects labor supply directly. We isolate the impacts of tax incentives by again using di¤erences
in knowledge about the EITC across neighborhoods to obtain counterfactuals. We …nd that wage
earnings in low-bunching and high-bunching neighborhoods track each other closely in the years
prior to child birth. However, when a …rst child is born, wage earnings distributions become much
more concentrated around the EITC plateau in high-bunching ZIP codes, leading to larger EITC
refunds in those areas. This result is robust to allowing for ZIP code level …xed e¤ects, so that the
impacts of the EITC on wage earnings are identi…ed purely from within-area variation over time in
the degree of knowledge about the schedule. Moreover, the birth of a third child – which has no
impact on EITC refunds in the years we study –does not generate di¤erential changes in earnings
across areas.
   Comparing changes in earnings around child birth in high vs. low knowledge neighborhoods, we
estimate that earnings responses to the EITC increase total refund amounts by approximately 5%
on average across the U.S. Approximately 75% of the increase in EITC refunds due to behavioral


                                                 3
responses comes from individuals who change the amount they earn rather than whether they work
or not, showing that the EITC has substantial intensive margin impacts.
   We …nd signi…cant di¤erences between the program’s impacts on earnings in the phase-in and
phase-out regions. The increases in EITC refunds due to behavioral responses are commensurate
to an intensive-margin earnings elasticity of 0.31 in the phase-in region and an intensive-margin
earnings elasticity of 0.14 in the phase-out region on average in the U.S. The phase-in and phase-out
elasticities are 0.84 and 0.29 in areas in the top decile of EITC knowledge. Approximately 70%
of the increase in EITC refunds due to behavioral responses in high-knowledge areas comes from
increases in earnings in the phase-in region, with only 30% coming from reductions in earnings in
the phase-out region. One explanation for the larger responses in the phase-in is that structural
labor supply elasticities are larger in the phase-in than the phase-out region. Another explanation
is that, on average, individuals pay more attention to the phase-in and refund-maximizing plateau
portions of the schedule than the phase-out region.       This point illustrates a key feature of our
research design: it identi…es the impact of the EITC on earnings as it is currently perceived on
average in the U.S. Changes in the structure of the program that make the phase-out incentives
more salient –e.g., increasing the phase-out rate –could potentially amplify disincentive e¤ects.
   Overall, our results show that the EITC has raised net incomes at the low end of the income
distribution signi…cantly with limited work disincentive e¤ects.      The fraction of EITC-eligible
wage-earners below the poverty line falls from 31.3% without the EITC to 21.4% by mechanically
including EITC payments (holding earnings and reported incomes …xed). The fraction below the
poverty line falls further to 21.0% once earnings responses to the EITC are taken into account. If
knowledge about the EITC schedule were to increase to the level observed in the highest decile of
bunching, the poverty rate would fall further to 20.2%.
   Our results build on a large literature on the impacts of the EITC on labor supply surveyed by
Hotz and Scholz (2003), Eissa and Hoynes (2006), and Meyer (2010). Several studies have shown
that the EITC clearly increases labor force participation – the extensive-margin response (e.g.,
Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001, Grogger 2003, Eissa and Hoynes 2004, Hotz
and Scholz 2006, Hotz et al. 2011, Gelber and Mitchell 2012).       However, evidence on intensive-
margin responses is much more mixed (e.g., Meyer and Rosenbaum 1999, Bollinger, Gonzalez,
and Ziliak 2009, Rothstein 2010).    Prior studies, which focus on short-run changes in behavior
around EITC reforms, may have detected extensive-margin responses because knowledge about the
increased return to working di¤used more quickly than knowledge about how to optimize on the


                                                 4
intensive margin.5 Surveys show that the knowledge that working can yield a large tax refund –
which is all one needs to know to respond along the extensive margin – is much more widespread
than knowledge about the non-linear marginal incentives created by the EITC (Liebman 1998,
Ross Phillips 2001, Romich and Weisner 2002, Smeeding, Ross Phillips, and O’Connor 2002, Maag
2005).6    This pattern of knowledge di¤usion is consistent with a model of rational information
acquisition, as re-optimizing in response to a tax reform on the extensive margin has …rst-order
(large) bene…ts, whereas reoptimizing on the intensive margin has second-order (small) bene…ts
(Chetty 2012). Intensive-margin responses may therefore take more time to emerge. Thus, the
common wisdom that intensive-margin responses are smaller than extensive-margin responses may
be an artifact of the short-run research designs used in prior work.
    Our analysis also contributes to the literature on estimating behavioral responses from non-
linearities in the budget set and bunching at kink points (e.g., Hausman 1981, Saez 2010, Chetty
et al. 2011, Kleven and Waseem 2012). As wage-earners cannot control earnings perfectly, the
impact of taxes on the wage earnings distribution is di¤use and does not produce visible bunching
at kinks. As a result, traditional non-linear budget set methods would again lead to the conclusion
that taxation does not generate intensive-margin responses. We uncover wage-earners’di¤use real
earnings responses by exploiting the ability to non-parametrically identify sharp bunching among
the self-employed to develop a counterfactual.
    Our …ndings also contribute to the recent debate on whether EITC subsidies drive down wage
rates in equilibrium, thereby limiting the extent to which the program raises net incomes (Roth-
stein 2010, Leigh 2010). Such general equilibrium e¤ects are di¢ cult to identify using traditional
methods (e.g., di¤erence-in-di¤erences designs comparing women with and without children) be-
cause they a¤ect both the treatment and control groups.               Under the assumption that di¤erent
geographic areas constitute separate labor markets, our comparisons of income distributions across
neighborhoods incorporate general equilibrium changes in wage rates. Our results suggest that the
EITC substantially increases earnings even when general equilibrium e¤ects are taken into account.
    Finally, our approach contributes to the recent literature on estimating the impacts of tax
and transfer policies from bunching at kink points (e.g., Saez 2010, Chetty et al. 2011, Kleven
   5
     75% of eligible individuals claim the EITC (Plueger 2009), indicating that many individuals are aware of the
program’s existence. This knowledge is likely due to IRS outreach e¤orts such as Taxpayer Assistance Centers (TAC)
and Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA). However, these programs focus on increasing take-up rather than
disseminating information about the details of the non-linear marginal rate structure of the schedule.
   6
     For example, among the 42 families interviewed by Romich and Weisner (2002), 90% had heard of the EITC, but
only two families knew that they needed to earn a certain amount to maximize their credit.



                                                        5
and Waseem 2012) by identifying di¤use behavioral responses around kinks. Because wage-earners
typically cannot control their earnings perfectly, the impact of the tax policies on the wage earnings
distribution is di¤use and cannot be identi…ed by studying the aggregate distribution. We leverage
the ability to non-parametrically identify sharp bunching by self-employed tax …lers through income
manipulation to develop a counterfactual to identify wage-earners’di¤use real earnings responses.
This method allows us to identify the impact of tax policies on the full distribution of real earnings.
As we discuss in the conclusion, this approach could be used to identify the impacts of a variety of
policies in environments with frictions.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.         Section II presents a stylized model to
formalize our research design. Section III provides background about the EITC and the dataset
we use. Section IV documents the heterogeneity across neighborhoods in sharp bunching by the
self-employed and shows that this heterogeneity is driven by di¤erences in information. Section V
presents our main results on the e¤ects of the EITC on wage earnings. In Section VI, we use our
estimates to calculate the impacts of the EITC on income inequality. Section VII concludes.


                                 II    Model and Research Design

In this section, we develop a stylized non-linear budget-set model of labor supply and tax compli-
ance behavior to formalize our estimation strategy and identi…cation assumptions. We make two
simpli…cations in our baseline derivation.         First, we assume that …rms have constant-returns-to-
scale technologies and pay workers a …xed pre-tax wage of w. Second, we abstract from income
e¤ects in labor supply by assuming that workers have quasi-linear utility functions.                We discuss
how these assumptions a¤ect our estimator after analyzing the baseline case.
       Setup. Individuals, indexed by i, make two choices: labor supply (li ) and tax evasion (ei ). Let
zi = wli denote true earnings and zbi = zi            ei denote reported taxable income.          Workers face
a two-bracket tax system that provides a tax credit for working.               When zbi < K, workers face a
marginal tax rate of       1   < 0 (a subsidy for work). For earnings above K, individuals pay a marginal
tax rate of     2   > 0 (a clawback of the subsidy). Let      = ( 1;   2)   denote the vector of marginal tax
rates.7
       There are two types of workers: tax compliers and non-compliers. Non-compliers face zero cost
of evasion and always choose to ei to report zbi = K and maximize their tax refunds (when they
   7
    This simpli…es the actual EITC schedule shown in Figure 1, which has a plateau region and two kinks. The case
with one kink captures the key concepts underlying our research design.



                                                        6
know the tax schedule, see below). Compliers face an in…nite cost of altering their reported taxable
income and hence always set ei = 0.8
      Individuals have quasi-linear utility functions u(Ci ; li ;         i)   = Ci    h(li ;   i)   over a numéraire con-
sumption good Ci and labor supply li . The parameter                 i   captures skill or preference heterogeneity
across agents. Individuals cannot set li exactly at their utility-maximizing level because of frictions
and rigidities in job packages. Our empirical approach does not rely on a speci…c positive model of
how such frictions a¤ect labor supply choices. Because of these frictions, the empirical distribution
of true earnings F (z) exhibits di¤use excess mass around the refund-maximizing kink K rather
than sharp bunching at the kink K. As a result, traditional non-linear budget-set methods (e.g.,
Hausman 1981) and the bunching estimator proposed by Saez (2010) do not non-parametrically
identify the impact of taxes on earnings behavior.
      Our estimator exploits geographic heterogeneity for identi…cation. To model such heterogeneity,
we assume that there are N cities of equal size in the economy, indexed by c = 1; :::; N . Workers
cannot move to a di¤erent city.           Cities di¤er in their residents’ knowledge about the tax credit
for exogenous reasons.9         In city c, a fraction      c   of workers are aware of the marginal incentives

 1    and   2   created by the tax credit.10      The remainder of the workers optimize as if                     1   = 0 and

 2   = 0 (denoted below by        = 0). Cities may also di¤er in the distribution of skills                  i,   denoted by
a smooth cdf Gc ( i ), and in the fraction of non-compliers,                   c.   Let Fc (zj ) denote the empirical
distribution of earnings in city c with a tax system .
      Identifying Tax Policy Impacts. Our objective is to characterize the impact of the tax credit,
as it is currently perceived by agents, on the aggregate earnings distribution:

(1)                                        F = F (zj 6= 0)        F (zj = 0).

The …rst term in this expression is the observed distribution of true earnings in the population given
current knowledge of the tax credit and rates of non-compliance.11 The second term is the potential
   8
     For simplicity, we ignore other variable costs of evasion, such as the threat of an audit or …nes. Allowing for such
costs has no impact on the estimator we derive below.
   9
     In practice, di¤erences in knowledge may arise from factors related to the structure of the city, such as population
density, network structure, and the availability of tax preparation services.
  10
     To simplify notation, we assume that c is the same for compliers and non-compliers. If knowledge varies across
the types, the estimator in (3) identi…es the treatment e¤ect of interest under the two assumptions below if c is
interpreted as the average level of knowledge across all individuals in each city.
  11
     Recall from our model that non-compliers adjust solely evasion ei and hence their real earnings decisions zi are
not a¤ected by knowledge about marginal tax rates. Hence, a high fraction of non-compliers would lead to attenuated
real earnings responses.




                                                           7
outcome without taxes, which is the unobserved counterfactual.12 Cities with no knowledge about
the tax credit’s marginal incentives (         c   = 0) can be used to identify this counterfactual distribution.
In the absence of income e¤ects, earnings decisions in these cities are identical to behavior with no
taxes at all:
                                      Fc (zj 6= 0;   c    = 0) = Fc (zj = 0;          c   = 0).

To use cities with     c   = 0 as counterfactuals, we …rst need to measure the degree of knowledge of
marginal incentives        c   in each city. We do so by taking advantage of the fact that we observe both
reported income zbi and true wage earnings zi in our data.                           The fraction of individuals in city c
who report taxable income zbi exactly at the kink, which we denote by                                  c,   is equal to the product
of local knowledge about the tax code and non-compliance rates:


                                                               c   =     c c.


Hence, the rate of sharp bunching at the kink                        c   is a noisy proxy for the degree of knowledge              c.

To identify areas with          c   = 0, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1 [Tax Knowledge]. Individuals in neighborhoods with no sharp bunching at the
kink have no knowledge of the policy’s marginal incentives and perceive                                     = 0:


                                                      c   =0)             c   = 0.

In our simple model, Assumption 1 is equivalent to requiring that                                 c   > 0 in all cities, i.e. that
all cities have some non-compliers. In this case, a city with no sharp bunching at the kink must
be a city in which no one knows about the tax incentives.13 More generally, the key assumption
underlying our approach is that individuals in areas with no sharp bunching behave on average as if
the credit induces no change in their marginal tax rates ( = 0). If some areas with                                  c   = 0 actually
have knowledge about marginal incentives created by the tax code, our approach will understate
the impact of tax policy on earnings behavior. The degree of this attenuation bias depends on the
extent to which the variation in bunching                  c       across cities is driven by knowledge vs. compliance
rates and other factors. While we are unable to directly test Assumption 1, we present evidence
   12
      The traditional approach to identifying F (z; = 0j = c ) is to use behavior prior to a tax reform as a coun-
terfactual. In practice, time series trends and the slow di¤usion of information make it challenging to separate the
causal impacts of the tax policy from confounding factors.
   13
      Importantly, Assumption 1 does not require that c is an accurate proxy for di¤erences in knowledge across all
cities; it only requires when c is low, knowledge about marginal incentives created by the tax code is low. The
second requirement is much weaker and perhaps more plausible.



                                                                     8
that knowledge is a key driver of variation in          c   and that individuals in cities with   c   close to 0
behave as if they face no change in taxes ( = 0) when they become eligible for the tax credit we
study.
      Under Assumption 1, the empirical distribution of earnings Fc (z) in cities with no sharp bunch-
ing in reported taxable income at the kink K reveals the distribution of earnings in those cities in
the absence of taxes:

(2)                             Fc (zj 6= 0;   c   = 0) = Fc (zj = 0;           c   = 0).

Although (2) identi…es the necessary counterfactual in cities with no knowledge of the tax code,
estimating the treatment e¤ect in (1) requires that we identify the mean earnings distribution across
                                                    P
                                                    N
all cities in the absence of taxes, F (zj = 0) = N1    Fc (zj = 0). This leads to the identi…cation
                                                            c=1
assumptions underlying our research design.

Assumption 2a [Cross-Sectional Identi…cation]. Individuals’skills do not vary across cities
with di¤erent levels of knowledge about the tax credit:

                                       G( i j c ) = G( i ) for all         c.


This orthogonality condition requires that cities with di¤erent levels of sharp bunching at the
kink have comparable earnings distributions. This assumption leads to the following feasible non-
parametric estimator for the treatment e¤ect in (1):

(3)                                   dF = F (zj )          F (zj ;   c   = 0).

Intuitively, the impact of the tax credit on earnings can be identi…ed by comparing the uncondi-
tional earnings distribution with the earnings distribution in cities with no sharp bunching (i.e., no
knowledge) about the tax credit.14 Naturally, this identi…cation strategy requires that the earnings
distribution in cities with no bunching is representative of earnings distributions in other cities in
the absence of taxes. We can relax this assumption by studying changes in behavior when an in-
dividual becomes eligible for the tax credit in panel data. Suppose we observe individuals making
labor supply decisions for multiple years. Let t denote the year that an individual becomes eligible
for the tax credit, e.g. by having a …rst child, which is the situation we will use in our empirical
analysis. This panel design relies on a weaker “common trends” assumption for identi…cation.
  14
     In practice, there are no neighborhoods with exactly zero sharp bunching in the data. We therefore use the
neighborhoods with very low levels of bunching as counterfactuals, which slightly attenuates our estimates.


                                                        9
Assumption 2b [Panel Identi…cation]. Changes in skills when an individual becomes eligible
for the credit do not vary across cities with di¤erent levels of knowledge about the tax credit:

                           Gt ( i j c )    Gt      1( ij c)   = Gt ( i )     Gt      1( i)   8 c.

Under Assumption 2b, we can identify               F using a di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimator that compares
earnings distributions across cities before vs. after individuals become eligible for the tax credit:

(4)               dF DD = [Ft (zj )       Ft (zj    ; c   = 0)]    [Ft   1 (zj   )    Ft   1 (zj   ;   c   = 0)].

The …rst term in (4) coincides with the cross-sectional estimator in (3). The second term nets out
di¤erences in earnings distributions across cities prior to eligibility for the credit. This estimator
permits stable di¤erences in skills across cities, but requires that skills do not trend di¤erently across
cities around the point at which individuals become eligible for the tax credit. We implement the
estimator in (4) using the birth of a …rst child as an instrument for eligibility. Importantly, (4)
permits a direct e¤ect of child birth on labor supply as long as the e¤ect does not di¤er across
cities with di¤erent amounts of knowledge. Because of such direct e¤ects, we cannot identify                         F
purely from changes in earnings behavior around the date of eligibility in the full population, again
making comparisons across cities with di¤erent levels of knowledge essential for identi…cation.15
       Income E¤ ects and Changes in Wage Rates.                  We now return to the implications of our two
simplifying assumptions for our estimator for                 F . When …rms do not have constant-returns-to-
scale technologies, changes in labor supply induced by tax incentives will a¤ect equilibrium wage
rates. As a result, the impact of a tax policy on the equilibrium earnings distribution is a function
of both labor supply changes and changes in wage rates.                      The cross-sectional estimator for       F
in (3) incorporates any such general equilibrium (GE) e¤ects because the earnings distributions
in cities with more knowledge about the tax code incorporate both changes in li and wi .                            The
di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimator in (4) nets out GE wage changes if individuals who are eligible
and ineligible for the credit are pooled in the same market. By comparing the two estimates, one
can in principle gauge the magnitude of GE e¤ects provided that both Assumptions 2a and 2b
hold.
       When utility is not quasi-linear, taxes a¤ect behavior through both price and income e¤ects.
Because individuals in all cities receive the tax credit we analyze irrespective of their perceptions,
  15
    In a more general model that permits heterogeneity in responses to taxation, (4) identi…es the local average
treatment e¤ect of the EITC on wage earnings among households who have just had their …rst child.



                                                             10
our cross-city comparisons essentially net out di¤erences in behavior that arise purely from income
e¤ects. Hence, our estimator for           F approximately identi…es compensated elasticities in a more
general model without quasilinear utility.16


                       III     Data and Institutional Background
III.A       EITC Structure

The EITC is a refundable tax credit administered through the income tax system. In 2010, 27.4
million tax …lers received a total of $59.6 billion in EITC payments (Internal Revenue Service 2012,
Table 2.5). Eligibility for the EITC depends on total earnings –wage earnings plus self-employment
income – and the number of qualifying children.               Qualifying dependents for EITC purposes are
relatives who are under age 19 (24 for full time students) or permanently disabled, and reside with
the tax …ler for at least half the year.17 Eligibility for the EITC is also limited to tax …lers who
are US citizens or permanent residents with a valid Social Security Number (SSN).
       Figure 1a displays the EITC amount on the right y-axis as a function of earnings for single
…lers with one or two or more qualifying dependents throughout our period, expressed in real 2010
dollars. EITC refund amounts …rst increase linearly with earnings, then plateau over a short income
range, and are then reduced linearly and eventually phased out completely. In the phase-in region,
the subsidy rate is 34 percent for taxpayers with one child and 40 percent for taxpayers with two
or more children. In the plateau (or peak) region, the EITC is constant and equal to a maximum
value of $3,050 and $5,036 for …lers with 1 and 2+ children, respectively. In the phase-out region,
the EITC amount decreases at a rate of 15.98% for …lers with 1 child, and 21.06% for those with
2+ children. The EITC is entirely phased-out at earnings equal to $35,535 and $40,363 for single
…lers with 1 and 2+ children, respectively. Tax …lers with no dependents are eligible for a small
EITC refund, with a maximum credit of $457 and a subsidy and clawback rate of 7.65%.                             As
both the rates and levels are an order of magnitude smaller than for households with children, we
exclude …lers with no children from our analysis of the credit’s treatment e¤ects and use the term
“EITC recipients” to refer exclusively to EITC recipients with at least one qualifying child. See
IRS Publication 596 (Internal Revenue Service 2011) for complete details on program eligibility
and rules.
  16
     The equivalence is not exact because price e¤ects induce changes in earnings that in turn change the size of the
EITC refund that individuals in high bunching areas receive. In practice, this change in the income transfer due to
behavioral responses is negligible relative to the size of the EITC and hence generates only a second-order e¤ect.
  17
     Only one tax …ler can claim an eligible child; for example, in the case of non-married parents, only one parent
can claim the child.


                                                         11
       Aside from in‡ation indexation, the structure of the EITC has remained stable since 1996 after
the large EITC expansion from 1994 to 1996, with two small exceptions. First, for those who are
married and …ling jointly, the plateau and phase-out regions of the EITC were extended by $1,000
in 2002-04, $2,000 in 2005-07, $3,000 in 2008, and $5,000 in 2009-11 (and indexed for in‡ation after
2009). Second, a slightly larger EITC was introduced for families with three or more children in
2009. For these households, the phase-in rate is 45% (instead of 40%) with a maximum EITC of
$5,666 as of 2010. The location of the plateau remains the same as for those with two children for
this group. The stability of the EITC schedule could facilitate the di¤usion of information about
the program’s parameters that we document below.
       Note that other aspects of the tax code such as the Child Tax Credit and income taxes also
a¤ect individuals’ budget sets.        Our estimates incorporate any di¤erences across neighborhoods
in knowledge about these other aspects of the tax code as well.                  However, marginal tax rates
in the income range we study are primarily determined by the EITC; the child tax credit and
federal income tax rates have relatively small e¤ects on incentives, as shown in Appendix Figure
1.18 Moreover, most of the earnings response we …nd comes from the phase-in region of the EITC
schedule, where marginal incentives are essentially una¤ected by other aspects of the tax code. We
therefore interpret our estimates as the impacts of the EITC on earnings behavior.

III.B       Sample and Variable De…nitions

We use selected data from the universe of United States federal income tax returns spanning 1996-
2009. Because the data start in 1996, we cannot analyze the large 1994 EITC expansion that has
been used in previous work. We draw information from income tax returns (i.e., individual income
tax form 1040 and its supplementary schedules) and third-party reports on wage earnings (W-2
forms). This section describes the main variables used in our empirical analysis –income, number
of children, and ZIP code of residence – and the construction of our analysis samples.                    In what
follows, the year always refers to the tax year (i.e., the calendar year in which the income is earned).
In most cases, tax returns for tax year t are …led from late January to mid-April of calendar year
t + 1. As mentioned above, we express all monetary variables in 2010 dollars, adjusting for in‡ation
using the o¢ cial IRS in‡ation parameters used to index the tax system.                     Therefore, with the
exception of the two legislated reforms described above, the EITC schedule remains unchanged in
  18
    The Child Tax Credit is only partially refundable and therefore for most of our sample period has no impact on
the budget set in the phase-in region. It is quantitatively small relative to the EITC; the maximum Child Tax Credit
per child is $500 before 2001 and $1,000 starting in 2001. Federal income taxes and state income taxes typically
a¤ect the budget set starting in the phase-out region because of exemptions and deductions.


                                                        12
real terms across years.
       Variable De…nitions for Tax Filers. We use two earnings concepts in our analysis, both of
which are de…ned at the household (tax return) level because the EITC is based on household
income. The …rst, total earnings, is the total amount of earnings used to calculate the EITC. This
is essentially the sum of wage earnings and net self-employment earnings reported on the 1040 tax
returns.19 Total earnings correspond to reported income zbi in our model.
       The second earnings concept, wage earnings, is the sum of wage earnings reported on all W-2
forms …led by employers on the primary and secondary …ler’s behalf. Data from W-2 forms are
available only from 1999 onward. For this reason, we focus primarily on the period from 1999-2009
when analyzing wage earnings impacts. However, our event studies of earnings around child birth
track individuals over several years and require measures of wage earnings prior to 1999. In these
cases, we de…ne wage earnings as total wage earnings reported on the 1040 tax return form for
1996-1998.20 We trim all income measures at -$20K and $50K to focus attention on the relevant
range for the EITC.
       For married individuals …ling jointly, we assign both individuals in the couple the household-
level total earnings and wage earnings because the EITC is based on household income. However,
we structure our analysis based on an individual-level panel to account for potential changes in
marital status. Because we de…ne earnings at the family level, changes in marital status can a¤ect
an individual’s earnings even if his or her own earnings do not change.21
       We de…ne the number of children as the number of children claimed for EITC purposes. The
EITC children variable is capped at 2 from 1996-2007 and 3 in 2009. For individuals who report
the maximum number of EITC children, we de…ne the number of children as the maximum of
EITC children and the number of dependent children claimed on the tax return. If the number
of children claimed for EITC purposes is missing because the tax return does not claim the EITC
(e.g., because earnings are above the eligibility cuto¤), we de…ne the number of children as the
  19
      More precisely, total earnings is the sum of the wage earnings line on the 1040 plus the Schedule C net income line
on the 1040 form minus 1/2 of the self-employment tax on the 1040 adjustments to gross income. This adjustment
is made in the tax code to align the tax treatment of wage earnings and self-employment earnings for Social Security
and Medicare taxes. These taxes are split between employers and employees for wage earners, and wage earnings
are reported net of the employer portion of the tax.
   20
      Total wage earnings reported on the tax return also include some minor forms of wage earnings not reported on
W-2 forms, such as tips. The W-2 earnings measure is preferable because individuals could misreport wage income
that is not third party reported on W-2 forms. None of our results are sensitive to the exclusion of pre-1999 data
because we only use these data to assess pre-period trends, as discussed in greater detail below.
   21
      We have checked that our results are not driven by marriage e¤ects by re-doing the analysis using solely individual
earnings, instead of family earnings.




                                                           13
number of dependent children.22
       Finally, we de…ne ZIP code as the ZIP code from which the individual …led his year t tax return.
If an individual did not …le in a given tax year, then we use the ZIP code reported as the home
address on the W-2 with the largest earnings reported for that individual in that year.
       We do not observe total earnings or number of children for individuals who do not …le tax
returns, and we do not observe ZIP code for individuals who neither …le nor earn wages reported
on a W-2. These missing data problems can potentially create selection bias, which we address in
our child birth sample below.
       Core Sample. Our analysis sample includes individuals who meet all three of the following
conditions simultaneously in at least one year between 1996 and 2009: (1) …le a tax return as a
primary or secondary …ler (in the case of married joint …lers), (2) have total earnings below $50,000
(in 2010 dollars), and (3) claim at least one child. We impose these restrictions to limit the sample
to individuals who are likely to be EITC-eligible at least once between 1996 and 2009. We also
remove observations with ITINs from the sample.23 We de…ne the total earnings and wage earnings
of person-year observations with no reported earnings activity as zero. These include individuals
who do not …le a tax return and have no W-2 wage earnings, individuals who die within the sample
period, and individuals who leave the United States. This procedure yields a balanced panel with
no attrition, i.e. every individual has exactly fourteen years of data.               We refer to the resulting
sample as our core analysis sample. The core sample contains 77.6 million unique individuals and
1.09 billion person-year observations on earnings. Our empirical analysis consists of three di¤erent
research designs, each of which uses a di¤erent subsample of this core sample.
       Cross-Sectional Analysis Sample.        Our …rst research design compares earnings distributions
for EITC claimants across cities in repeated cross-sections.              For this cross-sectional analysis, we
limit the core sample to person-years in which the individual …les a tax return, reports one or more
children, has total earnings in the EITC-eligible range, and is the primary …ler. By including only
primary …lers, we eliminate duplicate observations for married joint …lers and obtain distributions
of earnings that are weighted at the tax return (family) level, which is the relevant weighting for
tax policy and revenue analysis.          Note that this cross-sectional sample excludes non-…lers and
  22
     The requirements for EITC-eligible children vs. dependent children are not identical, but the di¤erence is minor
in practice. According to our calculations from the 2005 Statistics of Income Public Use Microdata File, less than
10% of EITC …lers report di¤erent numbers for dependent children and EITC children.
  23
     The IRS issues ITINs to individuals who are not eligible for a Social Security Number (and are thus ineligible
for the EITC). These individuals include undocumented aliens and temporary US residents, and account for 2.6%
of our core sample.



                                                         14
thus could in principle yield biased results if EITC take-up rates vary endogenously across cities.
We cannot resolve this problem in cross-sections because we do not observe non-…lers’number of
children. We therefore address this issue using panel data in our third research design below.
    Movers Sample. Our second research design tracks individuals as they move across neighbor-
hoods. To construct the sample for this analysis, we …rst limit the core sample to person-years in
which an individual …les a tax return, claims one or more children, and has income in the EITC-
eligible range.24 We then further restrict the data to individuals who move across 3-digit ZIP codes
(ZIP-3s) in some year between 2000 and 2005.25 We impose these restrictions to ensure that we
have at least four years of data on earnings before and after the move. In addition, this restriction
also guarantees that we have W-2 (employer reported) wage earnings data for at least one year
before the move. We de…ne a move as a change in ZIP-3 between two consecutive years for which
address information is available. When individuals move more than once, we include only the …rst
move and assign the individual to this …rst post-move neighborhood in all four subsequent years.
Note that we observe address at the time of tax …ling, which in the EITC population is typically
February of year t + 1 for year t incomes. A change in address for tax year t therefore implies that
the move most likely took place between February of year t and February of year t + 1. A small
fraction of the moves classi…ed as occurring in year t thus do not take place till shortly after the end
of that year. Importantly, none of the moves classi…ed as occurring in year t occur prior to year t
with this de…nition, ensuring that any misclassi…cation errors do not a¤ect pre-move distribution
and only attenuate post-move impacts.
    Child Birth Sample. Our third research design tracks individuals around the year in which they
have a child, which can trigger eligibility for a larger EITC.26 We observe dates of birth as recorded
by the Social Security administration.          As in the movers sample, we restrict attention to births
between 2000 and 2005 to ensure that we have at least 4 years of earnings data before and after
child birth and at least one year of pre-birth W-2 earnings data. Next, we de…ne the parents of
the child as all the primary and secondary …lers that claim the child either as a dependent or for
EITC purposes within 5 years of the child’s birth. If the child is claimed by multiple individuals
(e.g., a mother and father …ling jointly), we de…ne both individuals as new parents and track both
  24
     We include both primary and secondary …lers to avoid excluding a subset of observations for individuals who
change marital status within our sample. We account for repeated observations for married joint …lers by clustering
standard errors as described below.
  25
     See Section IV.B below for a detailed description of ZIP-3s.
  26
     As in the movers sample, we include all individuals (both primary and secondary …lers) rather than families here
to avoid dropping observations when marital status changes.



                                                         15
parents over time. We then limit the core sample to the set of all such new parents, including all
observations regardless of whether the individuals …les a tax return in a given year.
       In our child birth sample, we impute non-…lers’earnings, addresses, and number of children as
follows. Because marital status is only observed on income tax forms, we cannot identify spouses
for non-…lers. We assume that non-…lers are single and de…ne both their total earnings and wage
earnings as the total income reported on W-2 forms.27 We code total earnings as zero for non-…lers
who have no W-2’s.28 Throughout the sample, we assign individuals the ZIP code in which they
lived during the year in which the child was born.               For non-…lers, we impute the ZIP code as
the ZIP code to which a W-2 form was mailed in the year of child birth if available.29 11.6% of
households neither …led a tax return nor had W-2 information in the year their child was born; for
this group we use the …rst available ZIP code after the child was born.                   Finally, we impute the
number of children for non-…lers as the minimum of the children claimed in the closest preceding
and subsequent years in which the individual …led (not including the child who was born in year
0).30
       With these imputations for non-…lers, the child birth sample includes all years for every indi-
vidual who (1) has a child born between 2000 and 2005 according to Social Security records and
(2) claims that child on a tax return at some point after his birth. Treating the decision to have
a child as exogenous, the only selection into this child birth sample comes from the potentially
endogenous decision to claim a child as a dependent.31                We account for potential selection bias
through this channel using data prior to child birth as described below.
       Descriptive Statistics. Table I presents summary statistics for our cross-sectional analysis sample
using data from 1999-2009, the years in which we have W-2 earnings information.                         Mean total
earnings are $20,091. The majority of this income comes from wage earnings: mean wage earnings
as reported on W-2’s are $18,308.            19.6% of tax …lers report non-zero self-employment income
  27
      Excluding elderly households who receive Social Security Income, over 90% of non-…lers are single (Cilke 1998,
Table 1, p. 15). Because our sample requires having a child birth at some point within the sample, it contains very
few elderly households. Self-employment earnings are not observed if the individual does not …le and are assumed
to be zero.
   28
      This procedure codes total earnings and wage earnings as 0 for non-…lers prior to 1999, when W-2 data are
unavailable. Most non-…lers have very low W-2 earnings when data are available, so this imputation is likely to be
accurate for most cases. As noted above, none of our results are sensitive to the exclusion of pre-1999 data.
   29
      For individuals with multiple W-2 forms, we use the W-2 with the largest amount of earnings and non-missing
address information.
   30
      While we cannot be certain about the number of dependents living with an individual in years she does not …le,
it is more likely that the number of children is the minimum of the lead and lag as children are sometimes exchanged
(for tax reporting purposes) across parents. Individuals who do not …le are therefore likely to have fewer children.
   31
      The empirical literature on the EITC has found no evidence that the EITC a¤ects marriage and fertility decisions
(Hotz and Scholz 2003, p. 184).



                                                         16
in a given year and the mean (unconditional) self-employment income in the sample is $1,770.
Individuals in this population receive substantial EITC refunds, with a mean of $2,543.                  Nearly
70% of the tax returns are …led by a professional preparer.               The population of EITC eligible
individuals consists primarily of relatively young single women with children.


 IV        Neighborhood Variation in Bunching and EITC Knowledge

In this section, we develop a proxy for local knowledge about the EITC in four steps.                     First,
we document sharp bunching at the …rst kink of the EITC schedule by self-employed individuals
in the aggregate income distribution. Second, we show that the degree of sharp bunching varies
substantially across neighborhoods in the U.S. Third, we present evidence that this spatial variation
is driven by di¤erences in knowledge about the refund-maximizing kink of the EITC schedule rather
than other factors such as local tax compliance rates. Finally, we show that individuals in low-
bunching areas are unaware not only of the refund-maximizing kink but behave as if the EITC
does not a¤ect their marginal tax rates at all income levels. Together, the results in this section
establish that self-employed sharp bunching is a proxy for local knowledge that satis…es Assumption
1 above.

IV.A        Aggregate Distributions: Self-Employed vs. Wage Earners

Figure 1a plots the distribution of total earnings for EITC claimants in 2008 using our cross-
sectional analysis sample. The distribution is a histogram with $1,000 bins centered around the
…rst kink of the EITC schedule. We plot separate distributions for EITC …lers with one and two
or more children, as these individuals face di¤erent EITC schedules, shown by the solid lines in the
…gures.32    Both distributions exhibit sharp bunching at the …rst kink point of the corresponding
EITC schedule, the point that maximizes tax refunds net of other income tax liabilities (such as
payroll taxes). This sharp bunching shows that the EITC induces signi…cant changes in reported
income, con…rming Saez’s (2010) …ndings using public use samples.
    Figure 1b replicates Figure 1a restricting the sample to wage-earners, de…ned as households
who report zero self-employment income in a given year. In this …gure, there is no sharp bunching
at the EITC kinks, implying that all the sharp bunching in Figure 1a is due to the self-employed.
However, one cannot determine from Figure 1b whether the EITC has an impact on the wage
  32
     These and subsequent …gures include both single and married individuals. Married individuals face an EITC
schedule with a slightly longer plateau region but the same …rst kink point. The EITC schedules shown in Figure 1
are for single individuals.


                                                       17
earnings distribution. The impact for wage-earners is likely to be much more di¤use because they
cannot control their earnings perfectly due to frictions (Chetty et al. 2011). One therefore needs
counterfactuals for the distributions in Figure 1b to identify the impacts of the EITC on wage
earnings. We show below that the wage earnings distributions in Figure 1b are in fact reshaped by
the EITC, but one would have no way of detecting such responses by studying only the aggregate
distribution.33
       We develop counterfactuals for the wage earnings distribution using the research design de-
scribed in Section II. To implement the approach empirically, we interpret the sharp bunching
among the self-employed as a measure of manipulation in total earnings (^
                                                                        zi in the model) and wage
earnings reported on W-2’s as true earnings (zi ). Because wage earnings are double reported by
employers to the IRS through W-2 forms, individuals have little scope to misreport wage earnings.34
In contrast, there is no systematic third-party reporting system for self-employment income. Ran-
dom audits from IRS compliance studies …nd that more than 80% of small informal businesses
misreport income. In contrast, compliance rates for wage earnings exceed 98% (Internal Revenue
Service 1996, Table 3).35 Consistent with these results, tabulations using audit data from the 2001
National Research Program show that the majority of the sharp bunching at the …rst kink of the
EITC schedule among the self-employed is due to non-compliance (Chetty et al. 2012). The degree
of sharp bunching in the post-audit total earnings distribution is less than 50% of that in Figure
1a. In contrast, misreporting among wage-earners is negligible even around the refund-maximizing
region of the schedule, supporting the view that wage earnings represent true earnings zi .
       In the remainder of this section, we focus on total earnings (^
                                                                     zi ) and analyze variation across
neighborhoods in the degree of self-employed sharp bunching at the …rst kink of the EITC schedule.
  33
     There is no need for a counterfactual to estimate sharp bunching among the self-employed because there is no
reason to expect point masses in the income distribution at the kinks of the tax schedule except for the impact of the
tax system itself. By leveraging our ability to non-parametrically identify sharp bunching without a counterfactual,
we develop counterfactuals to identify the di¤use response of wage earners.
  34
     Any discrepancy between an individual tax return self-report and the employer W2 information return report is
automatically detected by the IRS and can trigger an audit. Misreporting wage earnings therefore requires collusion
between employers and employees, which is likely to be di¢ cult especially in large …rms. We show below that our
results hold in the subsample of wage earners working at …rms with more than 100 employees.
  35
     For instance, the rate of income under-reporting for small business suppliers was over 80 percent in 1992 (Internal
Revenue Service 1996, Table 3, page 8).




                                                          18
IV.B      Spatial Heterogeneity in Sharp Bunching

We analyze spatial heterogeneity at the level of three-digit ZIP codes, which we refer to as ZIP-
3s.36 We de…ne the degree of self-employed sharp bunching in a ZIP-3 as the percentage of EITC
claimants who report total earnings at the …rst EITC kink and have non-zero self employment
income. More precisely, for ZIP-3 c in year t, let numct denote the number of primary tax …lers
who claim the EITC with children, report non-zero self employment income, and report total
earnings within $500 of the …rst kink. Let denomct denote the total number of primary tax …lers
with children in ZIP-3 c in year t in our cross-sectional analysis sample. We de…ne self-employed
sharp bunching bct as numct /denomct . Note that this de…nition incorporates both intensive and
extensive margin changes in reporting self-employment income.                    Thus, part of the variation in
bunching across areas is driven by di¤erences in rates of reporting self-employment income, some
of which is endogenous to knowledge about the EITC as we show below.37
    Figure 2 illustrates the spatial variation in bct in 2008 across the 899 ZIP-3s in the United
States. To construct this …gure, we divide the raw individual-level cross sectional data in 2008 into
10 deciles based on bct , so that the deciles are population-weighted rather than ZIP-3 weighted.38
Higher deciles are represented with darker shades on the map. The mean (population weighted)
level of bct in the U.S. in 2008 is 2.4%. To gauge magnitudes, recall that the mean self-employment
rate in our sample is approximately 20%; hence, if 10% of self-employed EITC claimants report
total earnings at the kink, we would observe bct = 2%.
    There is substantial dispersion in self-employed sharp bunching across neighborhoods in the
U.S.39 For example, bunching rates are less than 0.75% in most parts of North and South Dakota,
but are over 4% in some parts of Texas and Florida.                 While some of the variation in bunching
  36
     Standard (5 digit) ZIP codes are typically too small to obtain precise estimates of income distributions. Common
measures of broader geographical areas such as counties or MSA’s are more cumbersome to construct in the tax data
or do not cover all areas. There are 899 ZIP-3s in use in the continental United States, shown by the boundaries in
Figure 2. ZIP-3 are typically (but not always) contiguous and are smaller in dense areas. For example, in Boston,
the 021 ZIP-3 covers roughly the same area as the metro area’s subway system.
  37
     We have assessed the robustness of our results to several alternative measures of sharp bunching, including (a)
de…ning the denominator using only self-employed individuals rather than the full population to eliminate variation
arising from di¤erences in self-employment rates; (b) de…ning narrower and wider bands than $500 around the kink;
and (c) calculating excess mass relative to a smooth polynomial …t as in Chetty et al. (2011), which provides a
measure of sharp bunching relative to the local density of the income distribution around the …rst kink. Because
self-employed bunching is so sharp (as shown in Figure 1), our results are essentially unchanged with these alternative
de…nitions. As an illustration, we replicate our main results using the de…nition in (a) in Appendix Figure 2.
  38
     Visually, most of the country appears to be in the lower bunching deciles because bunching rates are much higher
in dense neighborhoods, as we show below.
  39
     Given the sample sizes –which are on average 23,000 returns per ZIP-3 –bunching rates are essentially estimated
without error and we therefore ignore the impact of imprecision in our estimates of bct .




                                                          19
occurs at a broad regional level –for example, bunching is greater in the Southern states –there is
considerable variation even within nearby geographical areas. For example, the Rio Grande Valley
in Southern Texas has self-employed sharp bunching of bct = 6:6%; in contrast, Corpus Christi, TX,
which is 150 miles away, has bunching of bct = 2:5%. Moreover, there are no obvious discontinuities
at state borders, suggesting that di¤erences in state policies such as state EITC’s are unlikely to
explain the heterogeneity, a result that we verify formally below.
   Appendix Figure 3 replicates Figure 2 for earlier years, beginning in 1996, the …rst year of our
dataset and the year in which the EITC was expanded to its current form. To illustrate variation
over time, we divide the observations into deciles after pooling all years of the sample, so that the
decile cut points remain …xed across years.    Initially, sharp bunching was highly prevalent in a
few areas with a high density of EITC …lers, such as southern Texas, New York City, and Miami.
Bunching has since spread throughout much of the United States and continues to rise over time.
   Figure 3 plots the distribution of total earnings for individuals living in the lowest and highest
bunching deciles in the pooled sample from 1996-2009. This …gure includes individuals with both 1
and 2+ children by plotting total earnings minus the …rst kink point of the relevant EITC schedule,
so that 0 denotes the refund-maximizing point. In the top decile, more than 8% of tax …lers report
total earnings exactly at the refund-maximizing kink. In contrast, there is virtually no bunching
at this point in neighborhoods in the bottom decile, suggesting that these neighborhoods could
provide a good counterfactual for behavior in the absence of the EITC if the lack of sharp bunching
is due to a lack of knowledge about the EITC schedule.

IV.C     Is the Variation in Bunching Driven by Knowledge?

We evaluate whether the di¤erences in self-employed sharp bunching across ZIP-3s are driven by
di¤erences in knowledge about the refund-maximizing kink of the schedule using two tests. First,
we analyze individuals who move across ZIP-3s and test for learning. Second, we correlate bunching
rates with proxies for the rate of information di¤usion and competing explanatory factors such as
tax compliance rates.
   Movers. Our hypothesis that the variation in bunching is driven by di¤erences in knowledge
generates two testable predictions about the behavior of movers. The …rst is learning: individuals
who move to a higher bunching area should learn from their neighbors and begin to respond to
the EITC themselves. The second is memory: individuals who leave high bunching areas should
continue to respond to the EITC even after they move to a lower bunching area. This asymmetric


                                                 20
impact of prior and current neighborhoods distinguishes knowledge from other explanations for
heterogeneity in bunching.     For instance, variation in preferences or tax compliance rates across
areas do not directly predict that an individual’s previous neighborhood should have an asymmetric
impact on current behavior.
   We implement these two tests using the movers sample de…ned in Section III, which includes all
individuals in our core sample who move across ZIP-3s at some point between 2000 and 2005. This
sample includes 21.9 million unique individuals and 54 million observations spanning 1996-2009.
We de…ne the degree of bunching for prior residents of ZIP-3 c in year t as the sharp bunching
rate for individuals in the cross-sectional analysis sample living in ZIP-3 c in year t          1.   We
then divide the ZIP-3-by-year cells into deciles of prior residents’ bunching rates by splitting the
individual-level observations in the movers sample into ten equal-sized groups. Note that with this
de…nition, ZIP-3s may change deciles over time if their bunching rates rise or fall.
   Figure 4a plots an event study of bunching for movers around the year in which they move. To
construct this …gure, we …rst de…ne the year of the move as the …rst year a tax return was …led from
the new ZIP-3. We then compute event time as the calendar year minus the year of the move, so
that event year 0 is the …rst year the individual lives in the new ZIP-3. For illustrative purposes,
we focus on individuals who live in a ZIP-3 in the …fth decile of the overall bunching distribution
in the year prior to the move. We then divide this sample into three groups based on where they
move in year 0: the …rst, …fth, and tenth bunching deciles. We calculate the sharp bunching rate in
each event year and subgroup as the fraction of EITC claimants in the relevant group who report
total earnings at the …rst kink and have non-zero self employment income.
   To obtain a point estimate of the e¤ect of moving to decile 10, we regress an indicator for sharp
bunching (i.e., reporting total earnings at the kink and non-zero self employment income) on an
indicator for moving to decile 10, an indicator for event year 0, and the interaction of the two
indicators. We estimate this regression restricting the sample to event years -1 and 0 and deciles 5
and 10, so that the coe¢ cient on the interaction term (   10 )   is a di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimate of
the impact of moving to decile 10 relative to decile 5. We estimate treatment e¤ects of moving to
deciles 1 and 5 using analogous speci…cations, always using decile 5 as the control group. Standard
errors, reported in Figure 4 in parentheses below the coe¢ cient, are clustered at the destination
ZIP-3-by-year-of-move level.
   Bunching rates rise sharply by      10   = 1:9 percentage points for individuals who move to the
highest bunching decile, rise by a statistically insigni…cant       5   = 0:1 percentage points for those


                                                   21
who stay in a …fth-decile area, and fall slightly (by             1   =    0:4 percentage points) for those who
move to the lowest bunching decile. Individuals rapidly adopt local behavior when moving to high
bunching areas. The mean di¤erence in self-employed sharp bunching rates for prior residents is
3.6 percentage points between the …fth and tenth deciles. Hence, movers to the top decile adopt
(2.0-.1)/3.6 = 53% of the di¤erence in prior residents’behavior within the …rst year of their move.
       While sharp bunching is perhaps the clearest evidence of responding to the EITC, relatively
few individuals report income exactly at the …rst kink.                   To evaluate whether individuals learn
about the EITC schedule more broadly when they move, we plot mean EITC refunds by event
year in Figure 4b. Using a di¤erence-in-di¤erences speci…cation analogous to that used in Figure
4a, we estimate that EITC refund amounts rise by $150 on average when individuals move to the
highest bunching decile.        The increase in sharp bunching at the …rst kink accounts for at most
1:9%       $4; 043 = $77 of this increase.40       Hence, individuals report incomes that generate larger
EITC refunds more broadly than just around the …rst kink when they move to areas with high
levels of sharp bunching.
       Figure 5 plots total earnings distributions in the years before and after the move for the three
groups in Figure 4. This …gure is constructed in the same way as Figure 3, pooling individuals
with 1 and 2+ children and computing total earnings relative to the …rst kink of the relevant EITC
schedule. Consistent with the results from the event studies, the fraction of individuals reporting
total earnings exactly at the kink and around the refund-maximizing plateau increases signi…cantly
after the move for those moving to high bunching areas, consistent with learning.41                        However,
the distribution remains relatively stable for those moving to low bunching areas, consistent with
memory.
       To distinguish learning and memory more directly, we test for asymmetry in the impacts of
increases vs. decreases in sharp bunching rates when individuals move. Figure 6 plots changes in
mean EITC refunds from the year before the move (year -1) to the year after the move (year 0) vs.
the change in local sharp bunching           bct that an individual experiences when he moves. Following
standard practice in non-parametric regression kink designs, we bin the x-axis variable                       bct into
  40
     Roughly half of the individuals in the movers sample claim one child, while the other half claim two or more
children. The weighted average of the maximum EITC refund across these groups is $4; 043. $77 is a non-parametric
upper bound on the impact of sharp-bunching on average EITC refunds; the actual e¤ect is likely much smaller.
  41
     Individuals moving to decile 10 exhibit more bunching even prior to the move because our ZIP-3 measure of
neighborhoods generates discrete jumps in neighborhood bunching at boundaries. Individuals who move to decile 10
are more likely to live in ZIP-3’s that are adjacent to decile 10 areas, and thus live in locally higher bunching areas
even though their ZIP-3 is classi…ed in decile 5 as a whole. This measurement error in neighborhood bunching works
against the hypotheses we test.



                                                          22
intervals of width 0.05% and plot the means of the change in EITC refund within each bin.                       If
the variation in bunching is due to knowledge, there should be a kink in this relationship around
0: increases in bct should raise refunds, but reductions in bct should leave refunds una¤ected. We
test for the presence of such a kink by …tting separate linear control functions to the points on the
left and right of the vertical line, with standard errors clustered by the bins of           bct (Card and Lee
2007). As predicted, the slope to the right of the kink is signi…cant and positive: a 1 percentage
point increase in sharp bunching at bct = 0 leads to a $60 increase in EITC refunds. In contrast,
a 1 percentage point reduction in bct leads to a statistically insigni…cant change in EITC refunds
of $6.   The hypothesis that the two slopes are equal is rejected with p < 0:0001.                 The kink at
zero constitutes non-parametric evidence of asymmetric responses to changes in bunching rates and
therefore strongly indicates that at least part of the variation in bct is due to knowledge.42
    Cross-Sectional Correlations. To better understand the sources of variation in sharp bunching,
we correlate bct with proxies for information, tax compliance, and other variables. While we cannot
interpret these correlations as causal e¤ects, the relative explanatory power of various factors sheds
some light on why knowledge varies so much across areas.
    Table II presents a set of OLS regressions of the rate of sharp bunching in each ZIP-3 on various
correlates. Among a broad range of economic and demographic variables available from the 2000
decennial Census, the single strongest predictor of sharp bunching is the local density of EITC
…lers. In column 1 of Table II, we regress sharp bunching on density of EITC …lers, de…ned as the
number of EITC claimants with children (measured in 1000’s) per square mile. We estimate the
regression in a dataset that has one observation on sharp bunching per ZIP-3 in 2000 (the year of
the Census) and weight by the number of EITC claimants in each ZIP-3. Increasing the density of
EITC …lers by 1,000 per square mile (a 1.6 SD increase) raises bunching rates by 1:93 percentage
points (1:1 SD). The R-squared of the density variable by itself in a univariate regression (weighted
by the number of …lers in each ZIP-3) is 0.6.           Intuitively, this regression shows that an isolated
EITC recipient is less likely to learn about the schedule than one living amongst many other EITC
eligible families.
    The correlation between density and sharp bunching suggests that agglomeration facilitates the
di¤usion of knowledge in dense areas.          Figure 7a documents this di¤usion over time by plotting
the average level of sharp bunching by year from 1996-2009. We split the sample into two groups:
  42
     We show below that wage earnings exhibits similar asymmetric persistence, implying that individuals learn not
just about non-compliance but also about the incentives that a¤ect real work decisions.




                                                       23
ZIP-3s with EITC …ler density below vs. above the median in 1996. The degree of sharp bunching
was relatively similar across these areas in 1996, the …rst year of the current EITC schedule. But
rates of bunching rose much more rapidly in dense areas, presumably because information about
the EITC schedule di¤used more quickly in these areas.
    Column 2 of Table II adds the following additional demographic controls to the speci…cation in
column 1: the percentage of the population that is foreign born, white, black, Hispanic, Asian, and
other race. Bertrand et al. (2001) suggest that these demographic characteristics are related to
the tightness of networks in low income populations. Consistent with this hypothesis, we …nd that
these demographic characteristics explain a substantial share of the variation in sharp bunching
beyond density, increasing the R-squared from 0.6 to 0.8.
    Prior studies have also suggested that professional tax preparers may help disseminate informa-
tion about the tax code (e.g., Maag 2005, Chetty and Saez 2012). To evaluate this hypothesis, in
column 3 of Table II, we regress sharp bunching on the fraction of individuals who use a tax pre-
parer in each ZIP-3 of our cross-sectional analysis sample in 2008. A 10 percentage point (1.5 SD)
increase in the rate of local tax professional utilization is associated with a 0.986 percentage point
(0.57 SD) increase in sharp bunching.          Figure 7b plots the relationship between sharp bunching
and the fraction of professionally prepared returns in the ZIP-3, dividing claimants into two groups
based on whether they themselves used a tax preparer or not. This …gure is a binned scatter plot,
constructed by binning the x-axis into 20 equal-sized bins (vingtiles) and plotting the means of
bct for each group in each bin.       The …gure shows that areas with high tax preparer penetration
exhibit higher bunching among both groups. This result implies that tax professionals either serve
simply as a seed for knowledge – informing their clients about the EITC who in turn spread the
information to others – or that tax preparation …rms locate endogenously in areas where EITC
refunds are already high (Kopczuk and Pop-Eleches 2007).
    Column 4 of Table II shows that sharp bunching is highly correlated with Google searches
for information about taxes and tax refunds, another proxy for interest in and awareness about
tax-related information.43 Following the techniques developed by Stephens-Davidowitz (2011), we
measure the percentage of an area’s Google searches for any phrase that includes the word “tax”
(such as “Earned Income Tax Credit” or “tax refund”) between 2004 and 2008. We divide this
  43
     Internet usage is substantial even amongst low SES populations: according to data from the CPS, 39% of
individuals who did not graduate high school lived in a household with internet access in 2009 (U.S. Census Bureau
2012). We use the search term “tax” rather than more speci…c terms such as “EITC” because many individuals may
not know the term “EITC”and because the Google search statistics are publicly available only for words that appear
in a large number of searches.


                                                       24
measure by its standard deviation to obtain a standardized measure.44 We regress sharp bunching
on the Google search measure using the cross-sectional analysis sample in 2008, as internet usage
rates were much lower in 2000 than 2008. A 1 SD increase in Google search intensity for “tax”
in a ZIP-3 is associated with an 0.3 percentage point (0.17 SD) increase in sharp bunching. This
association remains statistically signi…cant when we add demographics, density, and professional
tax preparation rates to the speci…cation, as shown in column 5. Column 6 replicates column 5
with state …xed e¤ects. EITC …ler density, tax preparation services, and searches for information
about taxes remain highly predictive of within-state variation in sharp bunching.
       Finally, we evaluate some competing explanations for the spatial variation in bunching. Column
7 shows that di¤erences in state EITC top-up rates do not have a statistically signi…cant impact
on sharp bunching rates and explain relatively little of the variation in bunching.                 In column 8,
we analyze whether di¤erences in tax compliance rates ( c ) across areas explain the variation in
sharp bunching. We implement this analysis using data on random audits from the 2001 National
Research Program as follows.45          First, we de…ne a measure of non-compliance in each state as
the fraction of non-EITC claimants who have adjustments of more than $1000 in their income due
to NRP audits. We de…ne non-compliance rates using individuals who do not receive the EITC
to eliminate the mechanical correlation arising from the fact that individuals bunch at the kink
primarily by misreporting total earnings. We then regress sharp bunching among EITC claimants
in each state on the non-compliance rate, weighting by the number of individuals audited in each
state to adjust for di¤erences in sampling weights in the NRP. The correlation between sharp
bunching and non-compliance rates is statistically insigni…cant, as shown in column 8. The non-
compliance measure has an R-squared of less than 1% by itself, suggesting that spatial variation in
bunching is unlikely to be driven by heterogeneity in non-compliance.
       In sum, the correlations indicate that a substantial fraction of the variation in sharp bunch-
ing across areas re‡ects di¤erences in knowledge about the refund-maximizing kink of the EITC
schedule that arise from structural features of local economies such as population density and
demographic characteristics.
  44
      Google search data are obtained at a media market level, which we map to ZIP-3’s using population-weighted
averages.
   45
      State-level tabulations from NRP data were provided by the IRS O¢ ce of Research. Note that the NRP sampling
frame was not explicitly designed to be representative at the state level, so the results here should be interpreted
with caution.




                                                        25
IV.D        Perceptions of the EITC in Low-Bunching Areas

While the preceding evidence establishes that self-employed sharp bunching provides an informative
(albeit noisy) proxy for local knowledge about the …rst kink of the EITC schedule, it does not
directly establish that Assumption 1 holds.           For instance, individuals who live in low-bunching
areas may perceive the EITC to be a ‡at subsidy at a constant rate or a smoothly varying subsidy
without kinks in the schedule. Such misperceptions would generate no bunching at the …rst kink
but would imply that low-bunching areas do not provide a valid counterfactual for behavior in the
absence of the EITC. We now present evidence that individuals in low-bunching areas actually
appear to have no knowledge about the entire EITC schedule and behave as if                      = 0 on average
when they become eligible for the credit.
       We assess the beliefs of individuals in the lowest-bunching decile by examining changes in the
distribution of reported self-employment income around the birth of a …rst child. As noted above,
this event makes families eligible for a much larger EITC refund and sharply changes marginal
incentives. We implement this analysis using our child birth sample, which includes approximately
15 million individuals from the core sample who have their …rst child between 2000 and 2005. We
classify individuals into deciles of sharp bunching based on the level of bct , as measured from the
cross-sectional sample, in the ZIP-3 and year in which he or she had a child.
       Figure 8a plots the distribution of total earnings among self-employed individuals in the year
before birth and the year of child birth.          The distributions are scaled to integrate to the total
fraction of individuals reporting self-employment income in each group, which varies across the
groups as shown in Figure 8b below.            The reported earnings distribution changes only slightly
when individuals in the lowest-bunching decile have a child.                 In contrast, the distribution of
total reported income exhibits substantial concentration both at and around the …rst kink for
individuals in the top-bunching decile.46          The fact that the total earnings distribution remains
virtually unchanged when individuals have a child in low-bunching areas implies that they perceive
no changes in marginal incentives throughout the range of the EITC (rather than simply ignoring
the …rst kink).      For instance, if individuals in low-bunching areas perceived the EITC to be a
constant subsidy, we would observe an upward shift in the total reported income distribution when
individuals have a child and become eligible for the EITC.
  46
    To simplify the …gure, we only plot the distribution of earnings in the year before the birth for households in
low-bunching neighborhoods. The pre-birth distribution in high bunching areas is similar to that in low-bunching
areas; in particular, it does not exibit any sharp bunching around the …rst kink of the EITC schedule.




                                                        26
       Figure 8b conducts an analogous test on the extensive margin by plotting the fraction of individ-
uals reporting self employment income by event year around child birth, which is denoted by year 0.
While there are clear trend breaks in the fraction reporting self-employment income around child
birth in higher-bunching areas, there is little or no break around child birth in the lowest-bunching
decile. Although we have no counterfactual for how self-employment income would have changed
around child birth in low-bunching areas absent the EITC, we believe that the costs of manipulat-
ing reported self-employment income are unlikely to change sharply around child birth.47 Hence,
the smooth trends in self-employment rates around child birth in the lowest-decile bunching areas
provide further evidence that individuals in these areas do not perceive any change in incentives
when they have a child.
       Provided that individuals perceive       = 0 before they are eligible for the EITC, the results in Fig-
ure 8 imply that EITC-eligible individuals in low bunching areas perceive and behave as if                    = 0 on
average, as required by Assumption 1.48 We therefore proceed to use low-bunching neighborhoods
as counterfactuals for behavior in the absence of the EITC. Note that we would ideally use areas
with literally zero bunching as counterfactuals. In practice, there are very few areas with literally
no sharp bunching, but the level of sharp bunching is very close to zero in the bottom decile, as
shown in Figures 3 and 8a. We therefore use the lowest bunching decile as “no knowledge” areas
to avoid extrapolations and maintain adequate precision to estimate counterfactual distributions.
Our estimates slightly understate the causal impacts of the EITC because of this simpli…cation.


                     V      E¤ects of the EITC on Wage Earnings

In this section, we identify the impacts of the EITC on the distribution of real wage earnings
using self-employed sharp bunching as a proxy for local knowledge about the EITC. We present
estimates from two research designs. We …rst compare earnings distributions across neighborhoods
in cross-sections. We then use child birth as a source of sharp changes in marginal incentives to
obtain estimates from panel data that rely on weaker identi…cation assumptions.
  47
     Recall that the audit evidence reveals that changes in self-employment income are largely driven by non-
compliance and hence re‡ect pure reporting e¤ects. In contrast, child birth clearly has e¤ects on real labor supply,
making it crucial to have a counterfactual when using child birth as a quasi-experiment to identify wage earnings
impacts as we do in Section V below.
  48
     Individuals in the EITC income range who do not have children pay minimal taxes and receive minimal refunds;
hence, it is most plausible that they perceive essentially zero marginal tax rates. These individuals may be aware
of some aspects of the tax schedule, such as payroll or income taxes. In that case, our approach would identify the
impact of the tax system including the EITC as it is perceived in the population on average relative to tax perceptions
absent the EITC.




                                                          27
       Throughout most of this section, we limit the sample to wage-earners (individuals who report
zero self-employment income) and analyze wage earnings as reported by …rms on W-2 forms. Note
that restricting the sample based on self-employment income could in principle introduce selection
bias, as the choice to report self-employment income is endogenous and depends upon knowledge
about the EITC. In the last part of this section, we show that including all individuals and using
W-2 wage earnings as the outcome yields similar but less precisely estimated results, implying that
endogenous selection is not a signi…cant source of bias in practice.

V.A        Cross-Neighborhood Comparisons

We begin by comparing the distribution of wage earnings in ZIP-3s with low vs. high levels of
sharp bunching.      Identifying the causal impacts of the EITC using this research design requires
that areas with di¤erent levels of sharp bunching would have comparable earnings distributions in
the absence of the EITC (Assumption 2a).              In practice, there could be many di¤erences across
ZIP-3s with di¤erent levels of sharp bunching, as they di¤er in population density and various
other characteristics as shown above. We nevertheless begin with cross-neighborhood comparisons
because they provide a simple illustration of the main results and turn out to yield fairly similar
estimates to those obtained below using our quasi-experimental design.
       We compare earnings distributions across neighborhoods using our cross-sectional analysis sam-
ple, restricted to the years in which we have data on wage earnings from W-2’s (1999-2009). We
pool the observations for wage-earners across all years in this dataset and divide the ZIP-3-by-year
cells into ten deciles based on sharp bunching rates, weighting by the number of observations in each
cell. Figure 9 plots the distribution of W-2 wage earnings for individuals in the lowest and highest
deciles of bct . Panel A considers EITC recipients with one child, while Panel B considers those with
two or more children. The vertical lines denote the beginning and end of the refund-maximizing
EITC plateau. In both panels, there is an increased concentration of the wage earnings distribu-
tion around the refund-maximizing region of the EITC schedule in areas in the top decile of sharp
bunching bct . Under Assumption 2a, we can interpret this result as evidence that the EITC induces
individuals to choose earnings levels that yield larger EITC refunds in high-knowledge areas.49
       To characterize the excess mass more precisely, Figure 10 plots the di¤erence between the
  49
    One may be concerned that the behavioral response occurs through di¤erences in child claiming behavior across
areas rather than earnings behavior. For instance, if divorced couples in high-knowledge areas are more likely to
claim a child on the return that produces a larger EITC refund, we would see di¤erences in earnings distributions as
in Figure 9. We address this source of selection bias in the next subsection by exploiting exogenous information on
the date of child birth.



                                                        28
earnings distributions for the highest and lowest deciles.             For both the one child (Panel A) and
2+ child (Panel B) cases, the largest di¤erence between the two densities occurs precisely in the
refund-maximizing plateau region of the relevant schedule.                 As discussed above, audit studies
reveal that W-2 earnings are rarely misreported, allowing us to interpret the di¤erences in earnings
distributions in Figure 10 as being driven by “real”labor supply choices rather than manipulation
of reported income.       The only potential source of misreporting on W-2’s is for …rms to collude
with workers to misreport W-2 earnings to the IRS, for instance by paying workers part of their
earnings o¤ the books. While such collusion may be feasible in small family …rms, it is much less
likely to occur in large …rms given the complexity of sustaining collusion on a large scale (Kleven,
Kreiner, and Saez 2009). To ensure that our results are not driven by collusive reporting e¤ects,
we repeat the analysis in Figure 10 for wage-earners working in …rms with 100 or more employees.
Within this subgroup, the di¤erence in earnings distributions between the highest and lowest sharp-
bunching areas is very similar to that in the full sample.              We therefore conclude that the wage
earnings changes in high-bunching areas are not driven by reported earnings manipulation.50
       The analysis in Figures 9 and 10 considers only the …rst and tenth deciles of bct , the areas with
the least and most knowledge about the EITC schedule.                  In Figure 11a, we extend the analysis
to include all neighborhoods by plotting average EITC amounts for wage-earners vs. the level of
sharp bunching bct in their ZIP-3-by-year cell. The average EITC refund e¤ectively measures the
concentration of the earnings distribution around the refund-maximizing region of the schedule.51
Consistent with the earlier results, wage-earners in areas with high sharp bunching have earnings
that produce signi…cantly larger EITC refund amounts.                 A one percentage point increase in bct
raises the EITC refund by $15.9 on average. Wage-earners in the highest-bunching areas earn EITC
refunds that are on average $122 (5.2%) higher than those living in the lowest-bunching (near-zero
knowledge) neighborhoods. Under Assumption 2a, this implies that behavioral responses to the
EITC schedule raise EITC refund amounts by 5.1% in the highest bunching decile.
       Cross-Neighborhood Movers. A natural approach to evaluate Assumption 2a and assess whether
the level of knowledge in a neighborhood has a causal impact on earnings behavior is to again analyze
  50
     One may be concerned that individuals in high-knowledge areas work in the formal sector up the point where they
maximize their EITC refund and then work in informal jobs. Two pieces of evidence suggest that this is unlikely.
First, our analysis of audit data (Chetty et al. 2012) shows that the likelihood of misreporting total earnings is no
higher for individuals who report wage earnings in the plateau. Second, as we show below, most of the excess mass
in the plateau comes from individuals raising W-2 earnings in the phase-in region in high-knowledge areas. The
phase-in response cannot be driven by under-reporting of income from other jobs.
  51
     EITC refund amounts also vary with marital status and number of children. Although di¤erences in these
demographics across areas could in principle a¤ect the estimate in Figure 11a, we …nd very similar results within
each of these demographic groups.


                                                         29
changes in behavior for individuals who move across neighborhoods. Figure 11b plots changes in
EITC refunds from the year before the move (event year -1) to the year after the move (event year
0) against the change in sharp bunching bct from the old to the new neighborhood.                        This …gure
exactly replicates Figure 6, restricting the sample to wage earners. Note that Figure 11b can be
interpreted a …rst-di¤erenced version of Figure 11a, relating changes in EITC refunds to changes
in local knowledge for movers using our movers analysis sample.
       Figure 11b shows that wage-earners who move to higher bct ZIP-3s change their earnings behav-
ior so that their EITC refunds rise sharply. That is, increases in information in one’s neighborhood
lead to earnings responses that raise EITC refund amounts. In contrast, for individuals who move
to areas with lower levels of sharp bunching, the slope of the relationship has, if anything, the oppo-
site sign.52 We reject the null hypothesis that there is no kink in the slope of the control functions
at 0 with p < 0:0001. This …nding echoes the pattern of learning and memory documented above
for the self-employed in Figure 6. The asymmetric persistence of past neighborhoods rules out a
broad class of omitted variable biases that may arise from simple di¤erences in characteristics across
areas with di¤erent levels of sharp bunching. The …nding that wage-earners making real decisions
exhibit asymmetry also provides further evidence that the spatial heterogeneity in EITC response
is due to knowledge about the schedule rather than tax compliance rates or other factors.53
       While these …ndings show that neighborhoods have a causal e¤ect on individuals’ earnings
behavior, they do not identify the extent to which individuals actively change their own behavior
when exposed to more information about the EITC. Part of the increase in EITC refund amounts
when individuals move to areas with higher bct in Figure 11b could in principle arise simply because
individuals draw wage o¤ers from a distribution that is more concentrated around the EITC plateau
even if they do not actively reoptimize in response to the program incentives themselves.54 We now
turn to a research design that allows us to isolate individuals’ responses to changes in incentives
  52
      The only parameter that is non-parametrically identi…ed in this …gure is the kink at 0. The negative slope of
the control function to the left of zero could be due to various factors that covary smoothly with the change in bct .
For instance, because individuals who experience large drops in bct come from high bunching areas, di¤erences across
areas in movers’characteristics could generate di¤erences in slopes. The identifying assumption underlying inference
from the kink is that any such correlated factors have smooth impacts on the slopes.
   53
      For instance, one may be concerned that norms about tax compliance could have asymmetric persistence: once
one observes someone else misreport earnings, it becomes an acceptable habit. The asymmetric persistence of wage
earnings rules out such models and implies that individuals’ perception of incentives changes when they move to
areas with high sharp bunching.
   54
      Another potential concern is reverse causality: areas with wage earnings distributions that have substantial mass
around the plateau for exogenous reasons may end up having higher sharp bunching as individuals near the plateau
learn how to earn larger refunds. It is di¢ cult to explain the asymmetric pattern in Figure 11b purely with reverse
causality, but it is possible that the magnitudes of the estimates obtained from cross-neighborhood comparisons are
biased by such factors.



                                                          30
more precisely.

V.B        Impacts of Child Birth on Wage Earnings

In this section, we implement a second research design to characterize the impact of the EITC
on wage earnings behavior that does not rely purely on cross-neighborhood comparisons.                       Our
strategy relies on the fact that individuals without children are eligible for only a very small EITC
(see Section III) and therefore serve as a control group that can be used to net out di¤erences
across areas.      We implement this strategy by studying changes in earnings around the birth of
a …rst child.     The …rst birth changes low-income families’ incentives to earn signi…cantly and is
thus a powerful instrument for tax incentives.          The obvious challenge in using child birth as an
instrument for tax incentives is that it a¤ects labor supply directly.             We isolate the impacts of
tax incentives by again using di¤erences in knowledge across neighborhoods.                   In particular, we
compare changes in earnings behavior around child birth for individuals living in areas with high
levels of sharp bunching with those living in low-bunching areas. Low-bunching areas provide a
counterfactual for how earnings behavior would change around child birth in the absence of the tax
incentives.
       We divide our child birth analysis sample into deciles based on sharp bunching in the individual’s
ZIP-3 in the year of child birth, as described in Section IV.D. Figure 12 plots W-2 wage earnings
distributions for wage-earners in the year before (Panel A) and the year of …rst child birth (Panel
B). The distributions are reported for those living in deciles 1, 5, and 10 of the sharp bunching
distribution when they have a child. In the year before child birth, the wage earnings distributions
are virtually identical across areas with low vs. high levels of sharp bunching.55 However, an excess
mass of wage-earners emerges around the plateau in high bunching areas immediately after birth,
showing that individuals in these areas make an e¤ort to obtain a larger EITC refund when making
labor supply choices after child birth. Connecting this result to the cross-sectional correlations in
Table II, Figure 12 essentially shows that individuals who live in areas with a high density of EITC
…lers have heard more about the credit by the time they have a child and therefore respond more
strongly to its incentives.
  55
     In Table II, we showed that areas with higher sharp bunching have a higher density of EITC tax …lers. This is
not inconsistent with the result in Figure 12a. Figure 12a shows that the conditional earnings distributions among
individuals just about to give birth are very similar across areas. However, the unconditional distributions di¤er
across areas (e.g., because of di¤erences in age and number of children). This is why we use an event study around
child birth rather than comparisons of earnings distributions across all individuals with and without children for
identi…cation.




                                                       31
    The identi…cation assumption underlying the research design in Figure 12 is that the direct im-
pacts of child birth on earnings do not vary across neighborhoods with di¤erent levels of knowledge
about the tax code (Assumption 2b). We assess the validity of this “common trends” assumption
by examining trends prior to child birth using an event study design. Let year 0 denote the year in
which the child is born (and hence the family becomes eligible for a larger EITC) and de…ne event
time relative to this year. De…ne an individual’s simulated EITC credit as the EITC an individual
would receive given her wage earnings if she had one child and were single. This simulated EITC
credit is a simple statistic for the concentration of the wage earnings distribution around the EITC
plateau.56
    Figure 13 plots the simulated EITC by event year for wage earners with incomes in the EITC-
eligible range for exactly the same three groups as in Figure 12. For scaling purposes, we normalize
the level of each series at the mean simulated credit in t =             4 by subtracting the decile-speci…c
mean in t =     4 and adding back the mean simulated EITC across the three deciles in t =                4 to all
observations. Simulated EITC amounts trend similarly in low, middle, and high bunching areas
prior to child birth, supporting Assumption 2b.             In the year of child birth, the simulated credit
jumps signi…cantly in high bunching areas relative to low bunching areas, showing that individuals
in high-knowledge areas make an active e¤ort to maintain earnings closer to the refund-maximizing
level after having a child.57 We estimate the magnitude of the impact using di¤erence-in-di¤erences
speci…cations analogous to those used in the movers event studies in Figure 4a, clustering standard
errors at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level.         EITC refunds increase by $85.4 (4.5%) more from the
year before to the year of child birth in the highest bunching decile relative to the lowest bunching
decile.
    In Figure 14a, we expand the analysis to include all neighborhoods by plotting the change in
the simulated EITC from the year before birth (event year -1) to the year of birth (event year 0) vs.
the level of sharp bunching in the individual’s ZIP-3 in the year of birth, which we denote by bct0 .
In this …gure, we include all wage earners with incomes in the EITC-eligible range, as in Figure
12, as well as those with zero earnings (whose simulated credit is zero) to incorporate extensive
margin responses. Consistent with the preceding evidence, individuals living in areas with higher
bct0 (i.e., higher knowledge) have signi…cantly larger increases in simulated EITC amounts around
  56
     We use the simulated credit with …xed parameters in this analysis rather than the actual credit to separate
changes in earnings from mechanical changes in credit amounts when individuals have children.
  57
     The slight divergence between the series in year -1 may occur because individuals in high-bunching areas keep
their jobs prior to birth, recognizing that they will soon be eligible for a large EITC refund.



                                                       32
child birth.     A one percentage point (0.58 standard deviation) increase in bct0 leads to a $26.5
increase in the EITC after child birth, an e¤ect that is statistically signi…cant with p < 0:0001 with
standard errors clustered at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level.
    Endogenous Sample Selection. Our child birth analysis sample makes two restrictions that could
potentially lead to selection bias, thereby violating Assumption 2b. The …rst restriction is that we
can only link parents to children they claim as dependents.58 Because the decision to claim a child
could be endogenous to knowledge about the EITC, this could also potentially bias our estimates
through two channels. First, if a child is never claimed by any parent as a dependent, he or she
is not included in our sample.          In practice, over 97% of children are claimed as dependents on
a tax return within 4 years of their birth.59            Hence, endogeneity arising from whether a child is
claimed at all is minimal.60 Second, selection bias could arise if the person who claims a child is
endogenously selected, e.g. if the family member who gets the highest EITC refund claims the child
in high-knowledge areas. Such selection bias should be manifested in the period prior to child birth,
as it would produce di¤erences in simulated EITC credit amounts in event year -1 in Figures 12a
and 13. Stated di¤erently, we …nd sharp changes in earnings behavior within individuals around
child birth. Bias can arise only if the decision to claim a child is related to changes in earnings
around the time of child birth di¤erentially across areas. While we cannot directly rule out such
dynamic selection patterns, they are unlikely to produce a sharp break in earnings behavior only
in the year of child birth given the smooth and relatively parallel dynamics of earnings across areas
in prior years. Moreover, selection biases are unlikely to explain the asymmetric impacts of past
neighborhoods for movers reported above.
    The second restriction we impose above is to exclude individuals who report non-zero self-
employment income in order to isolate wage earnings responses.                       If the choice to report self-
employment income varies endogenously across areas, this restriction could also bias our estimates
of the impact of the EITC on wage earnings.61                To address this concern, we analyze changes in
   58
      Importantly, we observe date of birth from social security records. Each child’s birth date is therefore measured
independently of parents’ tax …ling behavior; only our link between parents and children is potentially endogenous
to EITC incentives.
   59
      We compute this statistic by comparing the total number of dependents claimed in the tax data to total births in
the U.S. from vital statistics. This ratio is approximately 99% for births between 2000 to 2005. This …gure slightly
overstates our true coverage rate because it ignores children who immigrated to the U.S. and are claimed by their
parents. Comparing vital birth statistics to all individuals recorded in the tax data, we estimate that immigration
at young ages adds less than 0.5% per year to the size of a cohort, and hence obtain a lower bound of 97% for the
fraction of individuals claimed.
   60
      Most children are claimed very quickly after child birth presumably because knowledge that claiming children
yields large tax credits is widespread. Conditional on claiming a child within four years of his or her birth, we …nd no
evidence that parents living in ZIP-3’s with high levels of sharp bunching bct claim a child more quickly after birth.
   61
      For instance, suppose individuals in high-bunching areas are more likely to fabricate self-employment income


                                                          33
W-2 earnings around child birth for the full sample, including both wage-earners and the self-
employed.       We calculate the simulated EITC credit based purely on W-2 wage earnings even
if the individual has self-employment income to isolate wage earnings responses.                          Figure 14b
shows that the relationship between sharp bunching and the change in EITC amounts around
child birth remains highly signi…cant when the self-employed are included, with a point estimate
of $19.4.62     We use this technique to adjust for potential endogenous selection by including self-
employed individuals and computing EITC amounts based on W-2 earnings in all the remaining
tables and …gures.
      Robustness Checks.       In Table III, we assess the robustness of the result in Figure 14b to
alternative speci…cations of the form:

(5)                   EIT Cict =      +   1 bct0   +     2 post   +   3 post   bct0 + Xict + "ict

We estimate (5) using only observations in the year before and the year of child birth, t 2 f 1; 0g.
In this equation, EIT Cict denotes the simulated credit individual i in ZIP-3 c obtains in event
year t, post denotes an indicator for the year of child birth (t = 0), and Xict denotes a vector of
covariates. The coe¢ cient of interest,            3,   measures the impact of a 1 percentage point increase in
sharp bunching bct0 on the change in the simulated credit from the year before to the year after birth.
Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level to account for potential correlation
in earnings across residents of an area. Column 1 of Table III reports                     3   for the speci…cation in
Figure 14b (with no controls Xict ) as a reference.63 Column 2 replicates column 1, restricting the
sample to individuals working at …rms with more than 100 employees (based on the number of
W-2’s).    We continue to …nd a highly signi…cant impact in this subgroup, con…rming that these
changes are not driven purely by manipulation of reported income. The magnitude of the e¤ect is
smaller because this speci…cation excludes those with zero earnings from the sample, eliminating
extensive margin responses. Column 3 adds ZIP-3 …xed e¤ects interacted with the post indicator,
so that    3   is identi…ed purely from variation in bct0 over time within areas.64 The coe¢ cient on
after child birth if their wage earnings put them in the phase-in region rather than the plateau. By excluding those
with self-employment income, we would arti…cally obtain a sample that exhibits more mass in the wage earnings
distribution around the plateau in high-bunching areas.
  62
     The magnitude of the coe¢ cient is attenuated because we e¤ectively miscalculate EITC amounts for self-employed
individuals by using only their wage earnings to simulate their credits. We discuss how this attenuation bias can be
corrected when computing elasticities below.
  63
     In a balanced panel, the estimate of 3 in equation (5) is identical to the estimate obtained from a univariate
regression of the change in EITC amounts on bct0 as in Figure 14b.
  64
     Allowing for ZIP-3 post …xed e¤ects permits every ZIP-3 to have a di¤erent trend in EIT C around child birth.
Hence, the only remaining source of identi…cation for 3 comes from comparing individuals who give birth in di¤erent



                                                             34
bct0 remains large and highly signi…cant in this speci…cation, showing that unobservable di¤erences
across areas do not drive our …ndings.
    A simple placebo test for our child birth research design is to examine changes in behavior for
individuals having their third child instead of …rst child. Individuals with two or three children
were eligible for the same EITC credit during the years of child birth that we analyze (2000 to
2005).    The series in triangles in Figures 14a and 14b plots changes in simulated credit amounts
(again using the one-child EITC schedule) from the year before to the year of the birth of a
third child. Reassuringly, the relationship between neighborhood sharp bunching and changes in
simulated credits around the birth of the third child is a precisely estimated zero, as shown in
column 4 of Table III. This result con…rms that the impacts of child birth on wage earnings do not
vary systematically across neighborhoods in the absence of changes in EITC incentives, supporting
Assumption 2b.
    The estimated impact from the child birth design of a $19.4 increase in the simulated credit
per percentage point of sharp bunching is similar to the corresponding cross-sectional estimate
in Figure 11a of $15.9.   As discussed in Section II, cross-neighborhood comparisons incorporate
endogenous changes in wage rates o¤ered by …rms as a result of shifts in the labor supply curve
induced by the EITC. In contrast, changes in labor supply around child birth do not a¤ect the
equilibrium wage rate a new parent is o¤ered as long as labor markets for parents and non-parents
are not segregated. The fact that both research designs uncover signi…cant and relatively similar
impacts of the EITC on earnings suggests that general equilibrium feedback e¤ects do not fully
undo the partial-equilibrium changes in earnings behavior induced by the EITC. However, we
cannot de…nitively identify the magnitude of general equilibrium e¤ects because our cross-sectional
estimate relies on a strong assumption for identi…cation, namely that low and high bunching areas
would have comparable wage earnings distributions absent the EITC (Assumption 2a).
Phase-In vs. Phase-Out Responses. The welfare consequences of the EITC depend on whether the
higher concentration of earnings around the refund-maximizing plateau of the EITC schedule comes
from increased earnings for those who would have been in the phase-in region or reduced earnings
from those who would have been in the phase-out region.       To isolate the phase-in response, we
de…ne a “simulated phase-in credit”as the phase-in portion of the EITC schedule (for a single earner
with one child) combined with a constant refund above the …rst kink at the refund-maximizing
level.   Analogously, we de…ne a “simulated phase-out credit” as the phase-out portion of the
years within a ZIP-3.



                                                35
schedule combined with a constant refund below the second kink at the refund-maximizing level.
Appendix Figure 4 depicts these two schedules. Formally, we de…ne the simulated phase-in credit
as min(:34    zi ; 3050) and the phase-out credit as max(3050   :16    max(zi   16450; 0); 0). The
simulated phase-in credit is a convenient summary statistic for earnings increases in the phase-in
region because it grows when individuals raise their earnings in the phase-in but is una¤ected by
changes in earnings in the plateau and phase-out regions. The simulated phase-in credit asks, “How
would behavioral responses a¤ect refund amounts if the EITC stayed constant at its maximum level
and was never phased out?” The simulated phase-out credit similarly isolates changes in earnings
behavior in the phase-out region. We de…ne both simulated credits based purely on wage earnings
(but include self-employed individuals in the sample).
   Figure 15a plots changes in the simulated phase-in and phase-out credits around child birth vs.
the degree of sharp bunching. By construction, the two series plotted in Figure 9a sum to the total
change in EITC amounts plotted in Figure 14b. The linear regression coe¢ cients corresponding
to these two series are reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table III.
   Figure 15a shows that the phase-in response is considerably larger than the phase-out re-
sponse. We estimate the portion of the earnings response coming from the phase-in region non-
parametrically as follows. First, based on the analysis in Section IV.D, we assume that individuals
in bottom-decile neighborhoods have no knowledge about the EITC and can therefore be used as a
control group whose behavior is una¤ected by EITC eligibility. In Figure 14b, the mean change in
simulated EITC refunds in the year of child birth in the sample as a whole is $32:9, compared with
 $15:4 for the control neighborhoods in the bottom decile.      Hence, the causal impact of EITC
eligibility on the simulated refund amount is $48:3, an increase of 4:7% relative to the pre-birth
mean of $1; 022. In Figure 15a, the mean change in the simulated phase-in credit in the full sam-
ple is $29.0 larger than in the bottom-decile control neighborhoods.    It follows that on average,
$29:0=$48:3 = 60% of the response to the EITC is driven by increases in earning in the phase-in
region.   Replicating this calculation for the top decile, we estimate that $86:9=$123:9 = 70% of
the earnings response in the highest-knowledge areas comes from the phase-in region, with the
remaining 30% coming from the phase-out region.
Intensive vs. Extensive Margin Responses. To identify extensive-margin responses, we de…ne “work-
ing”as having positive W-2 earnings in a given year. We use the full sample (including non-workers,
self-employed individuals, and wage earners) for this analysis. Figure 15b plots the change in the
fraction of individuals working from the year before to the year of child birth vs. sharp bunching;


                                                36
the corresponding regression coe¢ cient is reported in column 7 of Table III.65 Consistent with
prior studies, we …nd signi…cant extensive-margin responses. Individuals living in areas with high
levels of sharp bunching are more likely to continue working after they have a child than those
living in areas with little sharp bunching.
    To estimate the relative magnitude of intensive and extensive margin responses, we assume that
extensive-margin entrants earn the average EITC refund in the child birth sample conditional on
working ($1; 075). Under this assumption, the extensive-margin response increases EITC refunds
by $10.8 on average relative to the bottom decile control neighborhoods.                    Hence, the extensive
margin contributes $10:8=$48:3 = 22% to the increase in EITC refunds. Replicating this calculation
under the assumption that extensive-margin entrants earn the maximum EITC refund, we obtain
an upper bound on the extensive-margin response of 63%. This …nding constitutes non-parametric
evidence that the EITC induces signi…cant changes in labor supply even among individuals who
are already working, con…rming the …nding in column 2 of Table III.
    Finally, in column 8 of Table III, we analyze the number of W-2’s per individual, which is a proxy
for the number of distinct jobs an individual held over the year. A one percentage point increase
in sharp bunching leads to a 0.017 (0.018 SD) increase in the number of W-2’s …led after child
birth. Hence, part of the increase in earnings in the phase-in region comes from individuals taking
additional part-time jobs. Adjustment in part-time jobs could explain why earnings responses to
the EITC are larger in the phase-in than the phase-out. In our child birth sample, individuals in
the phase-in have 1.59 W-2’s per person, at which they earn $2,400 per job on average.                        Those
in the phase-out have 1.43 W-2’s with mean earnings of $13,700 per W-2.                       Because they work
more small, part-time jobs, individuals in the phase-in may be able to change their earnings more
easily than those in the phase-out. An alternative explanation for larger phase-in responses is that
current perceptions of the EITC focus on phase-in incentives more than the phase-out incentives.


                   VI      Elasticity Estimates and Policy Impacts

In this section, we use our estimates to quantify the impacts of the EITC in two ways.                         First,
we calculate the elasticities implied by the estimated earnings responses. Second, we evaluate the
impacts of the EITC on poverty rates.
  65
     The mean fraction of individuals working in this sample is 84% in the year before child birth and 86% in the year
of child birth. The fraction working increases around child birth because this sample includes predominantly young,
unmarried women who are entering the labor force and because our de…nition of “working” is de…ned as having any
earnings over a year. By de…nition, the newborn child is present only for part of the birth year.



                                                         37
VI.A           Elasticity Estimates

One of the main lessons of our study is that the impacts of tax policies cannot be characterized
using a single elasticity, as the di¤use behavioral responses we have documented do not conform to
the predictions of neoclassical labor supply models. Nevertheless, to benchmark the responses we
document to those identi…ed in the prior literature, we calculate the elasticities that would generate
the increases in EITC refunds we observe under a neoclassical intensive-margin labor supply model.
Importantly, the elasticities reported below should not be interpreted as structural parameters and
cannot be used to forecast the impacts of other tax reforms on earnings behavior. Obtaining such
elasticity estimates would require estimating a model that incorporates both intensive and extensive
margins as well as the frictions that generate di¤use bunching.66
       Panel A of Table IV reports elasticity estimates for wage earners. The …rst column reports the
intensive-margin elasticity that would generate an increase in EITC refunds commensurate to the
empirical estimates above. We compute these elasticities as follows. With a standard iso-elastic
labor supply function, a frictionless model with elasticity " implies

                                      log(z +      z)     log(z) = " log(1           )

where          is the actual marginal tax rate an individual faces because of the EITC, z is the level
earnings when the EITC marginal tax rate is perceived to be zero, and z +                            z is earnings when
the EITC marginal tax rate is accurately perceived to be .67                      The change in the EITC refund
induced by the earnings response is:                    z=         [(1    )"    1] z. Hence, the mean increase in
EITC refunds due to behavioral responses in the phase-in and phase-out regions is

                                                          "                                   "
(6)                     EIT C =        1 1   [(1        1)    1] z1      2 2   [(1       2)       1] z2

where      1   =    34% and    2   = 16% denote the phase-in and phase-out tax rates,                     1   = 17:8% and

 2    = 23:4% denote the fraction of wage earners with non-zero earnings in the phase-in and phase-
out regions in the year after birth in our child birth sample, and z1 = $5; 725 and z2 = $23; 217
denote the mean earnings levels for wage earners in the phase-in and phase-out regions.68
  66
     In a frictionless labor supply model, the increase in EITC refunds would come primarily from a point mass in
the wage earnings distribution at the kink points of the EITC schedule. A model that produces the di¤use responses
we observe empirically would yield di¤erent elasticity estimates.
  67
     For simplicity, this equation assumes that individuals remain on the interior of the budget segment when they
increase earnings by z. Accounting for the kinks in the EITC schedule signi…cantly complicates the calculations
and has little impact on the estimated elasticities.
  68
     When calculating 1 , 2 , z1 , and z2 , we assume that those in the bottom half of the plateau region are in the
phase-in and those in the upper half of the plateau are in the phase-out for simplicity. In addition, we restrict attention


                                                              38
     We calculate the impact of the EITC on refund amounts               EIT C under our maintained assump-
tion that individuals in the bottom decile of the sharp bunching distribution have no knowledge
about the EITC. Recall that in Figure 14b, the mean impact of obtaining EITC eligibility af-
ter child birth in the sample as a whole is $48:3 larger than in the bottom-decile neighborhoods.
10.8% of individuals are self-employed in this sample. As in our model, we assume that these
self-employed individuals do not change their real wage earnings, as adjusting self-employment
income is less costly. Therefore, the impact of the EITC on the treated (i.e., the wage earners)
is   EIT C = $48:3=(1         :108) = $54:1. Substituting this value into (6) and solving for " yields
" = 0:21 (Table IV, column 1, row 1).
     This estimate of " assumes that the earnings elasticity is the same in the phase-in and phase-out
regions of the schedule. However, as demonstrated in Figure 15a, responses in the phase-in and
phase-out regions are quite di¤erent in magnitude. We estimate separate phase-in and phase-out
region elasticities using the formulas

                                                                             "1
                              Phase-in EITC =              1   1   [(1     1)     1] z1
                                                                             "2
                             Phase-out EITC =              2   2   [(1     2)     1] z2

We compute the changes in EITC amounts by comparing mean changes in the simulated credits
to changes for individuals in the bottom decile in Figure 15a. The resulting estimates, reported
in columns 2 and 3 of Table IV, are a phase-in elasticity of 0.31 and a phase-out elasticity of
0.14. These estimates con…rm that the EITC induces signi…cantly greater earnings increases in the
phase-in region than earnings reductions in the phase-out region.
     Finally, in column 4 of Table III, we report estimates of extensive-margin elasticities. We de…ne
the participation tax rate     ext   as the mean EITC refund as a percentage of mean income conditional
on working. As above, we calculate the impact of the EITC on participation rates as the mean
change around child birth minus the change for individuals in bottom-decile neighborhoods in Figure
15b. We de…ne ^"ext as the log change in participation rates induced by the EITC (starting from
the sample mean) divided by the log change in the net-of-participation-tax rate. This yields an
estimate of ^"ext = 0:19. Note that the EITC has smaller e¤ects on average tax rates than marginal
tax rates: the participation tax rate changes by 13% on average in our sample, whereas the phase-in
to individuals with positive earnings because (6) assumes that all behavioral responses come from intensive-margin
changes. Since part of the change in EITC refunds EIT C is due to extensive margin responses, these elasticity
calculations should again only be interpreted as the elasticities one would need in a pure intensive margin model to
match the observed change in EIT C.



                                                        39
subsidy rate is nearly three times larger (34%). This is why extensive-margin responses account for
only 22% of the overall increase in EITC refunds even though the intensive and extensive margin
elasticity estimates are roughly comparable in magnitude.
      The preceding elasticities apply to the country as a whole given the average level of knowledge
about the EITC schedule between 2000 and 2005. In row 2 of Table IV, we report elasticities for
areas in the top decile of sharp bunching bct , i.e. the areas with the highest levels of knowledge in
our sample. We calculate these elasticities using the same method as above, but de…ne the increase
in EITC refunds as the change in EITC refund amounts in the top decile relative to the bottom
decile in the year of child birth. The elasticities are roughly 2-3 times larger in areas in the top
bunching decile relative to the country as whole.
      Panel B of Table IV replicates Panel A including self-employment income.             It reports total
earnings elasticities, calculated as in Panel A but using total earnings instead of wage earnings.
Total earnings elasticities are much larger because self-employed individuals exhibit large responses
to the EITC, especially in high bunching areas. The mean earnings elasticity is 0.36 in the U.S. as
a whole and 1.06 in the top bunching decile. Even though less than a …fth of EITC claimants are
self-employed, they account for a substantial fraction of the increase in EITC refunds via behavioral
responses. As discussed above, most of the self-employed response is driven by non-compliance.
Reducing non-compliance responses by auditing or more stringent reporting requirements for self-
employment income could make the EITC more e¤ective at raising real earnings.

VI.B       Impacts on the Income Distribution

We measure the impact of the EITC on the earnings distribution by calculating the fraction of
wage-earners in our cross-sectional analysis sample below various fractions of the o¢ cial poverty
line (corresponding to the individual’s marital status and number of children). Let F (z) be the
fraction of individuals below threshold z. We estimate the causal impact of the EITC on F (z)
using our child birth design. Let t =       1; 0 denote the years before and of child birth. Let bd = 1
denote ZIP-3-by-birth-year cells in the …rst decile of the bunching distribution, the no-knowledge
control group. The EITC treatment e¤ect is given by the di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimator:

(7)         F (z) = [F (z; t = 0)   F (z; t =   1)]   [F (z; t = 0jbd = 1)   F (z; t =   1jbd = 1)]

The …rst di¤erence is the change in the fraction of individuals below z in the full population; the
second is the same di¤erence within neighborhoods in the lowest bunching decile. We estimate the


                                                      40
fraction who would have been below z absent the EITC in the full population as F (z)        F (z).
   We characterize the impact of the EITC on the average earnings distribution in 2000-5, the
period over which we estimate the treatment e¤ect        F (z) using our child birth sample.    The
…rst row of Table V shows our estimate of F (z) without the EITC for various multiples of the
poverty line. For instance, we estimate that 31:3% of wage-earners in our cross-sectional analysis
sample – which consists of EITC-eligible households with children – would be below the poverty
line without the EITC. In the second row, we add in EITC payments based on the individual’s
wage earnings, marital status, and number of dependents. We assume that all eligible households
claim their bene…t and hold wage earnings for each household …xed at the same level as in the …rst
row. The di¤erence between the …rst and second rows thus re‡ects the mechanical e¤ect of EITC
payments on post-tax incomes. EITC payments shift the income distribution upward signi…cantly;
the fraction below the poverty line falls to 21:4%. As 15% of all US households with children
are EITC eligible, the EITC reduces overall poverty rates in the population by approximately 1.5
percentage points. The third row reports statistics for the observed post-EITC income distribution
in the aggregate economy. This row incorporates behavioral responses to the EITC on top of the
mechanical e¤ects in the second row. Behavioral responses to the EITC further increase incomes
at the lowest levels, as workers respond to the marginal subsidy on the phase-in. Taking behavioral
responses into account, the fraction below the poverty line with the EITC is 21:0%.
   In the last row of Table V, we consider the e¤ect of increasing knowledge of the EITC everywhere
to the level observed in the highest sharp bunching decile. This row asks, “How would the EITC
a¤ect the US earnings distribution if knowledge about the schedule were at the level in the highest
bunching decile?” We estimate this e¤ect by recalculating (7), replacing the …rst term with the
CDFs in the top bunching decile instead of the full sample. We then add this causal e¤ect back to
the counterfactual distribution calculated in the …rst row of Table V and recompute EITC refund
amounts. The increased level of knowledge would further lower the fraction below the poverty line
to 20:2%.
   Table V yields three main lessons. First, the impacts of the EITC on inequality come primarily
through its mechanical e¤ects.     Second, behavioral responses tend to reinforce the mechanical
e¤ects of the EITC in raising incomes of the lowest earning households. For instance, the fraction
earning less than half the poverty line – which is near the end of the phase-in region – falls from
13.2% to 8.9% due to the mechanical transfer and falls further to 8.2% because individuals in the
phase-in raise their earnings.   In contrast, behavioral responses to the disincentive e¤ects of the


                                                 41
EITC in the phase-out region of the schedule have smaller impacts: the fraction earning less than
200% of the poverty line falls from 77.1% to 70.8% due to the mechanical e¤ect, but rises to only
71.3% when incorporating behavioral responses. Third, the aggregate response to the EITC still
comes from a subset of neighborhoods where behavioral responses are quite large. As knowledge
about the EITC’s structure continues to spread, the program’s impacts on the aggregate wage
earnings distribution are likely to grow.


                                      VII     Conclusion

A growing literature …nds that many policies have di¤use e¤ects on economic behavior that are
inconsistent with neoclassical models because of inattention and other frictions. Identifying di¤use
impacts has thus emerged as one of the major challenges for applied work on policy evaluation.
This paper has developed a new method of addressing this challenge by using di¤erences across
neighborhoods in knowledge about the policy to obtain counterfactuals for di¤use responses. We
apply this method to characterize the impacts of the EITC on earnings behavior by using the degree
of sharp bunching at the refund-maximizing income level by the self-employed as a proxy for local
knowledge about the EITC schedule. We …nd that areas with higher levels of knowledge exhibit
signi…cantly more mass in the wage earnings distribution around the EITC plateau. In addition,
changes in marginal incentives due to child birth have larger impacts on wage earnings behavior in
areas with higher levels of knowledge about the EITC.
   The wage earnings response comes primarily from intensive-margin increases in earnings by
individuals in the phase-in region.   As a result, behavioral responses to the EITC reinforce its
direct impacts in raising the incomes of low-income families with children. Overall, we conclude
that the EITC has increased earnings and net income levels among low-income families in the U.S.,
with especially large impacts in areas with a high density of EITC claimants.
   Our analysis can be extended and generalized in several dimensions. Most directly, one could
use the counterfactuals developed here to study the impacts of the EITC on other behaviors, such
as contribution to tax-deferred savings accounts, family formation, and earnings dynamics. One
could also use a similar approach to develop proxies for knowledge about other policies and study
their impacts.   For instance, several studies have documented sharp bunching around the kinks
of the Social Security earnings test schedule (Friedberg 2000, Gruber and Orszag 2003, Haider
and Loughran 2008). Using spatial variation in such bunching, one may be able to characterize
the impacts of Social Security incentives on retirement behavior in the U.S. Similar techniques

                                                42
could also shed light on the impacts of corporate tax credits, which create sharp incentives for
manipulation around thresholds (e.g., Goolsbee 2004), but may a¤ect real investment decisions
more di¤usely. More generally, using low-knowledge groups as counterfactuals could help uncover
the impacts of a variety of important policies whose e¤ects have proven di¢ cult to characterize
with traditional research designs.




                                              43
References

Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathon Feinstein (1998). “Tax Compliance,” Journal Eco-
nomic Literature, 36:2 : 818-860.
Ashenfelter, Orley (1983) “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programs,”Journal
of the American Statistical Association , 78(383): 517-525.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001) “Network E¤ects And
Welfare Cultures,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 1019-1055.
Bises, Bruno (1990). “Income Tax Perception and Labour Supply in a Sample of Industry Workers,”
Public Finance, 45(1): 3-17.
Bollinger, Christopher, Luis Gonzalez, and James P. Ziliak. 2009. “Welfare Reform and the Level
and Composition of Income.” In Welfare Reform and its Long-Term Consequences for America’s
Poor, James P. Ziliak, ed, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 59-103.
Brown, C.V. (1968). “Misconceptions About Income Tax and Incentives,” Scottish Journal of
Political Economy, 16(2): 1-12.
Card, David and David Lee. “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Speci…cation Error”Journal
of Econometrics, 142(2): 655-674.
Chetty, Raj (2012). “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and
Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica 80(3): 969-1018.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Peter Ganong, Alan H. Plumley, Kara E. Leibel, and Emmanuel
Saez (2012), “Taxpayer Response to the EITC: Evidence from IRS National Research Program.”
Tables available at http://obs.rc.fas.harvard.edu/chetty/eitc_nrp_tabs.pdf
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri (2011). “Adjustment Costs, Firm
Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 749-804.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez (2012), “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an Ex-
periment with EITC Recipients,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(1): 1-31.
Cilke, James (1998). “A Pro…le of Non-Filers.” U.S. Department of the Treasury, O¢ ce of Tax
Analysis Working Paper No. 78.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10): 1931-1958.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2006). “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC
and Labor Supply,” In James Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 20, Cambridge: MIT
Press, pp. 74-110.
Eissa, Nada and Je¤rey Liebman (1996). “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 605-637.
Friedberg, Leora (2000). “The Labor Supply E¤ects of the Social Security Earnings Test,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 82 (1): 48-63.
Fujii, Edwin T. and Cli¤ord B. Hawley (1988). “On the Accuracy of Tax Perceptions,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 70(2): 344-347.
Gelber, Alexander, and Joshua W. Mitchell (2012) “Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from
Single Women and Men,” Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.


                                               44
Goolsbee, Austan (2004). “The Impact of the Corporate Income Tax: Evidence from State Orga-
nizational Form Data,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(11): 2283-99.
Grogger, Je¤rey (2003). “The E¤ects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Wel-
fare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families,”Review of Economics and Statistics
85 (2), 394-408.
Gruber, Jonathan and Peter Orszag (2003). “Does the social security earnings test a¤ect labor
supply and bene…ts receipt?” National Tax Journal, 4(56):755-773.
Haider, Steven J. and David Loughran (2008). “The E¤ect of the Social Security Earnings Test
on Male Labor Supply: New Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data.” Journal of Human
Resources 43(1):57-87.
Hausman, Jerry A. (1981). “Labor Supply,” in How Taxes A¤ect Economic Behavioral, Henry
Aaron and Joseph Pechman eds.Washington D.C.: Brookings Institute.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin, and John Karl Scholz (2011). “Examining the E¤ect of
The Earned Income Tax Credit on the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare.” Duke
University Working Paper.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz (2003). “The Earned Income Tax Credit”in Robert Mo¢ tt,
ed., Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz (2006). “Examining the E¤ect of the Earned Income Tax
Credit on the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare.” NBER Working Paper 11968.
Internal Revenue Service (1996). Federal Tax Compliance Research: Individual Income Tax Gap
Estimates for 1985, 1988, and 1992, Publication 1415 (Rev. 4-96), Government Printing Press:
Washington, D.C.
Internal Revenue Service (2011). Earned Income Credit (EIC), 2009 Publication 596. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Press.
Internal Revenue Service (2012). Statistics of Income: Individual Income Tax Returns, 2010 Pub-
lication 1304. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Press.
Kleven, Henrik, Claus T. Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez (2009). “Why Can Modern Governments
Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,”NBER Working Paper 15218.
Kleven, Henrik J., and Mazhar Waseem (2012). “Behavioral Responses to Notches: Evidence from
Pakistani Tax Records,” London School of Economics Working Paper, April 2012.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Christian Pop-Eleches (2007). “Electronic Filing, Tax Preparers and
Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics. 91:1351-1367.
Leigh, Andrew (2010). “Who Bene…ts from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence among
Recipients, Coworkers and Firms,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Berkeley
Electronic Press, 10(1).
Liebman, Je¤rey (1998). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and the
Income Distribution,” in James Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 12, Cambridge: MIT
Press, pp. 83-123.
Liebman, Je¤rey and Richard Zeckhauser (2004). “Schmeduling”, Harvard University mimeo.
Maag, Elaine (2005). “Paying the Price? Low-Income Parents and the Use of Paid Tax Preparers,”
New Federalism: National Survey of America’s Families B-64, Urban Institute.



                                              45
Meyer, Bruce (1995). “Natural and Quasi- Experiments in Economics.” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics. 13(2): 151-161.
Meyer, Bruce (2010). “The E¤ects of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Recent Reforms.” Ed.
Je¤rey Brown, Tax Policy and the Economy, 24(1), Cambridge: MIT Press, 153-180.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum (1999). “ Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” NBER Working Paper 7363.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 1063-1114.
Plueger, Dean (2009). “Earned Income Tax Credit Participation Rate for Tax Year 2005,”Internal
Revenue Service, available at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/09resconeitcpart.pdf.
Ross Phillips, Katherin (2001). “Who Knows About the Earned Income Tax Credit?” Urban
Institute policy brief, No. B-27, January.
Rothstein, Jesse (2010). “Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax
Incidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1), 177–208.
Saez, Emmanuel (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2(3), 180–212.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel B. Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz (2012). “The Elasticity of Taxable Income
with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1),
3-50.
Slemrod, Joel (2007): “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion,”Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21, 25–48.
Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin Ross Phillips, and Michael A. O’Connor (2002). “The Earned
Income Tax Credit: Expectation, Knowledge, Use, and Economic and Social Mobility,” in Bruce
Meyer and Douglas Holtz-Eakin, eds. Making Work Pay, Russell Sage Foundation: New York, also
in National Tax Journal 53(4): 1187–1209.
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth. “The E¤ects of Racial Animus on Voting: Evidence Using Google
Search Data.” Harvard University mimeo, 2011.
U.S. Census Bureau (2012) “Internet Use in the United States: October 2009.”
http://www.census.gov/hhes/computer/publications/2009.html




                                             46
                                        TABLE I
           Summary Statistics for Cross-Sectional Analysis Sample, 1999-2009

                      Variable                                     Mean                          Std. Dev.
                                                                    (1)                             (2)


Income Measures
  Total Earnings                                                 $20,091                         $10,784
  Wage Earnings                                                  $18,308                         $12,537
  Self-Employment Income                                         $1,770                          $6,074
  Indicator for Non-Zero Self-Emp. Income                         19.6%                           39.7%
  Number of W-2's                                                  1.32                            0.94

Tax Credits
 EITC Refund Amount                                               $2,543                          $1,454
 Claimed EITC                                                     88.9%                           31.4%
 Tax Professional Usage                                           69.6%                           46.0%

Demographics
 Age                                                                37.3                           13.3
 Number of Children                                                 1.7                            0.8
 Married                                                           30.3%                          45.9%
 Female (for single filers)                                        73.0%                          44.4%

Neighborhood (ZIP-3) Characteristics
 Self-Emp. Sharp Bunching                                          2.05%                          1.73%
 EITC Filer Density                                                 0.22                           0.61
 State EITC Top-Up Rate                                            5.00%                          9.17%

Number of Observations                                         219,742,011

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the cross-sectional sample, which includes primary filers in our core
sample (defined in Section III) who file a tax return, report one or more children, and have income in the EITC-eligible
range. We restrict the sample to 1999-2009, the years for which we have W-2 earnings data. Total earnings, which
includes wage earnings and self-employment earnings, is the earnings measure used to calculate EITC refunds.
Self-employment income is income reported on Schedule C. Wage earnings are earnings reported on Form W-2 by
employers. We trim all income measures at -$20K and $50K. Tax professional usage is the fraction of individuals
using a third-party tax preparer. Age is defined as of December 31 of a given tax year. Number of children is
number of EITC-eligible dependents claimed on Schedule EIC; for those who do not file Schedule EIC, it is the
number of non-elderly dependents claimed on Form 1040. Statistics for neighborhood variables weight ZIP-3 level
means by the number of EITC-eligible individuals with children in the cross-sectional analysis sample. Self-
employed sharp bunching is the fraction of EITC-eligible filers with children who both report total earnings within
$500 of the first kink point in the EITC schedule and have non-zero self-employment earnings. EITC filer density is
the number of EITC-eligible filers (measured in 1000's) per square mile in tax year 2000. State EITC top-up rate is
state EITC as a fraction of the federal credit (coded as 0 for states with no top-up).
                                                        TABLE II
                                       Cross-Sectional Correlates of Sharp Bunching


             Dependent Variable:                           Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rate in ZIP-3 (%)


                                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)


EITC Filer Density                            1.93         1.82                                  0.44        0.69
  in ZIP-3                                   (0.05)       (0.05)                                (0.06)      (0.06)

Tax Professional Usage                                                 9.86                      3.02        3.46
 in ZIP-3                                                             (1.48)                    (0.51)      (0.56)

Google Search Intensity                                                             0.30         0.14        0.19
 for "Tax"                                                                         (0.05)       (0.03)      (0.03)

State EITC Top-Up Rate                                                                                                    0.07
                                                                                                                         (0.05)

State Non-Compliance Rate                                                                                                             -1.51
                                                                                                                                      (5.32)

Demographic Controls                                         x                                     x            x

State Fixed Effects                                                                                             x

Year                                         2000         2000         2008         2008        2008         2008         2000        2000

R-squared                                    0.603        0.798       0.169        0.032        0.728        0.848       0.105        0.002

Number of Observations                        873          873          883         875          870          870          886          51

Notes: Each column reports estimates from an OLS regression run at the ZIP-3 level, weighted by the number of individuals in each ZIP-3 in
the cross-sectional analysis sample. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. EITC filer density is the number of EITC filers (measured
in 1000's) per square mile in the ZIP-3. Tax professional usage is the fraction of EITC filers who use a professional tax preparer in the ZIP-3.
Google search intensity for "tax" is the fraction of all Google searches in the ZIP-3 for phrases that include the word "tax" divided by standard
deviation of this measure, so that the variable is scaled in standard deviation units. State EITC top-up rate is the size of the state EITC top-
up as a fraction of the federal EITC; states without a state EITC are coded as zero. State non-compliance rate is the fraction of non-EITC-
eligible individuals in a state with a difference between reported and corrected income greater than $1,000; this variable is measured using
data from the 2001 IRS National Research Program audit data. The specification in column 8 is estimated at the state level because the non-
compliance variable is only available by state even though it may vary locally. Note that state EITC top-up is also measured at the state
level, but since that variable does not vary within state, we run the regression at the ZIP-3 level and cluster standard errors by state. The
demographic controls include the percentage of the population that is foreign-born, white, black, Hispanic, Asian, and other. We use data
from year 2000 in some specifications because Census data are available only in 2000; we use data from year 2008 in other specifications
because Google search intensity was high only in more recent years.
                                                                TABLE III
                              Impacts of EITC on Wage Earnings: Regression Estimates from Child Birth Design




                                                           Large       With ZIP-3 Placebo
                                      Baseline             Firms         Fixed    Test: 3rd
                                     Specification         Only         Effects    Child                    Phase-in vs. Phase-out                    Extensive Margin
                                                                                                           Simulated          Simulated            Positive
   Dependent Variable:                               Simulated EITC Refund                                 Phase-in           Phase-out              W-2    Number of
                                                                                                             Credit             Credit             Earnings W-2 Forms
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)                 (7)       (8)


ZIP-3 Self-Emp.                           $19.4            $14.4           $34.7           -$1.89             $14.2               $5.2               0.54%            0.017
  Sharp Bunching (%)                      (1.61)           (1.14)          (3.20)          (0.63)             (1.55)             (0.69)              (0.05)          (0.002)

ZIP-3 by Post-Birth                                                           x
  Fixed Effects

Observations                              29.96            13.20           29.96            10.07             29.96              29.96               29.96             29.96
 (millions)

Mean Level of Dep. Var.                  $1,022           $1,198         $1,022             $925             $2,159             $1,913               83.7%             1.78
 in Year Before Birth

Notes: All specifications are estimated using the child birth sample, which includes individuals in the core sample who had their first child between 2000 and 2005, using
only the year before and the year of child birth. All columns include all individuals (wage earners, self-employed, and non-workers). Each column reports estimates from an
OLS regression of an outcome on the level of sharp bunching in the ZIP-3-by-year cell in which the individual gives birth to his or her first child, an indicator for the post-birth
year, and an interaction of sharp bunching and the indicator for the post-birth year. The table reports coefficients on the interaction term, which can be interpreted as the
impact of a one percentage point increase in sharp bunching on the change in the outcome around child birth. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level,
are reported in parentheses. In column 1, the dependent variable is the simulated EITC refund. To calculate the simulated EITC refund, we apply the one-child EITC
schedule for single filers to total household W-2 earnings, regardless of the household's actual structure and self-employment income. Column 2 replicates column 1,
restricting the sample to individuals whose W-2 forms are all issued by firms with 100 or more employees in a given year. Column 3 adds ZIP-3 fixed effects to the
specification in column 1. Column 4 replicates column 1 using individuals having 3rd births instead of 1st births (for whom there is no change in EITC in tax years 2000-
2005) as a placebo test. The dependent variable in column 4 is again the one-child simulated EITC. Columns 5 and 6 decompose the response into the phase-in and
phase-out regions. In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the simulated phase-in credit and the simulated phase-out credit, respectively, which are calculated
based on W-2 earnings as defined in the text. The estimates in columns 5 and 6 mechanically sum to the estimate reported in column 1. The dependent variable in
column 7 is an indicator for having positive W-2 wage earnings. The dependent variable in column 8 is the number of W-2 forms of the individual parent (not the tax return).
The bottom row displays the average level of the dependent variable in the year before birth.
                                          TABLE IV
        Elasticity Estimates Based on Change in EITC Refunds Around Birth of First Child

                                                        Mean               Phase-in            Phase-out            Extensive
                                                       Elasticity          Elasticity          Elasticity           Elasticity
                                                           (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)

                                                     A. Wage Earnings

Elasticity in U.S. 2000-2005                             0.21                0.31                 0.14                 0.19
                                                        (0.012)             (0.018)              (0.015)              (0.019)

Elasticity in top decile ZIP-3s                          0.55                0.84                 0.29                 0.60
                                                        (0.020)             (0.031)              (0.020)              (0.034)

                                                     B. Total Earnings

Elasticity in U.S. 2000-2005                             0.36                0.65                 0.11                 0.36
                                                        (0.017)             (0.030)              (0.006)              (0.019)

Elasticity in top decile ZIP-3s                          1.06                1.70                 0.31                 1.06
                                                        (0.029)             (0.047)              (0.010)              (0.040)

Notes: The first panel reports elasticities using wage earnings responses; the second panel reports elasticities using total
earnings responses (including self-employment income). Standard errors are reported in parentheses. In each panel, the first
row reports the mean elasticity implied for the U.S. as a whole, while the second row reports the elasticity in the top bunching
decile of ZIP-3-by-year cells. The identifying assumption in both cases is that the elasticity is zero in the bottom bunching decile.
Column 1 reports the intensive margin elasticity required in a neoclassical model of frictionless optimization to generate the
observed increases in EITC amounts around child birth. Column 2 reports the elasticity in the phase-in range required to
generate the observed increases in simulated phase-in EITC amounts. Column 3 reports the elasticity in the phase-out range
required to generate the observed increases in the simulated phase-out EITC amounts. Column 4 reports estimates of
participation elasticities. The top decile elasticities are calculated to match the increase in EITC amounts around child birth in
decile 10 relative to decile 1; the U.S. elasticities are calculated to match the mean increase in EITC amounts in the sample as a
whole relative to decile 1. See the text for additional details on the calculation of these elasticities.
                                    TABLE V
      Impact of EITC on Wage Earnings Distribution of EITC-Eligible Households

                                        Percent of EITC-Eligible Households Below Threshold

                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                        50% of      100% of                      150% of      200% of
                                      Poverty Line Poverty Line                 Poverty Line Poverty Line

No EITC Counterfactual                    13.15%              31.31%               53.81%               77.06%


EITC with No Behavioral                    8.92%              21.37%               41.56%               70.82%
  Response

EITC with Avg. Behavioral                  8.16%              21.00%               41.97%               71.29%
  Response in U.S.

EITC with Top Decile                       6.73%              20.24%               42.56%               72.08%
  Behavioral Response

Notes: This table presents CDF's of wage earnings distributions under various scenarios. Each column reports the
CDF of the income distribution of EITC-eligible wage earners with dependents at various thresholds relative to the
Federal Poverty Line (FPL). We calculate the FPL for each observation in our sample based on year, marital status
and number of children. The first row shows statistics for the counterfactual wage earnings distribution if there were
no EITC. To construct this distribution, we first estimate the causal impact of the EITC on wage earnings using the
difference-in-differences estimator around child birth discussed in the text. We then subtract this estimate of the
causal impact of the EITC from the CDF of the observed unconditional wage earnings distribution in our sample
between 2000-2005. The second row recomputes the CDF in the first row after mechanically adding the EITC
payments each household would receive based on its characteristics. The third row reports the observed CDF in
our sample using the unconditional post-EITC wage earnings distribution. This row incorporates the effects of both
mechanical transfers and behavioral responses to the EITC. The fourth row reports the counterfactual net earnings
distribution if the level of information increased in all areas to that of neighborhoods in the highest decile of self-
employed sharp bunching in our sample. We estimate this effect by recalculating the difference-in-differences
estimate of the causal impact of the EITC using the top bunching decile instead of the full sample. We then add
this causal effect back to the counterfactual distribution calculated in the first row and recompute EITC refund
amounts.
                                          APPENDIX TABLE I
            Impacts of EITC on Total Earnings: Regression Estimates from Child Birth Design


                                                     Placebo
                                Baseline With ZIP-3 Test: 3rd                                                      Extensive
                               Specification Effects  Child                      Phase-in vs. Phase-out             Margin
                                                                                 Simulated       Simulated         Positive
  Dependent Variable:                  Simulated EITC Refund                     Phase-in        Phase-out          Total
                                                                                   Credit          Credit          Earnings
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)


ZIP-3 Self-Emp.                     $44.2           $47.5           $2.1           $36.9             $7.3            0.97%
  Sharp Bunching (%)                (2.60)          (0.99)         (0.86)          (2.39)           (0.81)           (0.07)

ZIP-3 by Post-Birth                                    x
  Fixed Effects

Observations                        29.96           29.96          10.07            29.96           29.96            29.96
 (millions)

Notes: This table replicates selected columns from Table III using total earnings (self-employment income plus wage earnings) to
calculate the simulated EITC refund. See Table III for details on the variables and specifications.
                                                                       FIGURE 1
               Aggregate Earnings Distributions for EITC-Eligible Tax Filers
                                                              a) All Households with Children in 2008
                                                    5%                                                                  15k



                                                    4%                                                                  12k

                            Percent of Tax Filers
                                                    3%                                                                  9k




                                                    2%                                                                  6k


                                                                                          Two or More Children
                                                    1%                                                                  3k

                                                                              One Child

                                                    0%                                                                  0k
                                                         $0     $10K             $20K            $30K            $40K
                                                                       Total Earnings (Real 2010 $)
                                                                  One Child                   Two or More Children


                                                              b) Wage-Earners with Children in 2008
                                                    5%                                                                  15k



                                                    4%                                                                  12k
                            Percent of Tax Filers




                                                    3%                                                                  9k




                                                    2%                                                                  6k


                                                                                          Two or More Children
                                                    1%                                                                  3k

                                                                              One Child

                                                    0%                                                                  0k
                                                         $0     $10K             $20K            $30K            $40K
                                                                       Total Earnings (Real 2010 $)
                                                                  One Child                   Two or More Children


Notes: Panel A plots the distribution of total earnings for all individuals in our cross-sectional analysis sample in 2008,
which includes primary tax filers who report one or more children and have income in the EITC-eligible range. This and all
subsequent distributions are histograms with $1,000 bins centered around the first kink of the EITC schedule. Total earnings
is the total amount of earnings used to calculate the EITC and is essentially the sum of wage earnings and self-employment
income reported on form 1040. We plot separate distributions for households claiming one child and households claiming two
or more children. Panel B repeats Panel A for wage earners, i.e. households who report no self-employment (Schedule C)
income in 2008. Each panel also shows the EITC credit schedule for single filers with one and two or more children in 2008
(right scale). The dashed lines depict the income level that maximizes refunds net of other tax liabilities. Married households
filing jointly face schedules with the same first kink point, but a plateau region extended by $3,000. In this and all subsequent
figures, dollar values are scaled in 2010 real dollars using the IRS inflation adjustment.
                                                                           FIGURE 2
                                      Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods




Notes: This figure plots sharp bunching rates by ZIP-3 in 2008. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in
the cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into
deciles within the 2008 cross-sectional sample. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                            FIGURE 3
         Earnings Distributions in Lowest vs. Highest Sharp Bunching Deciles

                                  8%
          Percent of Tax Filers




                                  6%



                                  4%



                                  2%




                                  0%

                                       -$10k          $0                $10k             $20k                $30k
                                                Total Earnings Relative to First EITC Kink
                                               Lowest Bunching Decile              Highest Bunching Decile


Notes: This figure plots the distribution of total earnings for individuals living in ZIP-3-by-year cells in the highest and
lowest deciles of self-employed sharp bunching. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the percentage of EITC claimants
with children in the ZIP-3-by-year cell who report total earnings within $500 of the first EITC kink and have non-zero
self-employment income. We use all years in the cross-sectional analysis sample (1996-2009) in this figure. We divide the
observations into deciles after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. The
figure includes individuals with both 1 and 2+ children by plotting total earnings minus the first kink point of the relevant
EITC schedule, so that 0 denotes the refund-maximizing point.
                                                                                               FIGURE 4
                                                                                 Event Studies of Movers
                                                                                        a) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching
                                                            5%
                                                                       Effect of Moving to
                                                                       10th Decile = 1.93
                                                                                    (0.15)



                            Self-Employed Sharp Bunching
                                                            4%
                                                                       Effect of Moving to
                                                                       1st Decile = -0.41
                                                                                    (0.13)
                                                            3%



                                                            2%



                                                            1%



                                                            0%
                                                                  -4                     -2               0               2              4
                                                                                                    Event Year
                                                                       Movers to Lowest              Movers to Middle         Movers to Highest
                                                                       Bunching Decile               Bunching Decile          Bunching Decile




                                                                                              b) EITC Refund Amount

                                                           2000
                                                                       Effect of Moving to
                                                                       10th Decile = $150.1
                                                                                     (25.4)

                                                           1800        Effect of Moving to
                                                                       1st Decile = $5.1
                                                                                   (22.3)
                            EITC Refund ($)




                                                           1600




                                                           1400




                                                           1200
                                                                  -4                     -2               0               2              4
                                                                                                    Event Year
                                                                       Movers to Lowest              Movers to Middle         Movers to Highest
                                                                       Bunching Decile               Bunching Decile          Bunching Decile



Notes: Each panel plots an event study of individuals who move across ZIP-3s. We define event time as the calender year
minus the year of the move, so year 0 is the year in which the individual moves. The figure is drawn using the movers sample,
which includes all individuals in our core sample who move across ZIP-3s in any year between 2000 and 2005. If an individual
moves more than once, we use only the first move. To construct the figure, we first define the degree of bunching for prior
residents of ZIP-3 c in year t as the sharp bunching rate for individuals in the cross-sectional analysis sample living in ZIP-3
c in year t − 1. We then divide the ZIP-3-by-year cells into ten deciles of prior residents’ bunching rates by splitting the
individual-level observations in the movers sample into ten equal-sized groups. Each figure plots outcomes for individuals who
move from ZIP-3-by-year cells in the 5th decile to cells in the 1st, 5th, and 10th deciles. The outcome in Panel A is the rate
of self-employed sharp bunching among the movers themselves. The outcome in Panel B is the mean EITC refund for the
movers. In both panels, we include only individual-year observations in which the mover has one or more children and has
total earnings in the EITC-eligible range. The coefficients and standard errors are estimated using difference-in-differences
regression specifications comparing changes from year -1 to 0 for movers to the 10th or 1st deciles with changes for those
moving to the 5th decile. See text for details. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP-3-by-year of move level.
                                                                                FIGURE 5
                      Total Earnings Distributions Before and After Move
                                                                                   a) Before Move
                                                8%




                                                6%


                            Percent of Movers

                                                4%




                                                2%




                                                0%
                                                 -$10K               $0K                  $10K                $20K            $30K
                                                                            Total Earnings Relative to First Kink
                                                         Movers to Lowest               Movers to Middle             Movers to Highest
                                                         Bunching Decile                Bunching Decile              Bunching Decile




                                                                                    b) After Move
                                                8%




                                                6%
                            Percent of Movers




                                                4%




                                                2%




                                                0%
                                                 -$10K               $0K                  $10K                $20K            $30K
                                                                            Total Earnings Relative to First Kink
                                                         Movers to Lowest               Movers to Middle             Movers to Highest
                                                         Bunching Decile                Bunching Decile              Bunching Decile



Notes: These figures plot the distribution of total earnings before and after moving for the three groups of movers shown in
Figure 4a. Panel A shows the distribution of total earnings relative to the first kink point in the year before the move. Panel
B repeats this exercise for the year of the move. We include individuals with both 1 and 2+ children by plotting total earnings
minus the first kink point of the relevant EITC schedule, so that 0 denotes the refund-maximizing point. See the notes to
Figure 4 for details on sample and decile definitions.
                                                                        FIGURE 6
    Impact of Moving to Neighborhoods with Lower vs. Higher Sharp Bunching


                                      120
          Change in EITC Refund ($)




                                      100

                                                                                                                  β = 59.7
                                                                                                                      (5.7)
                                       80




                                       60
                                                  β = 6.0
                                                     (6.2)
                                                                                        p-value for diff. in slopes: p < 0.0001

                                       40
                                            -1%              -0.5%               0%                 0.5%                      1%

                                                                     Change in ZIP-3 Sharp Bunching

Notes: This figure plots changes in EITC refund amounts from the year before the move (event year -1 in Figure 4) to the
year after the move (event year 0) vs. changes in the level of residents’ sharp bunching across the old and new ZIP-3s. We
define the change in ZIP-3 sharp bunching as the difference between bunching of prior residents of the ZIP-3 where the mover
lives before the move and bunching of the ZIP-3 where the mover lives after the move. As in Figure 4, bunching for prior
residents of ZIP-3 c in year t is defined as the sharp bunching rate in year t for individuals in the cross-sectional analysis
sample living in ZIP-3 c in year t − 1. Bunching after the move is defined as the sharp bunching rate in year t in the mover’s
new ZIP-3. To construct the figure, we group individuals into 0.05%-wide bins on changes in sharp bunching and then plot
the means of the change in average EITC refund within each bin. The solid lines represent best-fit linear regressions estimated
on the microdata separately for observations above and below 0. The estimated slopes are reported next to each line along
with standard errors clustered by bin. See the notes to Figure 4 for further details on the sample definitions.
                                                                                             FIGURE 7
                                                                         Correlates of Sharp Bunching
                                                              a) Evolution of Self-Emp. Bunching in Low vs. High EITC-Density Areas

                                                            4%




                            Self-Employed Sharp Bunching
                                                            3%




                                                            2%




                                                            1%




                                                            0%

                                                                  1995                       2000                          2005                          2010
                                                                                                             Year
                                                                               Below-Median EITC Density                     Above-Median EITC Density



                                                           b) Self-Emp. Bunching vs. Fraction of Professionally Prepared Returns in ZIP-3
                                                             5%


                                                                                                                        β = 13.2
                           Self-Employed Sharp Bunching




                                                             4%                                                             (0.9)



                                                                                                        Self-Prepared                         β = 9.4
                                                             3%
                                                                                                                                                 (0.7)
                                                                                                                    Professionally Prepared

                                                             2%




                                                             1%


                                                                         60%           65%             70%           75%             80%          85%
                                                                                Fraction of Professionally Prepared Returns in ZIP-3
                                                                                       Self-Prepared                Professionally Prepared



Notes: Panel A plots sharp bunching rates by year for two groups: ZIP-3s with above-median and below-median EITC filer
density. We calculate density as the number of EITC-eligible filers per square mile. We split ZIP-3s into two groups at the
median based on their density in 1996 (weighting by the number of individuals in each ZIP-3), and then plot the average level
of sharp bunching in each group over time. Panel B plots the relationship between bunching and the fraction of returns filed
in each ZIP-3-by-year cell using third-party professional tax preparers. We define the use of a professional tax preparer as
reporting either a Tax Preparer TIN (PTIN) or Tax Preparer EIN on Form 1040 and compute the fraction of returns using a
professional tax preparer within each ZIP-3-by-year cell in our cross-sectional sample. To construct the plot in Panel B, we
split the cross-sectional sample into twenty equal-sized bins based on the fraction of tax prepared returns. Within each bin,
we then plot mean sharp bunching for two groups: filers who file their own returns and filers who themselves use a third-party
preparer. Coefficients are from OLS regressions estimated at the ZIP-3-by-year level, weighted by the number of individuals
in each cell, with standard errors reported in parentheses.
                                                                                                            FIGURE 8
                Impacts of Child Birth on Reported Self-Employment Income
                                                                                     a) Total Earnings Distributions Before and After Child Birth
                                                                          3




                             Percent of Individuals                       2




                                                                          1




                                                                          0

                                                                               0K                   10K              20K                  30K                      40K
                                                                                                               Total Earnings
                                                                              Lowest Decile: Before Birth    Lowest Decile: After Birth         Top Decile: After Birth



                                                                        b) Fraction of Individuals Reporting Self-Employment Income Around Child Birth
                                                                         25
                             Percent Reporting Self-Employment Income




                                                                        20




                                                                        15




                                                                        10




                                                                         5


                                                                               -4                   -2              0                     2                    4
                                                                                                              Age of Child
                                                                                     Lowest Bunching            Middle Bunching                 Highest Bunching
                                                                                     Decile                     Decile                          Decile



Notes: These figures are drawn using the child birth sample, which includes individuals from the core sample who give birth
to their first child between 2000 and 2005. We classify individuals into deciles of sharp bunching based on the level of sharp
bunching for residents of the ZIP-3 they inhabit in the year in which they have a child. Panel A includes only individuals with
non-zero self employment income and plots the distribution of total earnings in the year before child birth for individuals in
the lowest bunching decile, the distribution in the year of child birth for individuals in the lowest bunching decile, and the
distribution in the year of child birth for individuals in the highest bunching decile. To simplify the figure, we omit a plot of
pre-birth earnings for individuals in the highest bunching decile, since the distribution is similar to that of the lowest bunching
decile, and in particular does not exhibit any sharp bunching around the first kink of the EITC schedule. Panel B plots an
event study of the fraction of individuals in the child birth sample reporting non-zero self-employment income around child
birth for individuals giving birth in 1st, 5th, and 10th decile ZIP-3s.
                                                                                   FIGURE 9
         Wage Earnings Distributions in Lowest vs. Highest Bunching Deciles
                                                                            a) Wage Earners wtih One Child
                                                      3.5                                                                           4k
                                                                                                             Mean EITC Refund
                                                                                                                     = 1884.39
                                                        3




                            Percent of Wage-Earners
                                                                                                                                    3k




                                                                                                                                          EITC Amount ($)
                                                      2.5
                                                                                                     Mean EITC Refund
                                                                                                             = 1952.34
                                                        2
                                                                                                                                    2k
                                                      1.5

                                                        1
                                                                                                                                    1k

                                                        .5
                                                                                              ∆ EITC Refund = 67.96
                                                                                                              (7.15)
                                                        0                                                                           0k

                                                             $0k    $5k     $10k    $15k          $20k   $25k      $30k      $35k

                                                                                   W-2 Wage Earnings
                                                               Lowest Sharp Bunching Decile               Highest Sharp Bunching Decile


                                                                       b) Wage Earners with Two or More Children
                                                      3.5                                                                           6k

                                                        3
                            Percent of Wage-Earners




                                                                                                                Mean EITC Refund
                                                                                                                        = 2856.71




                                                                                                                                          EITC Amount ($)
                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                    4k
                                                        2
                                                                                                         Mean EITC Refund
                                                                                                                 = 3163.67
                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                    2k
                                                        1

                                                       .5
                                                                                              ∆ EITC Refund = 306.96
                                                                                                              (30.61)
                                                        0                                                                           0k

                                                             $0k          $10k             $20k             $30k             $40k

                                                                                   W-2 Wage Earnings
                                                               Lowest Sharp Bunching Decile               Highest Sharp Bunching Decile


Notes: This figure plots W-2 wage earnings distributions for households without self-employment income using data from
the cross-sectional sample from 1999-2009. The series in triangles includes individuals in ZIP-3-by-year cells in the highest
self-employed sharp bunching decile, while the series in circles includes individuals in the lowest sharp bunching decile. Self-
employed sharp bunching is defined as the percentage of EITC claimants with children in the ZIP-3-by-year cell who report
total earnings within $500 of the first EITC kink and have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations in
the pooled dataset covering 1999-2008 into deciles of sharp bunching, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years.
Panel A plots the distribution for households with one child; panel B plots the distribution for households with two or more
children in 1999-2008 and exactly two children in 2009. In each panel we compute the mean EITC refund for individuals in the
highest and lowest deciles of sharp bunching, and report the difference between the two groups with standard errors clustered
at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level. The figures also show the relevant EITC schedule for single households in each panel (right
scale); the schedule for married households has the same first kink point but has a plateau that is extended by an amount
ranging from $1,000 in 2002 to $5,000 in 2009.
                                                                                               FIGURE 10
Differences in Wage Earnings Distributions: Lowest vs. Highest Bunching Deciles
                                                                                        a) Wage Earners with One Child
                                                                                                                                             4k
                                                                    .5%




                            Difference in W-2 Earnings Densities
                                                                                                                                             3k
                                                                   .25%




                                                                                                                                                  EITC Amount ($)
                                                                     0%                                                                      2k



                                                                   -.25%                                                                     1k




                                                                    -.5%                                                                     0k

                                                                           $0k   $5k    $10k      $15k      $20k   $25k      $30k     $35k

                                                                                                 W-2 Wage Earnings
                                                                                               All Firms             >100 Employees


                                                                                   b) Wage Earners with Two or More Children
                                                                     1%                                                                      6k
                            Difference in W-2 Earnings Densities




                                                                                                                                             5k
                                                                    .5%




                                                                                                                                                  EITC Amount ($)
                                                                                                                                             4k


                                                                     0%                                                                      3k


                                                                                                                                             2k
                                                                   -.5%
                                                                                                                                             1k


                                                                    -1%                                                                      0k

                                                                           $0          $10K              $20K         $30K            $40K


                                                                                                 W-2 Wage Earnings
                                                                                               All Firms             >100 Employees


Notes: This figure plots the difference in the W-2 wage-earnings distributions between the highest and lowest bunching deciles.
The series in circles in Panel A is the difference between the two series plotted in Figure 9a; analogously, the series in circles
in Panel B is the difference between the two series plotted in Figure 9b. The series in triangles replicate the analysis of the
difference in earnings distributions, restricting attention to observations in the cross-sectional analysis sample in which all of
the individual’s W-2’s came from firms that filed 100 or more W-2’s in that year. The figures also show the relevant EITC
schedule for single households in each panel (right scale); the schedule for married households has the same first kink point
but has a plateau that is extended by an amount ranging from $1,000 in 2002 to $5,000 in 2009. See the notes to Figure 9 for
further details.
                                                                                                         FIGURE 11
      Wage Earners’ EITC Amounts vs. Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates
                                                                        a) EITC Refund Amount for Wage Earners vs. Self-Employed Sharp Bunching

                                                                         2500




                           EITC Refund Amount for Wage Earners ($)
                                                                         2450

                                                                                                                            β = 15.9
                                                                                                                               (0.59)


                                                                         2400




                                                                         2350

                                                                                     0                   2              4                     6                        8

                                                                                                 ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching (%)


                                                                          b) Effects of Changes in Neighborhood Bunching for Wage Earner Movers
                                                                        120
                           Change in EITC Amount for Wage Earners ($)




                                                                        100




                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                      β = 43.9
                                                                                                                                                          (5.7)
                                                                                    β = -19.4
                                                                                         (6.3)
                                                                         60



                                                                                                                            p-value for diff. in slopes: p < 0.0001
                                                                         40

                                                                              -1%                -0.5%             0%                    0.5%                     1%

                                                                                                     Change in ZIP-3 Sharp Bunching


Notes: This figure plots the relationship between self-employed sharp bunching rates and EITC refund amounts for wage
earners (those with no self-employment income). Panel A uses the cross-sectional analysis sample from 1999-2009; Panel B
uses the movers sample. In both panels, we first calculate the EITC for each household. To construct Panel A, we split the
observations into 20 equal-sized bins based on the rate of self-employed sharp bunching in the ZIP-3-by-year cell. We then
plot the mean EITC refund vs. the mean sharp bunching rate in each bin. The best-fit line and coefficient are derived from
an OLS regression of mean EITC refund amount in each ZIP-3-by-year cell on sharp bunching rates, weighted by the number
of individuals in each cell. Panel B plots the relationship between change in EITC refund and change in neighborhood sharp
bunching rate for movers who are wage earners. This figure replicates Figure 6, restricting the sample to wage earners and
calculating the EITC refund based on W-2 wage earnings. See the notes to Figure 6 for more details on the construction of
Panel B.
                                                                                     FIGURE 12
           Wage Earnings Distributions Before and After Birth of First Child
                                                                                 a) Year Before First Child Birth


                                                     6%




                            Percent of Individuals
                                                     4%




                                                     2%




                                                     0%

                                                          $0               $10K                   $20K              $30K             $40K
                                                                                       Wage Earnings
                                                               Lowest Sharp                    Middle Sharp                Highest Sharp
                                                               Bunching Decile                 Bunching Decile             Bunching Decile



                                                                                   b) Year of First Child Birth

                                                     6%
                            Percent of Individuals




                                                     4%




                                                     2%




                                                     0%

                                                          $0               $10K                    $20K             $30K              $40K
                                                                                       Wage Earnings
                                                               Lowest Sharp                     Middle Sharp               Highest Sharp
                                                               Bunching Decile                  Bunching Decile            Bunching Decile



Notes: These figures are drawn using the child birth sample, which includes individuals from the core sample who give birth
to their first child between 2000 and 2005. We classify individuals into deciles of sharp bunching based on the level of sharp
bunching for residents of the ZIP-3 they inhabit in the year in which they have a child. The figures only include wage-earners
(those with no self-employment income) with positive W-2 earnings. Panel A plots W-2 wage earnings distributions in the
year before child birth for individuals giving birth in ZIP-3-by-year cells in the 1st, 5th, and 10th deciles. Panel B replicates
these distributions for the year of child birth. The dashed lines demarcate the beginning and end of the refund-maximizing
plateau region of the EITC schedule for a single individuals with one child.
                                                                               FIGURE 13
                                                Event Study of Simulated EITC Around Birth of First Child

                                                1900
          Simulated One-Child EITC Refund ($)




                                                1850
                                                                                                          β = 85.4
                                                                                                              (7.2)


                                                1800




                                                1750


                                                       -4                 -2          0             2                 4
                                                                                 Age of Child
                                                            Lowest Sharp          Middle Sharp          Highest Sharp
                                                            Bunching Decile       Bunching Decile       Bunching Decile


Notes: This figure plots an event study of the simulated EITC refund for wage earners around the year in which they have
their first child. To calculate the simulated credit, we apply the one-child EITC schedule for single filers to total household
W-2 earnings, regardless of the household’s actual structure. The figure plots mean simulated credit amounts by event year
for the exactly the same three groups as in Figure 12. For scaling purposes, we normalize the level of each series at the mean
simulated credit in t = −4; that is, we subtract the decile-specific mean in t = −4 and add back the mean simulated EITC
across the three deciles in t = −4 to all observations. The coefficient compares changes in the simulated credit amount from
year -1 to 0 across the highest and lowest bunching deciles, estimated using a difference-in-differences regression specification
as in equation (5) in the text. The standard error, reported in parentheses, is clustered at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level. See
the notes to Figure 12 for sample and bunching decile definitions.
                                                                                                       FIGURE 14
Changes in EITC Refund Amounts Around Child Birth vs. Sharp Bunching Rates
                                                                                                       a) Wage Earners Only




                            Change in Simulated One-Child EITC Refund ($)
                                                                            200




                                                                                                                                   β = 26.5
                                                                            100                                                       (1.97)




                                                                              0
                                                                                                                          β = -0.43
                                                                                                                              (0.79)


                                                                            -100

                                                                                   0%             2%               4%                   6%        8%
                                                                                                   ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching

                                                                                                0 to 1 Child                  2 to 3 Children



                                                                                    b) Full Sample, with EITC Amounts based on Wage Earnings
                            Change in Simulated One-Child EITC Refund ($)




                                                                            200




                                                                            100                                                       β = 19.4
                                                                                                                                         (1.61)



                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                β = -1.89
                                                                                                                                    (0.63)


                                                                            -100

                                                                                   0%             2%               4%                   6%        8%
                                                                                                   ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching

                                                                                                0 to 1 Child                  2 to 3 Children



Notes: These figures plot changes in simulated EITC refund from the year before to the year of child birth (year -1 to year
0 in Figure 13) vs. the self-employed sharp bunching rate in the individual’s ZIP-3 in the year of birth. Panel A includes
only individuals in the child birth sample without self-employment income; Panel B includes all individuals in the child birth
sample. In both panels we apply the one-child EITC schedule for single filers to total household W-2 earnings, regardless of the
household’s actual structure and self-employment income, to calculate the simulated credit. The series in circles plots changes
in simulated one-child EITC around the birth of the first child; the series in triangles plots changes in simulated one-child
EITC around the birth of the third child. To construct the “0 to 1 Child” series, we split the observations with first births
into twenty equal-sized bins based on the degree of self-employed sharp bunching in the individual’s ZIP-3-by-birth-year cell.
Within each bin, we then calculate the mean change in simulated EITC from the year before to the year of the birth and
plot this mean change against the sharp bunching rate. The “2 to 3 Child” series repeats this procedure for all third births
(i.e, where the individual claimed two children the year before), once again using the one-child EITC schedule for single filers
to calculate the simulated EITC credit. We estimate the best-fit lines and slopes using an OLS regression of the change in
simulated credit on sharp bunching in the individual data, with standard errors clustered at the ZIP-3-by-birth-year level. See
the notes to Figure 12 for further details on the child birth sample.
                                                                                                                       FIGURE 15
                    Phase-In, Phase-Out, and Extensive Margin Responses
                                                                                                      a) Changes in Simulated EITC Refund Around Births
                                                                                         200




                            Change in Simulated EITC Refund ($)
                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                                                     β = 14.2
                                                                                                                                                        (1.55)
                                                                                         100



                                                                                          50

                                                                                                                                                        β = 5.2
                                                                                           0                                                               (0.69)


                                                                                         -50

                                                                                                 0%               2%                  4%                 6%                 8%
                                                                                                                  ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching

                                                                                                                           Phase In            Phase Out



                                                                                               b) Extensive Margin: Changes in Fraction Working around First Birth
                           Change in Percent of Individuals with Positive W-2 Earnings




                                                                                         17.6%                                                                        200




                                                                                                                                                                            Change in Simulated EITC Refund ($)
                                                                                         13.2%                                                                        150



                                                                                          8.8%                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                               β = 0.54%
                                                                                                                                                  (0.05)
                                                                                         4.4%                                                                         50



                                                                                           0%                            Implied Effect on Credit: $5.8                0
                                                                                                                                                   (0.52)

                                                                                         -4.4%                                                                        -50
                                                                                               0%               2%             4%               6%               8%

                                                                                                             ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching



Notes: This figure decomposes the EITC response to the birth of a first child into the phase-in, phase-out and extensive
margin responses. To do so, we replicate the “0 to 1 Child” series in Figure 8b, replacing the simulated EITC variable with
other measures. Panel A distinguishes phase-in and phase-out responses. To calculate the phase-in response, we calculate the
simulated credit using the schedule depicted in Appendix Figure 4a instead of the actual EITC schedule. For the phase-out
response, we use the schedule depicted in Appendix Figure 4b instead. Panel B replaces the simulated EITC schedule with an
indicator for positive W-2 wage earnings. We translate the extensive margin impact to an implied effect on EITC amounts by
assuming that new workers earn the average EITC refund conditional on working in our sample ($1,075). The right scale in
Panel B is chosen to match the scale of Panel A so that the size of the extensive margin response is scaled in the same units.
The best-fit lines and standard errors are estimated as in Figure 14.
                                           APPENDIX FIGURE 1
EITC Refund Schedule vs. Total Tax Liabilities for Single Filers with One Child

                       $4000




                       $2000
          Tax Refund




                          $0




                       -$2000

                                $0k         $10k                  $20k                 $30k                 $40k
                                                           Wage Earnings
                                                EITC Refund                     Tax Refund

Notes: This figure plots the EITC refund and total tax refund for head-of-household filers with one dependent between 2002
and 2008. All monetary values are in 2010 dollars, indexed using the IRS inflation adjustment. The total tax refund includes
the EITC and the Child Tax Credit (including the Additional Child Tax Credit) minus federal income taxes (but excluding
payroll taxes). Negative values of the total tax refund indicate net tax liabilities.
                                                                                        APPENDIX FIGURE 2
                      Results with Alternative Measure of Sharp Bunching
                                                                      a) EITC Refund Amount for Wage Earners vs. Self-Employed Sharp Bunching
                                                                       2550




                            EITC Refund Amount for Wage Earners ($)
                                                                       2500



                                                                       2450

                                                                                                                          β = 8.08
                                                                                                                             (0.18)
                                                                       2400



                                                                       2350



                                                                       2300


                                                                                   5             10          15                20           25              30
                                                                                              ZIP-3 Self-Employed Sharp Bunching (%)


                                                                               b) Event Study of Simulated EITC Around Birth of First Child
                                                                      1950



                                                                      1900
                                                                                                                                            β = 105.4
                                                                                                                                                (6.0)
                            EITC Refund ($)




                                                                      1850



                                                                      1800



                                                                      1750



                                                                      1700


                                                                              -4                 -2               0                   2                 4
                                                                                                           Age of Child
                                                                                   Lowest Sharp              Middle Sharp                 Highest Sharp
                                                                                   Bunching Decile           Bunching Decile              Bunching Decile



Notes: This figure reproduces Figure 11a and Figure 13 using an alternative definition of sharp bunching. Here, we define
sharp bunching as the fraction of self-employed individuals in the ZIP-3-by-year cell who report income within $500 of the
refund-maximizing kink. This definition differs from our baseline definition because we use the number of individuals with
non-zero self-employment income in the denominator rather than the total number of individuals in the cross-sectional sample.
In Panel A, we replace the baseline measure of sharp bunching with the alternative measure on the x-axis and reconstruct
Figure 11a. To compare the coefficient in Panel A to that in Figure 11a, one must multiply the coefficient by 5.1 to account for
the larger standard deviation of the alternative measure of sharp bunching. In Panel B, we define the sharp bunching deciles
using the new measure and replicate Figure 13. The coefficient in Panel B can be compared directly with the coefficient in
Figure 13.
                                                                    APPENDIX FIGURE 3
                               Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods, 1996-2008
                                                                      a) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching in 1996




Notes: This figure plots sharp bunching rates by ZIP-3 in 1996. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in
the cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into
deciles after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades
representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                                  APPENDIX FIGURE 3
                              Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods, 1996-2008
                                                                   b) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching in 1999




Notes: This figure replicates Panel A for the year 1999. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in the
cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into deciles
after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades
representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                                  APPENDIX FIGURE 3
                              Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods, 1996-2008
                                                                   c) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching in 2002




Notes: This figure replicates Panel A for the year 2002. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in the
cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into deciles
after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades
representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                                  APPENDIX FIGURE 3
                              Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods, 1996-2008
                                                                   d) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching in 2005




Notes: This figure replicates Panel A for the year 2005. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in the
cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into deciles
after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades
representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                                  APPENDIX FIGURE 3
                              Self-Employed Sharp Bunching Rates Across Neighborhoods, 1996-2008
                                                                   e) Self-Employed Sharp Bunching in 2008




Notes: This figure replicates Panel A for the year 2008. Self-employed sharp bunching is defined as the fraction of all EITC-eligible households with children in the
cross-sectional sample whose total income falls within $500 of the first kink point and who have non-zero self-employment income. We divide the observations into deciles
after pooling all years of the sample, so that the decile cut points remain fixed across years. Each decile is assigned a different color on the map, with darker shades
representing higher levels of sharp bunching.
                                                                           APPENDIX FIGURE 4
                      Simulated Phase-In and Phase-Out Credit Schedules
                                                                                 a) Simulated Phase-In Credit


                                                                4K



                            Phase-In Simulated Credit Amount    3K



                                                                2K



                                                                1K



                                                                0K

                                                                     $0K   $5K    $10K     $15K     $20K        $25K   $30K   $35K

                                                                                            Total Income


                                                                                 b) Simulated Phase-Out Credit


                                                                4K
                            Phase-Out Simulated Credit Amount




                                                                3K



                                                                2K



                                                                1K



                                                                0K

                                                                     $0K   $5K    $10K     $15K     $20K        $25K   $30K   $35K

                                                                                            Total Income


Notes: This figure plots the credit schedules used to identify phase-in and phase-out responses in Figure 15 and Table III. For
the phase-in schedule, the simulated credit increases from $0 to $3,050 as income rises from $0 to $8,970 (corresponding to the
actual EITC phase-in schedule). The schedule is then constant at $3,050 above $8,970 in wage earnings. For the phase-out
schedule, the simulated credit is constant at $3,050 for incomes up to $16,690 and then decreases to $0 at a 15.98% rate (as
does the actual EITC phase-out schedule).
