                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE NEW PROTECTIONISM:
                     A RESPONSE TO SHIFTS IN
                     NATIONAL ECONOMIC POWER




                        Robert E. Baldwin




                      Working Paper No. 1823




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1823
                                                   January 1986




              The   New Protectionism: A Ecsponse to Shifts
                        in National Economic Pcier



                                 ABSTPAC

  The new protectionism threatening the international trading
regime is related to significant structural changes in world
production that have brought about a decline in the dominant
economic position of the United States, a concomitant rise of the
European Community     and   Japan  to   international  economic
prominence, and the emergence of a highly competitive group of
newly industrializing countries.

  For the United States, the adjustment process has been
difficult. Government and business leaders have gradually
adopted the view that unfair foreign trading practices are the
main cause of the country's competitive problems. By focussing
on a more vigorous enforcement of US. statutes and GATT rules on
fair trade, they are able to press for import protection and
still maintain that they support the type of open trading regime
the United States did so much to establish after World War II.

  While it is possible that particular protectionism will
continue  to   spread and lead to an essentially closed
international trading order, a more sanguine outcome, supported
of the three major trading powers, seems possible. This is the
emergence of a regime characterized by more trade—distorting
government interventions than at the height of American hegemonic
influence and by the existence of a significant group of
industries receiving government assistance. However, while new
industries will be added to this group, assistance will be
withdrawn from others as they lose political influence so that on
balance the list need not increase over time or, if it does, only
very slowly.    Such a regime will not yield the growth and
efficiency benefits of an open trading system, but at least it
will not lead to the disastrous economic and political
consequences brought about by the trading order that prevailed in
the 1930's.


                                                  Robert E. Baldwin
                                                  Departhent of Economics
                                                  University of Wisconsin
                                                  Madison, I 53706
     THE NEW PROTECTIONISM: A RESPONSE TO SHIFTS IN NATIONAL
                            ECONOMIC POWER

       Robert E. Baldwin,    University   of Madison—Wisconsin



1. Introduction


  The international trading economy is in the anomalous condition

of diminishing tariff protection but the increasing use of
nontariff trade—distorting measures.         The former trend is the
result of the staged tariff cuts agreed on in the GATT—sponsored
Tokyo Round of Multilateral Negotiations concluded in 1979. The
latter trend, however, is taking place largely outside the
framework of GATT and threatens to undermine the liberal
international trading regime established after World War II.

  This paper relates the new nontariff protectionism to
significant structural changes in world industrial production
that have brought about a decline in the dominant economic
position   of     the United States,      a concomitant rise     to

international economic prominence of the European Economic
Community and Japan, and the emergence of a group of newly
industrializing developing countries (NICs).         The first two
sections describe the rise of the United States to a dominant
position in international economic affairs in the immediate
postwar period and indicate the types of hegemonic actions taken
by this country. Section three briefly traces subsequent shifts
in international economic power in the areas of trade, finance,


                               —1—
and energy, and section four explains how these latter changes
have led to modifications in national trade policy behavior,
particularly on the part of the United States.          The paper
concludes by speculating about the nature of the international
trading regime that is evolving under the present distribution of

economic power among nations.




2. The Rise in U.S. Hegemony

  The role of the United States in the evolution of the modern
trading system has been central. Although this country became an
important trader on the world scene after World War I, it gave
little indication at the time of a willingness to assume a major
international leadership role. The American share of the exports
of the industrial countries rose from 22.1% in 1913 to 27.8% by
1928 (Baldwin, 1958), but during this period the United States
chose political and economic isolation by rejecting membership in
the League of Nations and by erecting in 1930 the highest set of
tariff barriers in its peacetime history.       The failure of the
London Economic Conference of 1933 due to the inward—looking
economic position of the United States marks the low point of
U.S. internationalism in the interwar period.


  A major    policy   reorientation   toward participation      in

international affairs began in the United States during the late
1930s and especially in World War II. More and more political


                                —2—
leaders and the electorate generally began to accept the view of
key policy officials in the Roosevelt Administration that
continued international isolationism would bring renewed economic

stagnation and unemployment to the American economy and the
likely prospect of disastrous new worldwide military conflicts.
Consequently, active participation in the United Nations was
accepted by the American _public as were the proposals to
establish international economic agencies to provide for an
orderly balance—of—payments adjustment mechanism for individual
nations and     to   promote    reconstruction   and   development.
International trade had long been a much more politicized
subject, however, and all that was salvaged (and then only by
executive action)    from the proposal       for a comprehensive
international trade organization Was the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT).


  The economic proposals initiated by the United States were not,
it should be emphasized, aimed at giving this country a hegemonic
role. Rather, they envisioned the United States being one of a
small group of nations that would cooperate to provide the
leadership necessary to avoid the disastrous nationalistic
policies of the 1930s. The envisioned leadership group included
the United Kingdom, France, China, and, it was hoped, the Soviet
Union.


  Hegemony was thrust upon the United States by a set of
unexpected circumstances.      First, the failure of the United



                               —3—
Kingdom to return to anything like her prewar position as a world

economic power was unforeseen.      U.S. officials ,    for   example,
thought that the U.S. loan of $3.75 billion to the United Kingdom

in 1946 would enable the country to                restore sterling
convertibility and to return         to   its     earlier prominent
international role. But the funds were quickly exhausted and it
was necessary to restore exchange control. The 1949 devaluation
of the pound was equally disappointing in its failure to
revitalize the country. Economic reconstruction in Europe also
proved much more costly than envisioned.         The resouces of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development proved to
be much too small to handle this task and massive foreign aid
from the United States became necessary. The U.S. economy also
grew vigorously after the war rather than, as many expected,
returning to stagnant conditions.

  The failure of either China or the USSR to participate in the
market—oriented international economy placed an added leadership
burden on the United States.     But perhaps the most important
factor leading to U.S. hegemony was the effort by the Soviet
Union to expand its political influence into Western Europe and
elsewhere. American officials believed they had little choice
from a national viewpoint but to assume an active political,
economic and military leadership          role    to   counter   this

expansionist policy, an action that most noncommunist countries
welcomed.




                             —4—
3. Hegemonic Behavior


     The significant expansion of productive facilities in the
United States during the       war   coupled with the widespread
destruction of industrial capacity in Germany and Japan gave
American producers an enormous advantage in meeting the worldwide

pent-up demand of the 1940s and 1950s. The U.S. share of
industrial country exports rose from 25.6% in 1938 to 35.2% in
1952 (Baldwin, 1958). (The combined share of Germany and Japan
fell from 24.0% to 11.4% between these years.)         Even in a
traditional net import category like textiles, the United States
maintained a net export position until 1958.


     Static trade theory suggests that a hegemonic power will take
advantage of its monopolistic position by imposing trade
restrictions to raise domestic welfare through an improvement in
its terms of trade. However, like the United Kingdom when it was
a hegemonic nation in the 19th century, the United States reacted
by     promoting   trade   liberalization   rather   than    trade
restrictionism.     A restrictionist reaction might have been
possible for a highly controlled, planned economy that coud
redistribute income fairly readily and did not need to rely on
the traded—goods sector as a major source of employment
generation or growth, but the growth goals of free—market firms
together with the nature of the political decision-making process
rule out such a response in modern industrial democracies.


 Industrial organization theory emphasizes that firms in


                               —5—
oligopolistically organized industries take a long-run view of
profitability and strive to increase their market share.      By
doing so, they try to prevent both new competitors from entering
the market and possibly causing losses to existing firms and old
competitors from increasing their shares to the point where
others might suffer progressive and irreversible market losses.
U.S.   firms organized in_this manner seized the postwar
competitive opportunities associated with American dominance to
expand overseas market shares both through increased exports and
direct foreign investment. The desire of U.S. political leaders
to strengthen noncommunist nations by opening up American markets
and providing foreign aid complemented these goals of U.S.
business, which actively supported the government's foreign
policy aims. Even most producers in more competitively organized
and less high—technology sectors such as agriculture, textiles,
and miscellaneous manufactures favored an outward—oriented
hegemonic policy at this time, since they too were able to export

abroad and were not faced with any significant import
competition.

  The United States behaved in a hegemonic manner on many
occasions in the 1950s and early 1960s. As Keohane (1984, chap.
8) emphasizes, in doing so, it did not coerce other states into
accepting policies of little benefit to them.       Instead, the
United States usually proposed joint policy efforts in areas of
mutual economic interest and provided strong incentives for
hegemonic cooperation.   In the trade field, for example, U.S.


                             —6—
officials regularly pressed for trade—liberalizing multilateral
negotiations and six such negotiations were initiated between
1947 and 1962.        But the United States traded short—term
concessions for possible long—run gains, since     the   concessions by
most other countries were not very meaningful in trade terms due
to the exchange controls they maintained until the late 1950s.
The U.S. goal was to penetrate the markets of Europe and Japan as
their controls were eased and finally eliminated.


  One instance in which the United States did put considerable
pressure on Its trading partners to accept the American viewpoint
was in the Kennedy Round of multilateral trade negotiations. At
the initial ministerial meeting in 1963, U.S. trade officials —       —



with    President Kennedy's approval -   - threatened   to call off the
negotiations unless the European Community accepted the American
proposal for a substantial, across—the-board tariff-cutting
rule.     Members of the Community had regained much of their
economic vitality and the United States wanted economic payment
for its earlier nonreciprocated concessions and its willingness
to support a customs union arrangement that discriminated against
the United States.


  In the financial area the $3.75 billion loan to the United
Kingdom in 1946, the large grants of foreign aid after 1948 under
the Marshall Plan, and the provision of funds to help establish
the European Payments Union in 1948 are examples of hegemonic
leadership by the United States. American leaders envisioned a



                               —7—
postwar international monetary regime with fixed and convertible

exchange         rates    in       which     orderly     adjustments     of

balance-of-payments problems would take place.                    When the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) proved inadequate to cope with
the magnitude of postwar payments problems, the United States
provided financial aid until the affected countries were strong

enough economically for the_IMF to assume its intended role. A
U.S. hegemonic role was also exercised in the energy field, as
American companies, with the assistance of the U.S. government,
gained control over Arab oil during the 1940s and 1950s.



4.    Shifts   in International Economic Power


4.1 Trade Competitiveness


     The hegemonic actions of the United States, aimed at
maintaining the          liberal    international      economic   framework

established largely through its efforts and at turning back the
expansion of the Soviet Union, succeeded very well. By 1960 the
export market shares of France, Germany, Italy, and Japan had
either exceeded or come close to their prewar levels. Among the
industrial countries only the United Kingdom failed to regain its

prewar position by this time.              The restoration of peacetime
productive capabilities in these countries meant that the
exceptionally high market shares of the United States in the
early postwar years declined correspondingly.              The 35.2% U.S.



                                    —8—
 export share of 1952 had dropped to 29.9% by 1960, a figure that
 was, however, still higher than its 1938 share of 25.6% (Baldwin,
 1962)


   For manufactured products alone, the picture is much the same.
The U.S. world export share decreased sharply from 29.4% in 1953
to 18.7% in 1959, while shares of Western Europe and Japan rose
from 49.0% to 53.7% and from2.8% to 4.2%,   respectively   (Branson,
1980). The export market share of Western Europe remained
unchanged in the 1960s, but the Japanese share continued to rise
and reached 10.0% in 1971. At the same time the U.S. share of
world exports of manufactures fell to 13.4% by 1971.

  While aid from the U.S. government played an important part in

restoring the trade competitivenessof the European countries and
Japan, the governments of these nations themselves were the prime
driving force for revitalization.    The French government, for
example, formulated an industrial modernization plan after the
war and two-thirds of all new investment between 1947 and 1950
was financed from public funds.         Similarly,     the British
government under the Labor Party created an Economic Planning
Board and exercised close control over the direction of postwar
investment, while even the relatively free market—oriented German

government channeled capital into key industries in the 1950s.
Government investment aid to the steel, shipbuilding, and
aircraft industries and the use of preferential government
policies to promote the computer sector are other examples of the



                             —9-.
use of trade—oriented industrial policies in Europe during this

period.

  Japan is perhaps the best—known example of the use of
government policies to improve international competitiveness.
During the 1950s and 1960s the Japanese government guided the
country's industrial expansion by providing tax incentives and
investment funds to favored industries. Funding for research and
development in high technology areas also became an important
part of the government's trade policy in the 1970s. Governments
of      newly    industrializing    developing   countries    use

industry—specific investment and production subsidies to an even

greater extent than any of the developed nations in their import

substitution and export promotion activities.

     Not only had the prewar export position of the United States
been restored by the late 1960s, but the period with an absence

of significant import pressures in major industries with
political clout had come to an end. Stiff competition from the
Japanese in the cotton textiles industry was evident by the late
1950s, and the United States initiated the formation of a
trade—restricting international cotton textile agreement in 1962.

A broad group of other industries also began to face significant
import competition in the late 1960s. The products affected
included footwear, radios and television sets, motor vehicles and

trucks, tires and inner tubes, semi—conductors, hand tools,
earthenware table and kitchen articles, jewelry, and some steel



                              — 10 —
 items.


   Trade pattern changes in the 1970s and early 1980s were
dominated by the price-increasing actions of the Organization of
Petroleum—Exporting Countries (OPEC).       This group's share of
world exports rose from 18.2% in 1970 to 27.3% in 1980 (Economic

Report of the President, 1985). By 1984 OPEC's share, however,
had fallen to 23.5% as the wer of the cartel declined. During
this period the U.S. export share fell from 13.7% to 10.9%, while

that of the European Community dropped from 36.1% to 30.7%.
Japan, however, managed to increase its share from 6.1% to 8.4%.
The latter figures reflect Japan's continued strong performance
in manufacturing. That country's share of industrial countries'
manufacturing exports rose from 9.9% in 1971 to 15.3% in early
1984 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1985).

  The 1970s and early 1980s were a time of relative stability in

the U.S. manufacturing export share, with it rising only slightly
from 19.6% in 1971 to 20.1% in 1984. In contrast, the European
Community's manufacturing export share declined from 59.9% in
1971 to 54.6% in 1984. Another major development of this period
was the increase in the manufacturing export share of the
developing countries from 7.1% in 1971 to 11.0% in 1983.


  An important feature of the trade pattern shifts in industrial
countries during the 1970s and 198O has been the severe import
competition faced not only by labor—intensive sectors like
textiles,   apparel, and footwear     but also by large-scale,


                             — 11 —
oligopolistically    organized      industries   such   as   steel,

automobiles, and shipbuilding.         Machine tools and consumer
electronic goods have also come under increasing import
pressure.

  The decline in the dominance of the United States in trade
policy matters became apparent in the Tokyo Round of multilateral
trade negotiations as well as when the United States proposed a
new negotiating round in 1982. As it had in the Kennedy Round,
the   United    States   proposed    an across—the—board     linear

tariff-cutting rule at the outset of the Tokyo Round, whereas the

European Community again proposed a formula that cut high tariff
rates by a greater percentage than low duties. This time the
United States did not prevail. The other industrial nations both
treated the United States and the Community as major trading
blocs whose negotiating objectives must be satisfied. The result
was a compromise duty—cutting rule that met the U.S. desire for a

deep average cut and at the same time produced the significant

degree of tariff harmonization sought by the European Community.
At the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting the United States again
called for a new multilateral exercise that included negotiations

to reduce export subsidies in agriculture and barriers to trade
in services.    The Community and the developing countries both
rejected the U.S. proposals, and it has become clear that the
United States can no longer determine the pace or content of such

negotiations.




                              — 12 —
 4.2 International Financial and Other Economic Changes

  As the decline in the dominant trade—competitive position of

the United States became increasingly evident in the 1960's, the
United States and many other countries became dissatisfied with
the U.S. role in international monetary affairs.          Since the
supply of gold in the world increases only slowly, the demand for

additional international lrquidity that accompanied the rapid
growth in world trade had to be met by greater holdings of
dollars, the other official form of international reserves.
However, as these holdings grew, a number of countries became
concerned about the freedom from monetary and fiscal discipline

that such an arrangement gave the United States and they resented
the seigniorage privileges it granted.     The U.S. also became
increasingly dissatisfied with its inability to change the
exchange rate of the dollar as a means of adjusting its balance
of payments. Another indication of the decline in U.S. hegemony
was the creation in 1969 of a new form of international liquidity

in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), namely, Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs), designed to reduce the dependence of the
international economy on the dollar.


  The shift to a flexible exchange rate system in 1971, however,
was the clearest manifestation of the decline in U.S. dominance
in the monetary field. Although the results of this action have
not given countries the expected degree of freedom from U.S
financial influence, the role of the dollar as a reserve and



                             — 13 —
vehicle currency has declined.            Another institutional change
directed at reducing the monetary influence of the United State
was the formation of the European Monetary System in 1979.


  The severe difficulties faced by the industrial nations in the
energy field as a consequence of the success of OPEC have already
been mentioned. This development was an especially devastating
blow to the international economic prestige of the United
States.




5. Trade Policy Responses to the Redistribution of National Economic
Power

  The non—hegemonic members of the international trading regime,
i.e., countries other than the United States, responded to the
inevitable industry disruption caused by the shifts                 in

comparative    cost patterns in a manner consistent with their
earlier   reconstruction and development policies.           With the
greater postwar emphasis on the role of the state in maintaining
full employment and providing basic social welfare needs, these
governments intervened to prevent increased imports and export
market losses from causing what they considered to be undue
injury to domestic industries. Assistance to industries such as

steel and shipbuilding injured by foreign competition in third
markets took the form of subsidies,               including loans at
below—market   rates, accelerated depreciation allowances and other
special tax benefits, purchases of equity capital, wage

                               —   14 —
 subsidies, and   the   payment of worker social benefits.   Such
activities had been an integral part of the reconstruction and
development efforts of the 1940s and 1950s, and the provisions of
the GATT dealing with subsidies other than direct export
subsidies did not rule out such measures.


  Because of the difficulties of modifying the tariff-reducing
commitments made in the earlier multilateral trade negotiations,

import—protecting measures generally did not take the form of
higher tariffs.    By requiring compensating duty cuts in other
products or the acceptance of retaliatory increases in foreign
tariffs, increases in tariffs could have led to bitter disputes
and the unraveling of the results of the previous negotiations.
Therefore, to avoid such a possibility, governments negotiated

discriminatory quantitative agreements outside of the GATT
framework with suppliers who were the main source of the market

disruption. For example, quantitative import restrictions were
introduced by France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and West Germany
on Japanese automobiles and on radios, television sets, and
communications equipment from Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan
(Balassa and Balassa, 1984) .   Flatware, motorcycles, and video
tape recorders from Japan and the NICs of Asia were also covered

by such import restrictions by various European countries In the
agricultural area, which had been excluded from most of the rules
of the GATT, governments did not hesitate to tighten quantitative
import restrictions (or restrictions like those under the
European Community's Common Agricultural Policy that have the


                              — 15 —
same effect) or   provide export subsidies to handle surpluses
produced by high domestic price—support programs.

  In the United States the disrupting effects of the postwar
industry shifts in competitiveness throughout the world produced
basic policy disputes that continue today. Except for the two
politically powerful oil and textile industries, until the latter
part of the 1960s import—injured industries were forced to follow

the administrative route provided for import relief under the
escape clause provision of the GATT.      Moreover, many of the
industry determinations by the International Trade Commission
were rejected at the presidential level on foreign policy
grounds, namely, the need for the hegemonic power to maintain an

open trade policy.     Industry subsidies provided by foreign
governments, though subject to U.S. countervailing duty laws,
were also largely ignored by the executive branch for the same
reason.


  The official position of the United States began to change
under the strong import pressures of the late 1960s. As their
constituents described the competitive problems they were facing,
fewer members of Congress accepted the standard argument that a
liberal U.S. trade policy was essential to strengthen the free
world against communism. The intensity of congressional views on
trade issues is indicated by the rejection by that body of
President Lyndon Johnson's 1968 request for new trade authority
and by the near approval in 1970 of protectionist legislation.



                             — 16 —
The growing unwillingness of U.S. allies to accept the
unquestioned leadership of the United States in international
political, military, and economic affairs also caused officials
in the executive branch to question the traditional American
position on trade.


  The view that gradually gained the support of the major public
and private interests concered with trade matters was that much
of the increased competitive pressure on the United States was
due to unfair foreign policies such as government subsidization,

dumping by private and public firms, preferential government
purchasing procedures, and discriminatory foreign administrative
rules and practices relating to importation. This argument had
appeal for several reasons. No new legislation was required to
provide import relief; a stricter enforcement of long-existing
domestic legislation seemed to be all that was necessary. After
a material injury clause was introduced into the U.S.
countervailing duty law in 1979, these laws also were consistent
with the provisions of the GATT dealing with unfair trade
practices.   Consequently, stricter enforcement of U.S. unfair
trade laws was unlikely to lead to bitter trade disputes with
other countries.     By placing the blame for their decline in
competitiveness on unfair foreign actions, U.S. managers and
workers could avoid the implication that this decline might be
due to a lack of efficiency on their part. Finally, government
officials could maintain that the United States was still
supporting the rules of the liberal international regime that the


                             — 17 —
country had. done so much to fashion.


  The emphasis on the great need for fair trade is evident in the

1974 legislation authorizing U.S. participation in the Tokyo
Round of multilateral negotiations. In reshaping the proposal of
the president, the Congress stressed that the president should
seek "to harmonize, reduce, or eliminate" nontariff trade
barriers and tighten GATT rules with respect to fair trading

practices.   Officials in the executive branch supported these
directives not only on their merits but because they deflected
attention from more patently protectionist policies.

  The new codes that were approved in the Tokyo Round by no means
fully satisfied those who strongly stressed the need for fairer
trade, but their provisions and t1e attention that the subject
received established the framework for many U.S. trade policy
actions that have followed these negotiations. There has been a
marked increase recently in the number of antidumping and
countervailing duty cases, determinations in such cases rising
between 1981 and 1983 from 21 to 50 in the United States and from

31 to 58 in the European Community (Moore, 1985). Another
indication of the greater use of these statutes to gain import
protection is the increased number of ITC injury findings in
antidumping cases, from 8 in the 1961-64 period to 32 between
1980 and 1983. The most important protectionist action taken by
the United States since the late 1960's, namely, the gradual
tightening of controls over steel imports, has also been



                              — 18 —
justified mainly on the grounds of unfair trade practices by
foreign producers.       For example, the trigger price mechanism
(TPM)   introduced   by the President Carter in 1978 that in effect
established minimum import prices for steel was designed to
offset foreign dumping.       When a series of voluntary export
restraiht agreements with leading steel—exporting nations were
concluded in late 1984, a spokesperson for the U.S. Trade
Representative stated, "We are responding to unfair trade in the
U.S.; defending yourself against unfair trade is not, in our
opinion, protectionism." (New York Times, December, 19, 1984)

  The unfair trade argument has been used in support of most
other trade—restricting or trade—promoting actions taken by the
United States in recent years. The textile and apparel sectors
have been described by government officials as "beleaguered" by

disruptive import surges, thus justifying more restrictive import

controls. Similarly, when temporary orderly marketing agreements
COMAs) were negotiated in the 1970s with selected East and
Southeast Asian countries, the implication conveyed was that
these were responses to unfair export activities of these
nations.    Even the Japanese voluntary export restraints on
automobiles were sometimes justified by American industry and
government officials on the grounds that the industrys
competitive problem was in part due to the unfair targeting
practices of the Japanese government. On the export—promoting
side, it is routinely claimed that subsidized export credits
through the Export-Import Bank and special tax privileges to


                               — 19 —
exporters establishing Foreign Sales Corporations are necessary
to counter unfair foreign practices in these areas.     In short,
fair trade arguments using such phrases as the need for "a level
playing field" or "to make foreign markets as open as U.S.
markets" have become the basic justification for the greater use
of trade—distorting measures by the United States.



5. The Future of the International Trading Regime


  The U.S. fared well economically in its hegemonic role:
American exporters and investors established substantial foreign
market positions from which they are still benefiting greatly.
The open trade policy that U.S. officials were able to maintain
for so long also promoted growth and resource—use efficiency and
thus extended the period of U.S. economic dominance. But the
postwar recovery of Europe and Japan and the emergence of the
NICs brought an inevitable relative decline in U.S. economic and

political power. The comparative economic position of Western
Europe also receded from its postwar recovery level as Japan and
the NICs grew more rapidly. The outcome has been an increase in
industrial-country protection that takes the form of nontariff
trade—distorting measures.

  No country or country group is likely to assume a dominant role
in the world economy during the rest of the century. Japan would
seem to be the most likely candidate for this leadership role
with its highly competitive industrial sector, but it appears to


                             — 20 —
be too small economically to be a hegemonic power.         Moreover,
like the United States in the 1920s, Japan is still quite
isolationist.      Government    officials   and   businessmen   are
conditioned by the disastrous outcome of the              country's
expansionist efforts in the 1930s and 1940s and by its past
history of inwardness. Furthermore, when a potential hegemonic
nation first demonstrates its competitive strengths over a wide
range of products, certain traditional sectors, for instance,
agriculture, that are faced with difficult adjustment problems
tend to be able to prevent the national commitment to trade
openness required by a dominant economic power. This occurred in
the early stages of both the British and American rise to
economic dominance and is now hampering Japan from making a
commitment to openness commensurate with its competitive
abilities.      In addition, Japanese consumers have not yet
developed the taste for product variety needed to make Japan an
important market for foreign manufactured goods.       The European
Community possesses the size and resources to be the dominant
economic power, but the very diverse economic nature of its
members and the severe structural adjustment problems faced by
almost all of them preclude a hegeinonic role for this economic
bloc.


  The United States remains the country most able to identify its
trading interests with the collective interests of all. However,
a number of the industries that were the most competitive
internationally during the rise of U.S. hegemony have become


                                — 21 —
victims of their success.    The relatively high profits these
oligopolistically organized industries were able to maintain
provided the investment funds needed to take advantage of the
expanding market opportunities at home and abroad.      But their
economic structures were also favorable to the development of
powerful labor unions that wished to share these profits through
higher wages. The outcome was wage increases in these industries

that far exceeded wage increases in manufacturing in general.
Consequently, as other countries developed their productive

capabilities,   these American    industries     found themselves
penalized by above—average labor costs and an institutional
framework that made it very difficult to adjust to the new
realities of international competition. Management in some of
these industries also failed to keep up with the most advanced
practices. Another very important feature of these industries is

their ability to obtain protection by exerting political pressure
at the congressional and presidential levels, if they fail to

gain   it   through    administrative   routes     involving   the

import-injury, antidumping, and countervailing duty laws.

  As a consequence of these developments, protectionism has
gradually spread in the United States as such industries as steel
and automobiles have come under severe international competitive

pressure.   European governments are faced with even stronger
protectionist pressures for similar reasons and have also moved
toward more restrictive import policies. As Mancur Olson (1983)
has argued, organized common interest groups such as these


                             — 22 —
industries tend to delay innovations and the reallocation of
resources needed for rapid growth.


  There seems to be no reason why the recent trend in nontariff
protectionism at the industry—specific level will not continue in

the United States and Europe and become more important in Japan.
But one should not conclude from this that the present
international   trading reime will       turn into one where
protectionism is rampant. There are — — and will continue to be
— — dynamic, export—oriented industriesin the older industrial

countries that will seek access to foreign markets and see the
relation between this goal and open markets in their own
country.   Moreover, such industries will have considerable
political influence, as U.S. high technology and export-oriented
service industries have demonstrated.       These sectors will
continue to provide the United States, Western Europe, and Japan
with the economic power that makes international openness a
desirable trade policy objective. Consequently, none of these
trading blocs is likely to adopt a policy of general protection.

  But will not creeping protection at the industry level
eventually bring a de facto state of general protection? This
is, of course, a real possibility. However, the reason this need
not follow is that protection usually does not stop a decline in

employment in declining industries. Even politically powerful
industries usually only have sufficient political clout to slow
down the absolute fall in employment.        Furthermore, while



                             — 23 —
employment tends to increase with the fal]. in imports from the
-countries against which the controls are directed, offsetting
forces are also set in motion.          These include a decrease in
expenditures on the product as its domestic price tends to rise;
a shift in expenditures to noncontrolled varieties of the
product, to either less or more processed forms of the good, and
to substitute products; a ...redirection of exports by foreign
suppliers to more expensive forms of the item; and, if the import
controls are country—specific, -an increase in exports by
noncontrolled suppliers. The larger industry profits associated
with the increased protection are also likely to be used to
introduce labor—saving equipment at a more rapid pace than
                   -




previously.                                   -




  The continued decline in employment after increased protection
is well documented from histories of protection in particular
industries (e.g., U.S. International Trade Commission, 1982). In
the European Community and the United States even such
politically powerful industries as textiles and apparel and steel
have been unable to prevent employment from falling despite
increased import protection.

 There are many factors          that determine an industry's
effectiveness in protection—seeking.        Its size in employment
terms is one important factor.      With declining employment an
industry is likely to face a dimuition of its political power
because of a fall in its voting strength and an attendant



                               — 24 —
decrease in i.ts abili.ty to raise funds for lobbying purposes.
The decline in the political power of the U.S. agricultural
sector as the farm population has declined is an example that
supports this hypothesis.       It seems likely, therefore, that
highly protected industries such as textiles and apparel will
gradually lose their ability to maintain a high degree of import
protection. Consequently, in older industrial nations the spread
of protection to sectors in which newly industrializing countries

gradually acquire international competitiveness may be offset by
a decrease in protection in currently protected sectors.
Counter—protectionist       pressures   also    build   up    as

industry—specific protection spreads. The stagnating effect of
this policy becomes more obvious as do the budgetary and economic

efficiency costs.      A state of aff.airs may thus be reached in
which protectionism will not increase on balance in the current
group of industrial countries or only at a very slow rate.
Meanwhile, export—oriented high technology and service sectors
will encourage continued international cooperation to maintain an

open trading regime.

  Even if this sanguine scenario takes place, the international

trading regime is likely to operate quite differently than it did
in the years of U.S. dominance. Industrial countries will seek
short—run economic reciprocity in their dealings with each
other.   In particular, the United States will no longer be
willing to trade access to the American market for acquiescence
to U.S. international political goals and the prospects of


                               — 25 —
long—term penetration of foreign economic            markets.   The

developing countries and nations with special political
relationships with particular major trading powers will probably
continue to be waived from the full reciprocity requirement but
their   trade benefits from this waiver will be closely
controlled.      Greater emphasis will be placed on bilateral
negotiations in reducing rontariff trade distortions, though
these negotiations may still take place at general meetings of
GATT members. The articles and codes of the GATT will provide
the broad framework for such negotiations, but the variety and

discriminatory     nature   of    nontariff   measures   make   true

multilateral negotiations too cumbersome. Bilateral negotiations
will also be used to a greater extent in handling trade
disputes. The GATT dispute-resolution mechanism will be utilized
by smaller countries in their dealings with the larger trading
nations and by the larger nations to call attention to actions by
one of their members that are outside of generally accepted
standards of good behavior. These means of settling disputes do
not differ essentially from the practices followed throughout the
history of the GATT.

 Greater discrimination in the application of trade restrictions
and in the granting of trade benefits is another feature of the

emerging inter-national trading regime. The safeguard provisions
of the GATT, for example, will probably be modified to permit the
selective imposition of quantitative import controls on a
temporary basis.    It will be justified, at least implicitly, on


                                 — 26 —
the grounds that injury—causing import surges from particular
suppliers represent a form of unfair competition and thus can be
countered with discriminatory restrictions under GATT rules.
Greater state assistance for the development and maintenance of

high technology and      basic     industries   will   be   another
characteristic of the international trading order likely to
evolve during the rest of the century.          The governments of
industrial countries and developing nations will continue to
insist on the use of subsidies to develop a certain minimum set
of high—technology industries and to maintain a number of basic
industries domestically on the grounds that these are needed for
a country to become or remain a significant economic power.


  The international trading regime described above is not one to
gain favor with economists.      It will not yield the degree of
static economic efficiency or economic growth that economists
believe is achievable in an open, nondiscriminatory trading
order. But this is an essay on the most likely nature of the
future international trading order and not on the regime
economists would like to see evolve.        Free trade is not a
politically stable policy in an economic world of continuing
significant structural shifts involving severe adjustment
problems for some politically important sectors and the demands
of infant industries for special treatment.        But neither is
general import protection a politically stable state of affairs
in modern industrial democracies with dynamic export sectors.
Politically stable conditions in this type of world economy


                              — 27 —
involve openness in some industries and protection in others with

the set of industries in each category changing over      time.    The

particular mix of openness and import protection can              vary
significantly, depending on such factors as the               country
distribution of economic power and the pace of structural
change.   The present situation in which there are three major
industrial trading powers plus a rapid rate of new technology
development and international transfer of old technology suggests

that the currently evolving trading regime will be characterized

by a greater degree of government control and private
cartelization than has existed throughout most of the postwar

period.



REFERENCES


Baldwin, R.E. (1958) The Commodity Composition of Trade: Selected
Industrial Countries, 1900—1954. The Review of Economics and

Statistics 40: 50—68.



Baldwin, R.E.   (1962) Implications of Structural Changes in
Commodity Trade. In Factors Affecting the   United   States

Balance of Payments, Part 1. Washington, D.C.: Joint Economic

Committee, 87th Congress, 2nd Session.



Belassa, B. and C. Belassa (1984) Industrial Protection in the
Developed Countries. The World Economy 7: 179—196.


                             — 28 —
 Branson, W. (1980) Trends in U.S. International Trade and Investment
 Si.nce World War II. In The American Economy in Transition.

 (M. Feldstein, ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


 Economic Report of the President. (1985) Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.



Keohane, R.O. (1984) After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the

World Political pjm. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


Moore, N. (1985) Import Relief from Fair and Unfair Trade in the

United States and the European Community. Madison, Wi.: University
of Wisconsin, Department of Economiôs.


New York Times. December 19, 1984.



Olson, N. (1983) The Political Economy of Comparative Growth Rates. I
The Political Economy of Comparative Growth Rates (D.C. Mueller,
ed.). New Haven: Yale University Press.



U.S. Department of Commerce (1985) United States Trade:
Performance in 1984 and Outlook. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Commerce, International Trade Administration.


United States International Trade Commission (1982) The



                              — 29 —
Effectiveness of Escape Clause Relief In Promoting Adjustment to

Import Competition. USITC Publication 1229, Washington, D.C.:

U. S. International Trade Commission.




                             — 30 —
