                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                BACK TO THE FUTURE OF GREEN POWERED ECONOMIES

                                           Juan Moreno Cruz
                                            M. Scott Taylor

                                         Working Paper 18236
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18236


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2012




We are very grateful to seminar audiences at several universities, and would like to thank, without
implicating, Bob Allen, Herb Emery, Oded Galor, Gene Grossman, Arvind Magesan and Jim Wilen
for comments. The usual disclaimer applies. Excellent research assistance was provided by Jevan Cherniwchan,
Nolan Derby and Rui Wan.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Juan Moreno Cruz and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Back to the Future of Green Powered Economies
Juan Moreno Cruz and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18236
July 2012
JEL No. N0,Q4,Q5

                                            ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to introduce the concept of power density [Watts/m²] into economics.
 By introducing an explicit spatial structure into a simple general equilibrium model we are able to
show how the power density of available energy resources determines the extent of energy exploitation,
the density of urban agglomerations, and the peak level of income per capita. Using a simple Malthusian
model to sort population across geographic space we demonstrate how the density of available energy
supplies creates density in energy demands by agglomerating economic activity. We label this result
the density-creates-density hypothesis and evaluate it using data from pre and post fossil-fuel England
from 1086 to 1801.


Juan Moreno Cruz
School of Economics
Georgia Institute of Technology
221Bobby Dodd Way
Atlanta, Georgia 30332
juan.moreno-cruz@econ.gatech.edu

M. Scott Taylor
IEE Canada Research Chair
Department of Economics
The University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, N.W.
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
mstaylor@ucalgary.ca
1       Introduction
In the not so distant past - and perhaps not so distant future - economies will rely, once
again, on renewable energy. In the not so distant past, solar power captured by wind ﬂows
and biomass production were the sole energy sources fueling human existence. The direct
and indirect fruits of solar power provided wood for heating, crops for eating, and fodder
for draft and game animals. Students of this era, particularly economic historians, debate
the role these nature given limits played in determining the economic limits to land use
(i.e. diminishing returns) identiﬁed by the giants of classical economics - Ricardo, Malthus
and Adam Smith. Students of our current era, particularly energy economists, look to a
not so distant future where post-industrial green powered economies may survive on the
direct and indirect fruits of solar power captured by wind turbines, wave motion, and silicon
panels. And similarly, many energy economists today debate the role green power can play
in powering a modern developed economy in the future.
    These two disciplines are separated by several hundred years in their respective periods
of study but share a common interest in understanding how the characteristics of renewable
energy sources determine the limits of an organic - or green powered - economy.1 The
purpose of this paper is to take a step back into the past to consider what our future may
look like if all energy is supplied by renewables. We do so by developing a simple general
equilibrium model that incorporates elements of an energy system thought to be important
by both economic historians and energy economists, and then ask how the physical limits of
renewable energy sources determine the economic limits of a green powered economy.
    We develop a model with four key features. First, we allow energy sources to diﬀer in
their power density. Power density measures the ﬂow of energy a source can provide per
unit area needed for its exploitation and maintenance. In the case of renewables power
density comes directly from the area requirement for a resource (say timber or biofuels or
solar power), together with its ability to provide a ﬂow of energy measured in Watts.
    It is somewhat surprising that a key characteristic of renewable energy, ignored in most
economic analyses, is the vast areas needed to provide power at anything approaching a
commercial scale. This areal constraint is well known in the case of biofuels since the land
tied up in their production is key to their cost, but area considerations are also important
in hydro power which displaces millions of people around the globe, and important to both
solar and wind power when they are asked to provide signiﬁcant energy ﬂows. The density
of available energy resources has however received considerable attention in the analyses of
    1
    In a series of contributions Sir Tony Wrigley refers to economies based wholly on the direct and indirect
ﬂows of solar power as ”organic economies”. Although this usage is not universally accepted we will use it
interchangeably with its, somewhat misleading, alternative ”green powered economies”.


                                                     2
economic historians, because the interplay of energy density and transport costs is commonly
held to be responsible for the small city sizes in pre-industrial times.2 To examine these
arguments we develop a spatial model of energy exploitation, transportation and use that
allows us to deﬁne and introduce the power density concept into economics.
   Second, energy economists and economic historians alike agree that every fuel source
has unique attributes that often requires - and always leads to - the introduction of a set
of facilitating goods that aid in its collection, transport, and conversion.                For example,
scythes, carts, and horse collars were all important facilitating goods in organic economies
just as today solar collectors, wind turbines, and DC converters are important for today’s
renewables. Since these goods are “intermediate” in the supply chain somewhere between the
exploitation and collection, and the ﬁnal use of energy, we will refer to them as intermediate
goods. The role of these intermediate goods is to facilitate the conversion of raw energy
inputs into ﬁnal energy services at a lower cost than otherwise. Our model gives a key role
to these energy converters since they are the backbone of any real world energy system.
    Third, the combination of the density of an energy source, the set of facilitating in-
termediate goods, and the pattern of production and consumption in an economy deﬁnes,
what we will call, an “energy system.” While referring to a set of interrelated demands
and supplies as a system is standard fare in economics, energy system experts and energy
historians have a more inclusive deﬁnition in mind. Their energy system is one where
complementarities between and across system components link consumption, transport and
exploitation in a mutually reinforcing way creating elements of increasing returns and path
dependence. To capture and hopefully understand the potential role played by these system
wide complementarities thought to be important in past, present, and presumably future
energy systems, we adopt a framework where increased specialization in the set of interme-
diate goods increases the eﬃcacy of the energy system. By design the extent of these system
wide complementarities is bounded and, by construction, easily manipulatable.
   Fourth, our spatial setting allows us to model the costly exploitation and transport of
energy explicitly. We assume transport is costly because it requires energy, and calculate
the work needed to move real resources across space. Transport requires both energy and
other inputs and we assume both inputs are essential. Since energy has to be collected,
reﬁned, transported, etc. it is diﬃcult to imagine a world where energy could be delivered at
zero energy cost to consumers; it is also impossible to think of energy being collected, moved
or distributed without complementary inputs such as wheel barrows, wagons, pipelines or
   2
    The link between city size and power density is very clearly made in many contributions of Vaclav Smil
(see for example Smil (2006, 2008)); it is also a recurrent theme in the work of Wrigely (see Wrigley (2010)
for one example) although Wrigley does not use the term power density. See also our discussion of Nunn
and Qian (2011) in section 6.


                                                     3
transmission lines that comprise the energy system.
   Within this context we develop several results. In our simplest model with only one
energy source and a social planner who maximizes delivered power, we show how the concept
of power density aﬀects energy supply. We ﬁnd energy supply is a cubic function of power
density. This ﬁnding not surprisingly, has large implications. For example, doubling
the density of an energy source implies eight times the energy supply. Alternatively in a
world with two energy sources, an energy source twice as dense as its counterpart would
be responsible for 8/9 of the energy supplied. These results reﬂect the power of the cubic,
but the cubic arises from a scaling law once we take into account the costs of transporting
energy in a world where geography matters.        The critical role we ﬁnd for power density
continues throughout our analysis and corroborates the key role economic historians have
given to energy constraints in an organic economy.
   Once we move to a market economy demand considerations - such as market size - also
play an important role. Larger markets support the entry of more specialized inputs and
create a more eﬃcient energy system. In some cases we ﬁnd energy prices fall with market
size. The reason is simple: while a larger demand for energy pushes up prices, it also leads
to improvements in the energy transportation system which, at least for some period, can
swamp the impact of sourcing energy from higher marginal cost sources. As a result both
the price of a Watt of power and the price of energy services delivered to consumers can fall
with market size before eventually rising.
    It may then come as no surprise that utility and consumption per capita can at ﬁrst
rise and then fall with market size. Indeed we ﬁnd that more dense energy sources provide
greater peak consumption per capita and they do so at larger population levels. This feature
of the consumption per person proﬁle creates an obvious energy-density driven incentive for
the agglomeration of activity. In this sense density in energy supply can create its own
density in energy demand - a result we term the density-creates-density hypothesis.
    Our model is highly abstract, largely static, and of very small dimension. It ﬁts no real
world economy past nor present, but does carry with it several potentially testable hypothe-
ses. To move towards an empirical evaluation we develop three additional results. We ﬁrst
show how to measure power density by decomposing it into three common, observable, and
fundamental features of energy resources: their renewability; their energy content; and their
dispersal in the environment. This makes the measuring of power density straightforward
in theory, although clearly still diﬃcult in practice.
    Second, since any real world landscape is cut by roads and rivers we extend our analysis to
examine how these low transport cost options aﬀect our results. Surprisingly we are able to
show an interesting equivalence. A city on a river or road enjoys an energy supply identical


                                              4
to that of a land-locked and isolated city with more dense resources at hand. Higher power
density of available resources is equivalent to having improved transportation options.
   Finally, population centers are not isolated states and hence we must allow for the possi-
bility that cities compete for both population and energy resources. To do so, we couple our
market model with a simple model of Malthusian population dynamics where consumption
per capita and population density jointly determine birth and death rates. The Malthusian
application gives us a simple mechanism to sort population across space and investigate
the density-creates-density hypothesis. We then evaluate its predictions by reviewing the
population history of England from 1100 to 1800 through the lens of our theory.
   Our work is related to contributions coming from three large and largely disjoint litera-
tures: economic history; energy economics; and economic geography. Our simplest model
with transport costs for energy collection generates results much like those in Von Thunen’s
Isolated State (1826). We likewise solve for a circular area of exploitation whose margins are
determined by a zero rent condition, but our work diﬀers since we generate transport costs
by taking explicit account of the density of the energy resources, the frictions in transport,
and the physical forces required to transport objects. As a result we derive a primitive per
meter transport cost - similar to that assumed by Von Thunen and popularized by Samuelson
as iceberg transportation costs - but now explicitly linked to fundamentals.
    We also diﬀer when we extend the simplest model to a market economy where energy
demanders and suppliers interact and determine the features of the energy system. Here
we ﬁnd that the increasing returns generated by complementarities in the energy system
combines with transport costs to generate a reason for economic activity to agglomerate.
Therefore, in contrast to Von Thunen’s work there is a reason for a village or city to exist.
Not surprisingly our Energy-Economy model is related to earlier contributions in economic
geography. Like Henderson (1974, 1980) the interplay of increasing returns and transport
costs generates an optimal city size. We diﬀer however by linking the density of economic
agglomeration to the density of the energy sources supplying the city. And similar to Fujita
et al (2000) we generate increasing returns at the economy level from increased specialization
in economic activity.
    Work in economic history is also related. Perhaps most importantly, Wrigley (2010)
argues the low density of available energy sources in the U.K made urbanization and fur-
ther progress impossible. He argues for a view of the Industrial Revolution where positive
feedbacks between the density of fossil fuels, the resulting urbanization, and eventual techno-
logical progress drive the transformation of the UK economy. Similarly, Smil (2008) argues
that the low density of biomass based fuels kept villages small and the market size for any
innovation too low to foster growth. Recent work by Nunn and Qian (2011) is also directly


                                              5
on point as they link the introduction of a new high density energy source (the lowly potato)
to population growth and urbanization in the Old World. Important work speciﬁc to the
period we study is Wrigley (1969, 1998), Allen (2009), and Clark (2009).
        Our work is far more abstract than these data-heavy accounts by historians. It oﬀers
to this literature a formal model of a green or organic economy that links the limits of
urbanization to primitives of the energy source, other economic attributes, and rivers and
road characteristics. It shows how migration, diﬀerential mortality, and the availability of
energy sources jointly determine city size and economic well being.
   Finally, there is a large and growing literature on the economics of renewable energy and
a healthy debate over its likely role in any future energy system.3 Contributions vary from
speciﬁc industry studies examining the costs of renewable energy to more macro approaches
evaluating the potential limits to growth. None of this work has, to our knowledge, recog-
nized that we have literally millennia of green economy experience under our belt already,
and as a result our examination of past green economies should provide guidance for the
future.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section two we introduce the concept of
power density and discuss how energy use over time has evolved in this context. This section
answers why it may be valuable to incorporate the concept of power density into economic
models. In the next section we show how to develop a simple model linking power density
to energy supply. This section develops deﬁnitions and establishes production possibilities
within our Only Energy model. Section four introduces an Energy-Economy model where
energy demand from ﬁrms interacts with energy supply to determine the rate of exploitation
for a single renewable energy source. Sections 5 and 6 contain our Malthusian application
and a discussion of data and hypothesis testing. A short conclusion ends the paper. All
proofs and lengthy calculations are relegated to the appendix.


2         Why Power Density?
The density of an energy source can be measured in a variety of ways. One method is to
rank sources according to their energy content measured in Joules/kg. Under this metric,
the energy contained in a kg of crop residue is less than that in a kg of wood, which is
in turn less than that of coal, and less than that of oil. Another method is to recognize
that some energy resources take up large areas for their maintenance and exploitation (crop
residue, wood, game animals) in comparison to what might be called punctiform resources
where energy resources are highly concentrated geographically (coal, fast moving rivers and
    3
        See for example the divergent views in Bryce (2010) and Droege (2009).


                                                       6
uranium). To capture both the energy content of sources and their geographic requirements,
some authors have employed the metric power density.
   The density of energy resources has long been a key concept in the analyses of economic
historians, because, as we will show, humans have always turned to increasingly dense fuels
during our industrialization. Straw and dung - to fuel wood and charcoal and coal - to
oil and natural gas and nuclear - all represent transitions to denser and denser fuels where
density refers to the ﬂow of energy these resources provide (measured in W atts of power)
per m2 needed for their maintenance or exploitation.4
   Density is important to capture because the concentration and agglomeration of economic
activity ﬁrst in villages, then cities and now mega-cities has meant the density of energy
consumption has grown tremendously. Energy demand in a major city like New York,
Tokyo or London requires a ﬂow of power in the range of 100 W atts/m2 (Smil, 2008).
Transporting and concentrating energy sources to meet this demand is a critical and major
function of any developed economy.
   To appreciate this relationship, consider the three panels shown in Figure 1. All panels
employ a historical time series for U.S. primary energy consumption from 1800 to 2005.
The ﬁrst panel shows how the composition of US energy consumption has changed over
time. It is interesting to note that new energy sources are added but old energy sources
do not disappear. For example, the primary energy generated by biomass in the U.S. was
approximately the same in 2005 as it was one hundred years earlier. The second panel shows
the same data but now in terms of shares. The share data suggests an almost smooth
repeating pattern of energy substitution across the last two hundred years, one that many
have taken as evidence of the inevitability of our move into renewables. Finally, in the
third panel this same data (excluding nuclear power) is used to construct the average energy
content and average power density of U.S. primary energy consumption indexing both to
100 in 2000.5 This ﬁgure casts the data in a diﬀerent light. The history of primary energy
consumption in the U.S. has been one of a dramatic rise in the energy content and power
density of consumption. As shown the average energy content of consumption has risen
   4
     For example, the newest wind turbine can in a very windy location capture 65 megajoules/m2 and
this is, what an engineer would call, its power density. Similarly, dry wood as an energy content of 15
megajoules/kg; a healthy forest delivers 20 kg/m2 in perpetuity, and hence dry wood has a power density
of 300 megajoules/m2
   5
     The three panels of Figure 1 are constructed using data from ﬁve sources: (i) energy consumption data
from the US Energy Information Administration Annual Report of 2009, (ii) data on energy content from
the World Energy Council’s Survey of Energy Resources (2010), (iii) data on power density from Smil (2010),
(iv) urban and rural population data for period 1800-1990 from the US Census Bureau’s 1990 Census of
Population and Housing (1990) and (v) urban and rural population data for the year 2000 from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s American Fact Finder. The urban and rural population data was only available for 10 year
intervals; the data presented in the ﬁgure were linearly interpolated to ﬁll in the missing 5-year intervals.



                                                     7
                70              60
 Primary Energy (Quadrillion BTUs)
 10   20     30 0  40      50


                                     1800     1825       1850      1875         1900      1925       1950       1975        2000
                                                                                 Year

                                                Coal               Liquid Fossil Fuels             Biomass              Nuclear




                                            (a) U.S. Primary Energy Consumption
  .5 .6         1
                .9
                .8
                .7
 Share
                .4
                .3
                .2
                .1
                0




                                     1800     1825       1850      1875         1900      1925       1950       1975        2000
                                                                                 Year

                                                Coal               Liquid Fossil Fuels             Biomass              Nuclear




                                                    (b) U.S. Energy Use in Shares
  120
  100
  80
  60
  40
  20
  0




                       1800                  1825      1850      1875        1900        1925      1950       1975      2000
                                                                               Year

                                                     Power Density (2000=100)                   Energy Content (2000=100)
                                                     Urban Population (%)




(c) Weighted Average of U.S. Energy Content and Power

                                            Figure 1: U.S. Energy Transitions

                                                                                8
more than 2.5 fold, while the average power density of consumption has risen almost 100
fold over the period. Also graphed in the third panel is the share of the U.S. population
living in urban centers of more than 2500 people. The close connection between these series
is intriguing. A major goal of this paper is to understand how they may be related and its
major question is to ask whether the density of available energy sources causes density in
economic activity.
    Given the last panel in the ﬁgure it is perhaps not surprising that economic and energy
historians have repeatedly highlighted the role power density plays in limiting city size and
economic progress. A few quotes should suﬃce to convey the importance they ascribe to
this measure. For example, energy historian Vaclav Smil states in a discussion on the limits
of city size:
    “. . . pre-industrial cities needed at least ten and up to thirty Watts per square meter of
their built up area. This means that if they relied entirely on wood, they needed nearby
areas of between 50-150 times their size in order to have sustainable phytomass” (Smil, 2006,
p. 73).
    Smil goes on to note how the cost of transporting energy from such large areas is why
city size was so limited in pre-industrial times.
   But power density is not only thought relevant to city size in early human history, eco-
nomic historian Sir Tony Wrigley has in a number of articles and one book length treatment
argued that overcoming the limitations of green power were key to the industrial revolution
in the U.K.
    “As long as supplies of both mechanical and heat energy were conditioned by the annual
quantum of insolation and the eﬃciency of plant photosynthesis in capturing incoming solar
radiation, it was idle to expect a radical improvement in the material conditions of the bulk
of mankind” (Wrigley, 2010, p. 17).
    And ﬁnally, several present day energy analysts have pointed to the low power density
of renewables to argue against their usefulness in any future energy system. For example,
energy expert and provocateur Robert Bryce argues:
    ”The essential problem with renewables is that they fail the ﬁrst test of the Four Imper-
atives: power density...The weak power density of renewables has become so apparent that
the Nature Conservancy,...., recently coined the term energy sprawl’” (Bryce, 2010, p. 84).
    It is of course diﬃcult, if not impossible, to examine these arguments further without a
formal model that allows us to understand the role power density may play in an economic
system.




                                              9
3     The Only Energy Model
We start by introducing a simple model of energy exploitation where energy is the only
input and only output of production. We do so to introduce our assumptions on geography
and costly transport, to deﬁne power and energy density, and to derive several preliminary
results useful to our subsequent analysis.
   We assume consumption and production activities are located at an economic core while
potential energy sources are distributed in the surrounding space. The economy’s core con-
tains all of its production and consumption units but is zero dimensional. The exploitation
zones where energy sources can be found are two dimensional planes allowing us to employ
deﬁnitions of area, distance, and density. Distance is meant to capture any and all costs
incurred when incremental amounts of energy are exploited. For some energy sources, dis-
tance is more than a metaphor. Timber resources for example may only be available some
distance from the core; and for some renewable energies - solar or wind power, or biofuels
- measures of area are important to consider. For other energy sources, like fossil fuels,
area considerations are less important, but here increasing distance can reﬂect the diﬃcul-
ties ﬁrms have in accessing incremental resources due to well depth, weather conditions, and
non-standard geological formations.
    Introducing geography into an energy model allows us to assess the arguments made
regarding power density and the roles it may play in a coupled economy-energy system.
It also allows us to distinguish our work from much of traditional thinking in energy and
resource economics where questions concerning the optimal depletion of a given resource base
have received much attention. Instead, we treat energy resources as essentially limitless but
with increments coming at a rising marginal cost.
   The area exploited to ﬁnd and collect energy is related to the power demands of the core
measured in watts, [W], and the power density, Δ, measured in [W/m2 ] of the particular
energy source exploited. If the ﬂow of needed power is W , then the area exploited must
equal:
                                       EX = W/Δ                                           (1)

where EX is measured in m2 .


3.1    The Geography of Exploitation
If the energy resources are distributed uniformly, then minimum cost search implies energy
will be collected from a circular area with the economy’s core at its center. To calculate the
average distance resources travel to the core, we need to relate the distance a resource travels


                                              10
with the density of resources at that distance. Suppose we exploit a circular area deﬁned by
a radius R. The density of resources at any given radii r less than R is simply given by the
circumference at this distance, 2πr, divided by the sum of all radii up to and including the
limiting radius of R. Since the total area exploited is πR2 , the density function for energy
resources must be given by f (r) = 2r/R2 . The average distance any resource is transported
is then simply the distance r times the density of resources at that distance. We will refer
to this as the average carry distance, ACD, and it is given by:

                                         R
                                                           2
                                ACD =         r[2r/R2 ]dr = R                              (2)
                                                           3
                                         0


While we assume energy resources are evenly distributed across (a two-dimensional) space,
it should be clear that other options are easily dealt with. For example, suppose the core
was located with resource availability in mind (not an unlikely scenario), then resources may
be dense near the core and less dense further away. Alternatively, we could allow for the
equally likely possibility that a new energy source is located further from the core than was
the older established source (think of the potential wind resources on the Great Plains or
solar power farms in Arizona!). In all these cases, an appropriate adjustment of the density
f (r) is warranted and will generate average carry distances less than or greater than that
given in (2).
    Since Area isπR2 and EX represents the area of exploitation, we have ACD = (2/3)(EX/π)1/2 =
     √
(2/3 π)(W/Δ)1/2 using (1). ACD is measured in meters; to calculate the work done in
transporting energy resources we need to ﬁnd what we will call “Total Carry”, measured
in kg-meters. This is found by multiplying the average carry distance by the total weight
of resources transported. Total energy resources transported is equal to the area under
exploitation times the density of fuel over this area. Therefore, Total Carry is given by:
                     ∼
                    T C = ACD × EX × d = [m][m2 ][kg/m2 ]=[kg × m]
                                 1/2
                     ∼        2    W
                    TC =     √           EX.d                                              (3)
                            3 π    Δ
                                 3/2
                     ∼       2d    W
                    TC =     √
                            3 π    Δ

where again use has been made of (1), and d is the (uniform) physical density of this resource
in [kg/m2 ]. Total carry is the number of kilogram-meters covered in transporting energy to
the core when the power requirements are W and the energy source has density Δ.
    Not surprisingly, the greater are the power requirements, the greater are total carrying

                                               11
costs. Less obvious is that marginal (carrying) costs are strictly increasing in power.                 As
power demand rises, larger and larger areas for exploitation must come at the fringe of
already sourced areas.


3.2     The Physics of Transport
Production possibilities are determined by the amount of power that can be supplied to
the core. This section sets out maximum supplied power as a function of energy resource
characteristics. A ﬁrst step in doing so is to recognize that power collected does not equal
power available for use in the core. The collection and transportation of resources, like
everything else, requires power. The net power supplied to the core is equal to total power
collected in the exploitation zone, W , minus the power needed for transportation. In obvious
notation, W S = W − W T .
    To calculate the power used in transport, a little high school physics is required. Recall
Work is equal to force, f , times distance, x, or work is Wk = f.x. Force is in turn equal to
mass, M , times acceleration g; as any mass moved horizontally must overcome the force of
gravity as mediated by friction in transport.6 All this implies:

                          Wk = μ[M × g]x = [Newton.meters] = [Joules]                                   (4)
                          Wk = μg[M × x]
                          Wk = μg[Total Carry]

where μ is the coeﬃcient of friction, g is the acceleration of gravity at 9.81m/s2 , and Wk is
then measured in Joules. This work is done per unit time since power is ﬂow as is the ﬂow
of labor services and the ﬂow of useful output. If we measure time in seconds, then the ﬂow
of work, Wk , measured in Joules per second is now power requirements measured in Watts.7
So the total cost of delivering the ﬂow of power W to the core is given by T C(W ). Using
(3) and (4) we can write this total cost as:

                                              
                                     W T = μg T C(W ) = T C(W )                                         (5)

Note T C(W ) is a strictly convex function where T C(0) = T C  (0) = 0. The calculation of
supplied power W S is shown in Figure 2. The vertical height of T C(W ) at any W gives the
   6
      We are ignoring static friction encountered when the object ﬁrst moves. The force that needs to be
overcome to keep an object in motion is equal to the normal force times the coeﬃcient of friction. Since the
object is moving horizontally, the normal force is just gravity times the mass of the object The coeﬃcient
of friction is a pure number greater than zero; and force is measured in Newtons.
    7
      Expending a Joule of energy per second means you are delivering power of one Watt.


                                                    12
                               Figure 2: Optimal Energy Exploitation

                                                                  TC(W )
                         Watts
                        Delivered




                              W*




                              WT




                                                    W*           WE         Watts
                                                                           Collected



power used in transporting to the core the resources represented by their associated power
on the horizontal axis. By construction, the gap between the 45 degree line and T C(W )
represents supplied power. Therefore extending our exploitation to collect power W E results
in zero power supplied since all of it would be exhausted in transport. In contrast, W ∗
maximizes supplied power because the vertical distance between W ∗ and T C(W ∗ ) represents
maximum of W S = W ∗ − T C(W ∗ ).
    One important feature of the ﬁgure is that it shows the energy system is productive. A
productive energy system is one that can provide positive supplied power to the economy:
that is, there exists extraction levels for which the power needed for delivery to the core do
not exhaust power collected. The system here is always productive regardless of the costs
of transport. Even if we push the coeﬃcient of friction towards inﬁnity making transport
very costly in terms of energy, the slope of the total carry curve at zero Watts, is still zero.
In contrast the slope of the 45 degree line remains one even at zero Watts, and hence for any
ﬁnite coeﬃcient of friction, there will always exist an opportunity to deliver positive power
to the core.8
    It is straightforward to show that the maximum supplied power is increasing in power
density Δ as this shifts T C(W ) outwards, and increasing, for the same reason, when the
transportation system becomes more eﬃcient in the physical sense (μ falls). Associated
   8
   This does not imply that all landscapes have suﬃcient resources to support life or a productive economy.
We discuss these issues in later sections.



                                                    13
with any W ∗ is an area of exploitation EX ∗ . If we focus on eﬃcient (in terms of maximized
supplied power) outcomes then we have a simple model of how the density of an energy
resource aﬀects power available for use in the core.
       When supplied power is maximized, total power is given by:

                                                       πΔ3
                                              W∗ =                                                       (6)
                                                      [μgd]2

   The optimal solution is a cubic function of power density. The intuition is illuminating.
Suppose we increase power density but leave the area of exploitation ﬁxed; then supplied
power should rise proportionately with power density; i.e. appear with power 1 in an expres-
sion like (6). But a higher power density also implies the marginal cost of exploitation falls.
With lower marginal costs, exploitation rises and the radius of search increases. Since area is
proportional to the square of radius, total power rises with the square of power density when
the extensive margin of exploitation changes. Putting this logic together it is apparent why
power density is so powerful in determining outcomes.9
   To ﬁnd the portion of power used in transport and the remainder that is supplied to the
core, evaluate total carry at W ∗ and subtract to ﬁnd:
                                                             
                                      1                        2
                                 W =S
                                         W ∗,              T
                                                          W =     W∗                                     (7)
                                      3                        3

       Two thirds of the energy collected is spent in transport leaving only one third to supply
the power needs of the core.
   The area of exploitation is also a function of power density since at the optimum:

                                                       Δ2
                                 EX ∗ = W ∗ /Δ = π          = π[R∗ ]2                                    (8)
                                                     [μgd]2
                                                     Δ
                                               R∗ =                                                      (9)
                                                    μgd

Having a more dense energy source means the energy costs of exploiting far away regions
is less: dense energy sources feed further exploitation. The area of exploitation for a fuel
twice as dense as another is four times larger. This feature seems to ring true. Villages
in the Middle Ages rarely sourced fuel wood from more than a few miles away.10 Coal
   9
      This result is not a function of our assumed circular exploitation zone and is in fact an example of a
scaling law. Expanding margins in two dimensions always leads to a squared term for power density. Section
5.2 demonstrates this for non-circular zones that arise when the landscape is cut by rivers, roads or canals.
   10
      Towns on rivers would be an exception since their transport costs are far less. See our discussion of
rivers in section 5.2.



                                                     14
however has been transported hundreds of miles on barges, wagons and trains for much of
the last two centuries. Today oil is sourced from some of the most inhospitable climates
in the far reaches of the planet and from wells drilled literally miles deep below the ocean
surface. Equation (8) and (9) tells us this is no surprise - dense energy sources beget large
exploitation zones.
   To see exactly why this is true, think about the costs of moving one Watt of power
just one meter. Since friction is a constant returns process this is all we really need to
understand. One Watt of power, takes up 1/Δ square meters of area which in turn implies
the energy resources it represents must weigh d/Δ kilograms. Moving this mass one meter,
and overcoming friction, requires a ﬂow of power of μgd/Δ. Therefore, μgd/Δ is the number
of Watts needed to transport one Watt worth of an energy source with power density Δ,
one meter. It is now apparent that (9) identiﬁes those marginal energy resources which are
located R∗ meters from the core and provide zero net energy supply: that is, 1 − R∗ μgd
                                                                                     Δ
                                                                                        = 0.
The more dense are the energy resources, the lower are the transport costs of obtaining a
marginal watt of power, and not surprisingly the energy exploitation zone must grow.
   Our discussion of marginal energy resources suggests an alternative method of ﬁnding net
supply. Net power supplied must come from adding up, what we could call, ”energy rents”.
These rents, 1 − μgd
                   Δ
                     r, are collected at distances r ≤ R∗ from the core. To add them up
consider this two step procedure. Along any ray from the core, there are Δ watts of power
every meter and transporting these resources at distance r from the core yields a density of
            
Δ 1 − μgd
        Δ
           r net watts of power at distance r from the core. Add these resources along our
ray over all distances less than R∗ , and then accumulate these quantities by sweeping across
the 2π radians of our circular exploitation zone. By doing so we obtain net power supply
to the core as the sum of all energy rents:
                                         2π       R∗
                                                                  μgd
                           W =S
                                                         vΔ[1 −       · v]dvdϕ          (10)
                                      0         0                  Δ
                                               3
                                    πΔ
                           WS =
                                  3 [μgd]2

It is sometimes useful to ﬁnd power supply using this method, once the zero rent margin
R∗ has been identiﬁed. It is also useful in highlighting our formulations similarity to Von
Thunen (1836). In Von Thunen’s work crops of various types generate rent gradients falling
with distance to the city center; and the market economy’s demands for wood, cereals, or
meat sets relative prices and land use. Aggregating across energy sources is in fact easy,
if we assume their collection costs are independent. In this case, two independent energy
sources with power densities Δ1 and Δ2 would provide net power in total of:


                                                         15
                                                             π Δ̄3
                                     W S = W1S + W2S =
                                                           3 [μgd]2
               
where Δ̄ =     3
                 Δ31 + Δ32 . It is as if the economy had only one energy source with density Δ̄
rather than two. We will exploit this result and aggregate all energy resources into one. The
simplicity this aﬀords allows us to tie a set of fundamentals comprising μgd
                                                                          Δ
                                                                             to unit distance -
or iceberg - transport costs, and thereby provide micro foundations for Von Thunen’s classic
work.11


3.3       What determines power density?
Thus far we have taken power density as a given ﬁxed constant. This may be a reasonable
representation of reality for solar and wind and water resources where the ﬂow is beyond
human manipulation. It may however be less accurate in situations where energy suppliers
could vary their take of an energy resource (timber, crops, livestock) and thereby aﬀect their
future productivity. If what we take today aﬀects future productivity of energy resources (a
not unlikely result), then our energy maximizing planner may want to take this into account
and choose a path that maximizes some measure of aggregate energy ﬂows over time. While
this may seem rather esoteric at present, it proves useful to consider this possibility now.
    To understand how this additional margin of adjustment may aﬀect our results, we need
to examine the concept of power density more closely. Recall power density is the rate
at which an energy resource can deliver a ﬂow of energy services per unit time divided by
the area needed to ﬁnd, collect, and maintain the resource. It is found by multiplying the
quantity of a fuel we can collect per unit time by the fuel’s energy content per unit fuel, and
then dividing by the area under exploitation. This calculation will produce Δ measured in
the units [Watts/m2 ]. Watts are a measure of energy ﬂow per unit time, and meters squared
are an indicator of area. An example is instructive especially for the renewable resource
case as all green energies are at bottom governed by renewable resource dynamics.
   Suppose a potential fuel is renewable with natural growth given by G(S) with G(0) =
G(K) = 0, and G being strictly concave. For example, this could be a forest, an area
dedicated to biofuels, or even an area dedicated to solar or wind power. It is helpful to
ﬁrst take a speciﬁc example with explicit units. Take logistic growth as our example (i.e.
G(S) = rS[1 − S/K]), and the maximum sustainable yield harvest, H msy , as one possible
 11
      See Samuelson (1983) for a modern exposition of Von Thunen.




                                                   16
plan for taking from the resource. Then in perpetuity this harvest is given by:

                             H msy = G(S msy ) = G(K/2) = rK/4                             (11)

where r is the intrinsic resource growth rate and K is the carrying capacity. Now consider
units explicitly. If K is measured in kilos and K = 100 kg, and r = 10% per unit time, then
the sustainable harvest is (.1)(100)/(4)=2.5kg/unit time. If we multiply this quantity by the
energy content of the fuel in [Joules/kg] denoted by e, we obtain a measure of [Joules] per
unit time that could be harvested from the resource. Choosing to measure time in seconds,
we obtain [Watts]. The ﬁnal step is to divide this ﬂow of power by the area of exploitation
needed to maintain it. Since the carrying capacity is K kg, and if the fuel has a physical
density, d, measured in [kg/m2 ], then the total area needed for this resource ﬂow is K/d.
All this implies we can write power density, Δ as:

                                        (rK/4)e   Watts
                                  Δ=            =
                                          K/d      m2
                                  Δ = γred         γ > 0.

    Power density is the simple product of three fundamental, commonly used, and poten-
tially observable characteristics of an energy source, and one behavioral component captured
in the parameter γ. Power density is proportional to the product of an energy source’s max-
imal rate of regeneration, r which measures the percentage rate of growth of the resource
in an unconstrained environment. Perhaps not surprisingly, a renewable energy source that
grows twice as fast has twice the power density. It is also proportional to the energy content
of the fuel, e, measured in [Joules/kg], again perhaps not surprising that energy content
matters but the speciﬁc form is of course not obvious. Finally power density also depends
on a fuel’s physical density, d, measured in [kg/m2 ]. All else equal a fuel that produces a
greater output in terms of harvest weight gives more energy.
    The remaining term in power density is the factor of proportionality γ which captures
the intensity of harvesting. To see this note that if harvesting results in a steady state stock
equal to a fraction of the carrying capacity given by κK, then γ = κ(1− κ) < 1. The example
given above has κ = 1/2 and γ = 1/4. We chose this example for a particular reason: if
the planner was interested in maximizing total energy collected over an indeﬁnite future,
then its clear the planner would adjust their take to match that of the maximum sustainable
yield. This is obvious, but more generally, if the planner discounted the value of future
versus current energy ﬂows, the optimal stationary harvest maximizing this objective would
lead to δ = G (S ∗ ) where δ is the discount rate on future periods. This is an application


                                              17
of a well known result in resource economics.12 In a stationary environment (like ours), the
intensity of harvesting is set to equalize the return from the resource to the energy supplier’s
discount rate. Leaving a marginal unit of the resource in situ raises future harvests by
G (S ∗ ) in perpetuity; taking it out today rather than tomorrow earns a return of δ. And
therefore, in our example our perfectly patient planner who only cares about total energy
ﬂows choses the maximum sustainable yield since 0 = G (S ∗ ).13
   The point of this exercise is that although power density may in some cases be subject
to manipulation, in a stationary environment it is fully determined by parameters of the
system. It is simply linked to four potentially observable magnitudes: the rate of resource
regeneration, the energy content of the fuel provided, its physical density, and the discount
rate applied to future rents by energy suppliers. This result is in fact general and not a
function of our logistic example, and the constancy of power density will also carry over
when we introduce a market economy with price determination.


3.4     Summary
The only energy model, although simple, tells us three things that carry forward with only
small amendment throughout our analysis. First, diﬀerences in power density across energy
resources are likely to create large diﬀerences in energy supply. Given the cubic formulation
even relatively small diﬀerences in power density matter greatly to outcomes. Second, we
are likely to search far and wide to exploit dense energy resources. The very density of
the energy resource we seek, fuels our eﬀorts at obtaining more. Finally, even though we
have assumed the potential supply of energy resources is limitless, the net supply of energy
resources is what matters. And the net energy supply will always be constrained by the
physical necessity of using energy in the costly exploitation and transportation of energy.


4      The Energy-Economy Model
Thus far we have said nothing about how a market economy would interact with the techno-
logical possibilities described. While there are many ways to embed our energy model in a
market economy setting, three large pieces of the puzzle are missing from the analysis thus
far. First, what is the demand for power in the core and how does this demand set prices
and determine exploitation zones? Second, how are the costs of transportation determined
  12
     See for example Neher (1990, p.28) for a discussion.
  13
      The optimal stock and attendant harvesting is set only by impatience and is independent of prices. In
our simple example with logistic growth, power density is simply Δ = γred, and γ = [1 − δ/r]2 /4 is positive
as long as suppliers discount rate is not too high.


                                                    18
by the cost of other factors used in transportation? And ﬁnally, how can we incorporate
elements of our only energy model into a tractable general equilibrium framework that allows
for the positive feedbacks thought to be important in real world energy systems?


4.1     Tastes, Technology, Endowments
There are L identical consumers each endowed with one unit of labor. Their utility is deﬁned
over the consumption, C, of a ﬁnal output good Y which provides energy services. Con-
sumers’ income comes from providing labor services and from reaping resource rents. Since
nothing important hinges on consumer numbers we will model a representative consumer
with labor endowment L. Utility of our consumer is strictly increasing and strictly concave
in consumption:

                                    u = u(C),         u > 0,        u < 0                         (12)

   Final output Y , is produced inter alia by a set of goods intermediate in the supply
chain between energy exploitation and ﬁnal consumption. Naturally we will refer to them
as intermediate goods. We take them to represent a set of capital goods and consumer
durables tailored to a speciﬁc energy source. These intermediate goods are of course the
backbone of any real world energy system since they are the means by which energy services
are delivered to ﬁrms and consumers in the economy.
    While any one ﬁrm or individual may employ only a subset of these intermediates to
provide energy services, aggregate output in the economy would be a function of all available
intermediates. One simple, tractable, and common way to capture the reliance of ﬁnal
output on the set of intermediates is to adopt a constant elasticity Dixit-Stiglitz speciﬁcation
for ﬁnal goods production.                         σ
                                            n              σ−1
                                                  σ−1
                                    Y ≡          xiσ
                                                                 ,    σ>1                            (13)
                                           i=1

where each of the xi are diﬀerentiated intermediate goods produced by a single ﬁrm. To-
gether these intermediates provide the service ﬂow represented by the ﬁnal output Y .14
   It is important to our analysis that the set of available intermediates is endogenously
determined. To do so we follow standard practice and assume σ > 1 to allow for their
production by monopolistically competitive ﬁrms. The number of ﬁrms is then determined
by a free entry condition. Each of these ﬁrms incur both ﬁxed and variable costs to produce
any intermediate. Let ai be the activity level of ﬁrm i, then the production of a typical
  14
   The service interpretation is well known and well used in the international trade literature.   See for
example, Markusen (1990).


                                                      19
intermediate at level xi requires ai units of activity. That is:

                                     ai = α + βxi        ∀i                            (14)

where α represents the set up cost to produce a typical intermediate while β represents its
constant marginal cost of production in terms of activity.
    Activity is the employment of labor in conjunction with power. Speciﬁcally, the activity
of each ﬁrm, ai , requires both a ﬂow of energy and labor given by the following constant
returns function:
                                     ai = f (li , Wi )   ∀i                            (15)

We take (15) to be a Cobb-Douglas function with a labor share in the value of output given
by z. Constant returns is innocuous given increasing returns are already assumed in the
mapping from activity to intermediate output; the constant shares assumption is useful in
identifying speciﬁc regions of the parameter space to characterize results.
   Combining these assumptions we see that ﬁnal energy services to consumers (and pro-
ducers) are provided by a set of diﬀerentiated processes that use both conventional inputs
(labor) and energy. In the abstract, these processes are energy converters that provide
the services of heat, light and power; and any energy converter that transforms energy into
services with the help of conventional inputs is broadly consistent with our formulation (a
toaster, ﬂashlight, and laser printer all ﬁt the bill). In the concrete, we have ignored the
particularities of these converters by assuming all intermediate goods are symmetric sub-
stitutes; and importantly, we have adopted a formulation where the greater is the number
of ways energy services can be delivered, the higher is the system’s overall productivity in
translating energy and inputs into services.


4.2    The Demand for Energy
The demand for energy comes from two sources. Energy is used in the production of
intermediates, as well, energy is used directly in transportation much as it was in the only
energy model. It proves useful to treat energy used in transportation as an input use
problem, and we leave it to our discussion of energy supply in the next section.
    To determine energy demand arising from production, note that the minimum cost pro-
duction of Y implies demands for each xi intermediate good is of the form:

                               xi = Ap−σ
                                      i          for some A > 0.                       (16)

   Individual producers, taking A as given, adopt a ﬁxed mark-up rule over marginal costs

                                                20
making intermediate prices, pi
                                                       
                                                   σ
                                       pi =                 βc(w, pW )                  (17)
                                                  σ−1

where c(w, pW ) is the unit cost function dual to (15), w represents the wage rate of labor
and pW the price of a Watt of power. Free entry implies that proﬁts to intermediate goods
producers will be eliminated in equilibrium and hence this implies:

                                       pi xi = c(w, pW )[α + βxi ]

   As is well known, the mark up rule and zero proﬁt condition neatly solve for the level of
output and activity per ﬁrm. Shephard’s Lemma then returns the implied factor demands
for labor and energy per ﬁrm. Together these are simply:

                            α
                    x∗i =     (σ − 1)         a∗i = ασ                                  (18)
                            β
                     li∗ = ασ∂c(w, pW )/∂w              Wi∗ = ασ∂c(w, pW )/∂pW

Since all ﬁrms are identical, total energy demanded (for production purposes) is just n times
ﬁrms speciﬁc demand Wi∗ .
   The number of ﬁrms, n, is endogenous and depends on the overall market size as indexed
by L. To solve for the number of ﬁrms use the ﬁrm speciﬁc demands for labor and note full
                     
employment requires ni=1 li∗ = L. By substituting for li∗ we can solve for the number of
ﬁrms:                                             1−z    1−z
                                  L            1−z         L     w
                n = L/li = ∗         W
                                          =                 ∗
                                                                                    (19)
                           ai zc(w, p )/w       z         ai    pW
because wli = za∗i c(w, pW ). We can now add up across ﬁrms to ﬁnd aggregate energy
demand, W D (Watts demanded) as:
                                                                       
                                   D                     1−z          w
                               W       = nWi = L                                        (20)
                                                          z          pW

The properties of demand follow directly from our assumptions. Constant returns implies an
increase in what we will refer to as market size, L, raises demand proportionately. Constant
factor shares implies a unitary price elasticity of demand; energy demand would however
respond negatively to a price increase under any suitable generalization.




                                                    21
4.3       The Aggregate Production Function
An important feature of our framework is that its aggregate behavior depends on character-
istics of the energy system. In some cases, the aggregate behavior is very neoclassical; in
others, its behavior reﬂects increasing returns coming from positive feedbacks in the energy
system. Not surprisingly, it is useful to understand some of the forces in play even before
we attempt to solve for the general equilibrium. To do so recall that ﬁnal output is given by
(13). By substituting from (18) we can write ﬁnal output solely as a function of the number
of ﬁrms producing intermediate goods and parameters. To go further use (19) and (20) to
write the number of intermediates as a constant returns function of labor input and watts
delivered to the core. Putting these results together and setting power supply to demand,
we can solve for the economy’s aggregate production function relating ﬁnal energy service
output to the economy’s (inelastically supplied) endowment of labor and the (endogenously
determined) supply of power:

                                    Y = BLa W b with a + b > 1,                                           (21)
                                           zσ      [1 − z]σ
                                     a=       , b=          , B > 0,
                                          σ−1        σ−1

      While energy is an endogenous variable, this doesn’t stop us from characterizing the
returns to scale when both inputs are varied. It is apparent from (21) that the aggregate
production function is homogenous of degree σ/[σ − 1] > 1: therefore, the aggregate pro-
duction function always exhibits increasing returns to its two inputs - labor and (delivered)
power. Thus far we have assumed that σ is greater than one in order to support monopolisti-
cally competitive ﬁrms producing unique intermediates; but, without any further restrictions
the production function’s degree of increasing returns is unbounded. Very simply, as σ ap-
proaches one from above, the degree of increasing returns approaches inﬁnity. Unbounded
increasing returns is of course an undesirable feature in any economic model since it makes
a mockery of resource constraints.
    Typically we bound increasing returns to eliminate undesirable or unbelievable outcomes.
One natural way to bound increasing returns is to assume diminishing marginal returns to
each input. That is, by assuming a < 1 and b < 1. Diminishing returns to each input
individually seems hardly novel or controversial but it is helpful and this is what we will do
here.15 One implication of assuming diminishing returns to each input is that the sum of
their exponents σ/[σ − 1] must be less than two. Therefore, diminishing returns provides
a simple bounding condition on the aggregate production function’s degree of increasing
 15
      In all of that follows we assume each input exhibits diminishing marginal productivity: a < 1, and b < 1.



                                                       22
returns that is independent of factor shares: σ > 2.
  While we have bounded increasing returns we have not eliminated their role. In much of
what follows we focus on two cases. We will refer to one of these as the Almost Neoclassical
case; the other as the Increasing Returns case. To understand why we obtain two cases, we
ﬁrst write the endogenous supply of power as a function of market size, W = W (L). Then
diﬀerentiate 21 with respect to market size and rearrange slightly to obtain:

                           dY    zσ   [1 − z]σ dW L              dL
                              =     +                                                      (22)
                            Y   σ−1     σ−1    dL W               L

This derivation highlights the link between the energy system’s ability to provide additional
power in response to an increase in market size, with the degree of aggregate returns the
economy as a whole will exhibit. Our discussion above on the aggregate production func-
tion’s degree of increasing returns concerned the typical hypothetical when both inputs are
varied in proportion; in contrast, 22 characterizes the equilibrium degree of increasing returns
the economy exhibits when its one primary factor, L, is varied and the economy’s endoge-
nous power supply adjusts accordingly. As shown this equilibrium behavior depends on the
energy system’s ability to provide additional power, dW/dL, since this response determines
the magnitude of the term in large brackets.
   The two possibilities are now fairly clear. In one case, the model generates almost
neoclassical results despite the existence of positive feedbacks and increasing returns. This
case is associated with a weak response of power to a change in market size and occurs
when power responds less than proportionately with market size. The model behaves very
diﬀerently from a neoclassical benchmark when power responds more than proportionately
with market size. In this second case, the economy’s behavior will look anything but
neoclassical.
    It is an interesting feature of the model that the same conditions which make increasing
returns in the aggregate production function stronger (i.e. a relatively low value for σ that
renders σ/[σ − 1] large) also ensure the power supply response to a change in market size is
large. And a relatively high value of σ that renders σ/[σ − 1] small, also ensures the power
supply response to a change in market size is small. Therefore, our two cases (by and large)
can be described as the Almost Neoclassical case with large σ and weak increasing returns;
or, the Increasing Returns case with small σ and strong increasing returns.
    We now turn to an examination of supply.




                                              23
4.4     The Supply of Energy
We assume a sole energy supplier chooses the area of exploitation to maximize ﬂow proﬁts
taking prices as parametric.16 The energy supplier’s optimization problem is to choose total
power to maximize proﬁts:

                                 Max Π = pW W − (pW + pC )T C(W )                                        (23)
                                  W


where W is total power embodied in the energy resources exploited, pC is the price of the
ﬁnal output, and T C(W ) is total carry as deﬁned before.
   There are three assumptions reﬂected in (23). The ﬁrst concerns how we have dealt with
the issue of net power. By construction, the ﬁrm chooses total power to maximize proﬁts,
but supplies to the market only that power net of use in transportation. It in eﬀect sells W
watts of power at pW but buys back from itself T C(W ) watts to pay for transportation back
to the core.17 By making power requirements proportional to total carry we have stayed true
to the physics of transport highlighted in the Only Energy Model.
    The second assumption is that transportation uses both energy and the ﬁnal output
good as inputs. The assumption provides a link between the eﬃciency of providing energy
services and the cost of energy exploitation. We mentioned previously how lower energy
prices created entry into intermediate good production and raised productivity; now we see
that this higher productivity (created, for example, by an energy price decline) will imply
lower exploitation costs and greater energy supply. This assumption closes the positive
feedback loop in the energy system.
    The ﬁnal, and most important, assumption is the limited substitutability between energy
and ﬁnal output in transport. Every unit of energy used in transportation must be matched
with a unit of ﬁnal output to provide transportation. This assumption reﬂects a critical
modeling decision. It ensures the energy costs of energy exploitation are bounded strictly
above zero. Therefore, even if ﬁnal output becomes very cheap relative to the price of power,
the energy input needed per Watt of power collected can never approach zero even in the
limit. This ensures energy is an essential input in energy collection.
    The Leontief speciﬁcation we adopt delivers simple results, but the critical assumption
is a production function for transport with an elasticity of substitution between energy and
conventional inputs of less than one. Since the energy costs of transport come from the
  16
     Assuming a single producer is innocuous, since the natural alternative of assuming atomistic energy
supplies produces identical results. Assuming the supplier maximizes ﬂow proﬁts is innocuous when energy
density is not aﬀected by the degree of energy exploitation.
  17
     Electric transmission pays a transport cost via transmission losses; natural gas pipelines run their tur-
bines on natural gas; diesel fuel runs diesel fuel tanker trucks, etc.


                                                     24
forces needed to overcome friction, one way to think about this assumption is that it respects
the physical reality that friction cannot be eliminated - even in the limit - regardless of the
scale of conventional inputs applied in transportation.
   With these assumptions in place, the ﬁrm’s maximization problem has a simple solution:
                                                  
                                           pW
                                                       = T C  (W )                       (24)
                                        p W + pC

Let s be equal to the share of energy costs in extracting and transporting resources to the
core, then s = pW /[pW + pC ] and the solution to our ﬁrm’s problem becomes s = T C  (W ).
In our Only Energy Model we had s = 1 and hence 1 = T C  (W ∗ ) determined the region of
energy exploitation.
   Since T C  > 0, we can invert (24) to write total power as W ∗ = ψ (s) and power supplied
as W S ≡ ψ(s) − T C(ψ(s)) = g(ψ(s)). It is now simple to show:

                                     dW S
                                          = [1 − s]ψ  > 0                                (25)
                                      ds

where use has been made of (24). Not surprisingly, the supply of power to the core is
increasing in the relative price of energy to a unit of ﬁnal output.
   Since energy demand is a function of relative factor prices, we need to put supply in
similar terms. To do so recall that ﬁnal good production is a constant returns activity, and
hence active production requires its price equal unit cost. This implies
                                                                          1
                                                             n           1−σ

                            pC = c(p1 , p2 , ....pn ) =           p1−σ
                                                                   i                      (26)
                                                            i=1


Since all ﬁrms are identical, and inputs are priced via (17), we can substitute and rearrange
to ﬁnd:                                     1
                                  n        1−σ
                                                   βσ               1
                          pC =       p1−σ      =        c(w, pW )n 1−σ                   (27)
                                 i=1
                                      i
                                                  σ − 1

The unit cost of energy services reﬂects not only the cost of labor and energy, but also
the set of intermediate goods used in producing the service ﬂow. An increase in the set
of intermediate goods tailored to a energy source raises overall productivity and therefore
lowers the costs of energy services delivered.
    To simplify further use the linear homogeneity of c(w, pW ) and (19) to substitute for the




                                                   25
number of intermediate goods to ﬁnd:

                                            σ(1−z)                   σ−1
                                                                            1          zσ−1
                pW     s              1−z      σ−1       σ−1        L             pW      σ−1
                    =     =z                                                                    (28)
                p C   1−s              z                  βσ        a∗             w

And hence we can now link energy supply to relative factor prices to ﬁnd:

                                 dW S                  ds
                                  W
                                       = ψ  [1 − s] W      >0                                  (29)
                               d(p /w)              d(p /w)
                                          ⇐⇒ σ > 1/z

Recall ψ  > 0. The deﬁnition of s and inspection of (28) signs the derivative.
   Somewhat surprisingly, we need to impose a parameter restriction in order to ensure the
supply curve for power is positively sloped. A higher price for power raises the incentive
for further collection and this operates to ensure supply is positively sloped. This direct
and familiar force is however potentially oﬀset by changes in the productivity of transport
created when energy price changes alter the number of intermediate goods. When the price
of power rises, intermediate goods producers face higher energy costs and exit the industry.
This lowers productivity, raises the cost of transporting energy, and naturally works against
a positive supply response.


4.5    General Equilibrium
To solve the model we need to equate the supply and demand for energy which solve for W ∗
and (pW /w)∗ ; with these two determined the rest of the system follows directly.18 This is
Proposition 1:

Proposition 1 A unique interior general equilibrium exists.

   Proof: See Appendix.
   The result follows for three reasons. First, our assumption of diminishing returns to
each input bounds the strength of increasing returns in the system and in particular this
ensures the energy supply curve is upward sloping (i.e. it ensures σ > 1/z). Second, given
Cobb-Douglas preferences there is no choke price for power. Third, the supply of power is
positive even at very low relative prices because our energy system is always productive.
   One very important feature of power supply, not apparent from the analysis above, is
that the supply of power is bounded above by a physical limit; as a result, the power
  18
    The market for the composite clears via Walras Law. To check, note our representative consumer’s
aggregate income is I = wL + Π.


                                                  26
supply curve becomes increasingly inelastic as prices rise. To understand why recall W S ≡
ψ(s) − T C(ψ(s)) = g(ψ(s)). Now substituting for the particulars of the model we can write
total power W ∗ = ψ(s), and supplied power W S = g(ψ(s)) in explicit form as follows:

                            2                   πs2 Δ3             sΔ
                     W = 1 − s W∗
                       S                      ∗
                                            W =             R∗ =                          (30)
                            3                   [μgd]2             μgd

where we note s ≡ s(pW /w, L) from (28).
   In many ways the economy’s supply of power is very similar to what we had in the Only
Energy Model. Total power, W ∗ , is again a cubic function of power density Δ; net power
supplied to the core, W S , is a simple fraction of total power; and evaluating supply at s = 1
returns our earlier solution. The area of exploitation is again quadratic in power density
but now also reﬂects the relative price of energy. With high energy prices, power is sourced
from more distant (read more diﬃcult) sources. Very high power prices also push the share
of energy costs towards their maximum of one, and at this point power supply becomes
perfectly inelastic. This should not be surprising because when s approaches one, the model
becomes more and more like the Only Energy Model.
   The reason for the upper bound on power supply is straightforward. When s approaches
one, energy is in eﬀect the only economically relevant input. The exploitation zone expands
but as s rises it approaches the point where marginal resources take as much energy to collect
and transport as they provide - implying their contribution to net power supply is zero. At
this point, net supply becomes perfectly inelastic. To see this note that as s approaches
unity, R∗ approaches Δ/μgd and this implies that one watt of marginal resources delivered
to the core has an energy cost of collection and delivery of R∗ μgd/Δ = 1watt. No net power
is provided. The supply curve is perfectly inelastic.

4.5.1   Energy Prices

There are several ”energy prices” in the model. There is the relative factor price of power,
pW /w; the relative price of energy services to the wage, pC /w; and the share of energy prices
in extraction and transport costs s = pW /[pW + pC ] which reﬂects, and is increasing in, the
relative price of power to energy services, pW /pC . There are also two cases to consider:
Almost Neoclassical and Increasing Returns; and at least two important primitives we may
want to link to energy prices: market size, L, and energy density, Δ.
    Of these many possibilities, two results - that are independent of any case driven assump-
tions - determine many others. The ﬁrst is that the share of energy costs in exploitation, s,
is always falling in power density. It should come as no surprise that an increase in power
density always lowers power prices however written. Higher power density lowers the relative

                                              27
factor price of power; the price of energy services to the wage; and lowers the energy cost
share as well. These results are straightforward and rely on no new assumptions. They
reﬂect the pure supply shock nature of a change in Δ, since an increase in density shifts
power supply outwards while driving down relative factor prices in a diagram like ﬁgure 1.
   The second key result is that the share of energy costs in exploitation is always rising
in market size. An increase in market size creates a demand shock that raises the demand
for power at the same time as increasing the supply of ﬁnal output. Consequently, their
relative price adjusts upward and s rises. This result is also independent of other case driven
assumptions, and it carries with it several important implications.     For example, while it
says larger markets always create larger exploitation zones and increasing power supply, we
have already seen there is a limit to this process. Speciﬁcally, dW/dL must eventually
approach zero in (22) so that ﬁnal output responds less than one for one with market size.
Therefore, regardless of the potential for increasing returns in the economy - as shown by our
hypothetical exercise using (21) - and regardless of whether the economy’s output responds
more than one for one with market size over some range - as seems plausible given (22) - the
economy must eventually suﬀer from diminishing returns to increases in market size. It also
implies there is a maximum size to exploitation zones given when s = 1.
   This result follows for two main reasons. The ﬁrst is that we have bounded increasing
returns by requiring each input suﬀer diminishing returns. In doing so, we rule out the
possibility that increases in labor alone can raise output per person forever. The second
reason is that power becomes more expensive with larger markets, and this drives up the
costs of exploitation. Higher energy prices drive potential revenues up, but when the share
of energy cost in exploitation approach one further increases in prices drive costs up by the
same amount.
    While the economy must eventually suﬀer from the limited availability of energy, over
some range, energy prices (measured in a variety of ways), may fall with market size. This
possibility comes about from eﬃciency gains in the energy system. Larger markets support
the entry of additional ﬁrms producing intermediates that raises the overall eﬃciency of the
energy system. How large these gains are determines the aggregate degree of increasing
returns in the model. Not surprisingly then our results here are case dependent. Two
deﬁnitions ease the notation: the Increasing Returns case satisﬁes σ < 3/[1 − z]; the Almost
Neoclassical case satisﬁes σ ≥ 3/[1 − z]. With these deﬁnitions in hand, we can report

Proposition 2 In the Almost Neoclassical case, an increase in market size raises the relative
price of energy services to the wage, and raises the relative price of power.

   The parameter restriction in this proposition is exactly that which ensures the bracketed

                                              28
term in 22 is always less than one. More descriptively given the measure of potential increas-
ing returns is given by σ/[σ − 1], it says when increasing returns are weak the increasingly
costly energy exploitation always oﬀsets any eﬃciency gains a larger market may provide for
the energy system. As a result, the economy’s results mimic those of a typical neoclassical
set up with one ﬁxed factor but constant returns overall.
    Results are quite diﬀerent when increasing returns are stronger.

Proposition 3 In the Increasing Returns case an increase in market size at ﬁrst lowers the
relative price of energy services to the wage but eventually leads to an increase.

   The parameter restriction deﬁning the Increasing returns case is exactly that which en-
sures the bracketed term in (22) is greater than one for small values of s, but less than one
for high values. Under slightly stronger conditions (σ < 3) it is also true that the relative
factor price of energy also falls and then rises with market size. Therefore, both the raw
price of power and the price of energy services will fall with market size. Since the cost of
energy services depends on both raw power prices and the number of intermediates in the
energy system, it is always true that the relative price of raw power turns upward ﬁrst only
later to be joined by an increasing price for energy services.


4.6    Consumption and Output per person
Given the last two propositions it should not be surprising that the relationship between mar-
ket size and output and consumption per person are determined by similar forces. Proving
this requires some further algebra that we relegate to an Appendix.

Proposition 4 In the Almost Neoclassical case, output per capita and consumption per
capita fall with market size; in the Increasing Returns case, output per capita and consump-
tion per capita are single peaked in market size.

    Proof: see Appendix.
     When increasing returns are weak, the model operates much like a competitive neo-
classical formulation with one ﬁxed factor and one variable factor. Output per person and
consumption per person fall with population size, and this represents the Almost Neoclassical
features of our model.
    When increasing returns are stronger, then things are vastly more interesting. Both
consumption and output per person reach an interior maximum at a given market size and
then fall thereafter. The single inﬂection point reﬂects the weighing of the model’s increasing
returns properties against the rising marginal costs of additional energy exploitation. Since

                                              29
both processes are monotonic - increasing returns always weaken and marginal costs are
always rising - the peak is unique.
   Two other results are relevant.

Proposition 5 Output per person and Consumption per person rise with power density.

   The entire schedules in both cases shift upwards when the energy source has greater
power density. In addition,

Proposition 6 In the Increasing Returns case, peak levels of output and consumption per
capita occur at larger market sizes when power density is greater.

   Proof See Appendix.
   More dense energy sources provide greater peak utility and support larger populations at
these peaks. These features are shown in the two panels of Figure 3 where we have assumed
power densities Δ > Δ > Δ. The top panel shows the Increasing Returns case; the bottom
panel the Almost Neoclassical case.
   The Energy-Economy model adds several new results and amends some from the Only
Energy model. Most importantly, it demonstrates how the interaction of rising marginal
costs of obtaining power with an ever more eﬃcient energy system determines the pattern of
energy prices, consumption and output per capita. When increasing returns are weak, the
model generates results that we have called Almost Neoclassical. Increases in market size
drive up energy prices, lower consumption and output per person, and oﬀer no incentives
for economic agglomeration. Indeed incomes and consumption are maximized when any
population center is of vanishingly small size.
    When increasing returns are strong, as in the Increasing Returns case, energy prices
initially fall with increases in market size despite the obvious pressure this puts on supplies.
Energy prices decline because the larger market for power allows for the introduction of new
methods and means for harnessing energy to productive ends. These new means create
aggregate productivity gains that fuel positive feedbacks in the energy system. Moreover
the strength of these impacts - declining energy prices, higher incomes per capita, and strong
incentives to agglomerate - are all stronger when the energy source is more dense.

4.6.1   Roads, rivers and canals.

Rivers, roads and canals were all important features of the energy transportation system in
1800; just as power lines, oil pipelines, and LNG terminals are important features today.
What these features have in common is that they represent low friction and presumably low

                                              30
                         c




                                                                         ∆"

                                                                        ∆'

                                                                    ∆

                                       LΔ   L∆'   L∆"                        L

                                   (a) Increasing Returns Case

                        c




                                                                             ∆"
                                                                        ∆'
                                                                    ∆
                                                                             L

                                  (b) Almost Neoclassical Case

                  Figure 3: Energy Density and Consumption Per Capita

cost methods of transporting energy to markets. In this section we examine the impact of
having a low friction alternative by examining the impact of having a river or a road cross
a city. Analytically, we treat roads as rivers that lower transport costs in both directions.
    The analysis proceeds in two steps. First, given the lower transport costs along a river
or road energy suppliers may now decide to take a longer route to the core if it oﬀers lower
costs. This decision problem aﬀects the shape of our exploitation zone. Second, since a
river or road lowers transport costs the overall size of the exploitation zone will also change.
    To proceed consider the decision problem of a potential energy supplier located on one
meter squared of land with energy produced with uniform power density equal to Δ Watts
per meter squared. The supplier can take energy directly into the city or deviate to take


                                                  31
advantage of a road or river nearby. Rivers and roads help to reduce the amount of work
used in transportation, increasing the amount of energy delivered to the city. To capture
this in our analysis we allow for the coeﬃcient of friction of the river or road to diﬀer from
the coeﬃcient of friction of land by a fraction ρ. That is, while the coeﬃcient of friction
of land is equal to μ, a road’s coeﬃcient of friction is ρμ in both directions whereas when
traveling with the current a river’s is also ρμ but against it μ/ρ. By this assumption, river
transport is only useful when you are an energy producer upstream; whereas road transport
reduces frictions in two directions and not one.
   We assume the river or road is a straight line that crosses the core of the city and expands
indeﬁnitely. The location of a supplier relative to the city is described by two terms: ι, the
distance from the city and θ the angle between the segment formed by the city and the
supplier and the river.
   We solve the energy producer’s problem in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage transportation
costs are minimized by choosing how much distance to cover by land and how much distance
to cover by river. Note that since every unit of energy used in transportation is matched
with a unit of ﬁnal output, minimizing energy use also minimizes total transport costs. In
the second stage proﬁts are maximized. The cost minimization problem is given by:

                                            μgd       ρμgd
                                   min          Δι1 +      Δι2                            (31)
                                   ι1 ,ι2    Δ         Δ

subject to
                                   ι21 = ι22 + ι2 − 2ιι2 cos θ                            (32)

where ι1 is the distance travelled by land and ι2 is the distance travelled by river or road.
   The constraint follows directly from the law of triangles with ι1 being opposite to the
angle θ. We can replace the constraint in the objective function to ﬁnd the optimal distances
travelled by land and by river:
                                                ι sin θ
                                       ι∗1 =                                               (33)
                                             (1 − ρ2 )1/2
and
                                                        ρι sin θ
                                  ι∗2 = ι cos θ −                  .                      (34)
                                                      (1 − ρ2 )1/2
   If the distance ι∗2 is strictly positive, the supplier deviates to the river, otherwise the
supplier goes straight to the city. We can solve for the critical value of θ that separates the
suppliers that go straight to the city from those who deviate to the river:

                            ι∗2 > 0 if and only if θ ≤ cos−1 ρ ≡ θ̄                       (35)



                                                 32
   The second part of the energy producer’s problem is to decide whether or not to take its
energy to the city. An energy producer situated a distance ι away from the city and forming
an angle θ with the river will go to the city if its proﬁts are greater than zero. Proﬁts are
given by
                                                   μgd ∗
                                                        (ι + ρι∗2 )Δ
                                              Π = pW Δ − (pC + pW )                      (36)
                                                    Δ 1
Replacing equations (33) and (34) in the previous equation makes the proﬁts a function of the
distance to the city ι. There is a critical distance ι∗ at which suppliers become indiﬀerent
between bringing their energy production to the city or leaving it on the ground. This
distance is determined by setting Π = 0. The critical distance is given by:
                                                              −1
                 ∗   Δ    p        (1 − ρ2 )1/2 sin θ + ρ cos θ
                                               W
                                                                    if θ ≤ θ̄
                ι =                                                                             (37)
                    μgd pW + pC   1                                 if θ ≥ θ̄

which determines the area of exploitation.
   Total energy supplied to the city can then be written as:
                      θ̄          ι∗                              π  ι∗          
                                              μgd ∗     ∗                         μgd
   W =2×
     S
                                         v Δ−    (ι + ρι2 ) Δ dvdθ +         v Δ−     vΔ dvdθ
                   0            0              Δ 1                    θ̄  0        Δ

   The integral is multiplied by 2 since we are only adding up over the half circle of π radians.
The ﬁrst integral represents the supply coming from suppliers who are close enough to the
river to use it in transport. The second integral represents the supply coming from those
who travel directly to the city core and should be familiar from our discussion of (10).
   Integrating and simplifying gives us a net energy supply curve much like that we had
before:

                                                            
                                         Δ3 2             2
                                W =      S
                                                s 1 − s (π + g(ρ))                              (38)
                                       (μgd)2             3
                                        θ̄
                                                                          −2
                                g(ρ) =        (1 − ρ2 )1/2 sin θ + ρ cos θ     − θ̄dθ  0       (39)
                                                0


where the function g(ρ) is positive and monotonic and approaches inﬁnity as ρ goes to zero.
Setting ρ = 1 means the river or road oﬀers no advantage in terms of transportation. This
implies g(ρ) = 0 since then θ̄ = 0 and equation (38) reduces to equation (30). We depict the
exploitation zone in the river and road case in the two panels of Figure 4 assuming ρ < 1.




                                                              33
                           (a) Area of Extraction with a River




                          (b) Area of Exploitation with a Road

                    Figure 4: Exploitation and Transport Costs

It is now possible to redeﬁne terms slightly to rewrite supply as:
                                               
                                   ∗      2
                            S
                          W =W          1− s
                                          3
                                 πs2 Δ̃3
                          W∗ =           where Δ̃ ≡ Δm(ρ)
                                 (μgd)2
                        m(ρ) = ((π + g(ρ))/π)1/3 > 1



                                           34
which is exactly the same form as our earlier supply curve!        The role of improved river
transport is identical to being granted a more dense resource base in terms of energy supplied
to the core. River location multiplies by m(ρ) the power density of available resources to an
extent determined by its capacity for reducing transport costs as reﬂected in ρ. An important
feature of this result is that the impact of the improved transport, in terms of energy supply,
is that it is increasing in the density of available resources; therefore, improved transport is
most powerful for very dense resources, and least powerful for low density resources.
  These calculations can be easily expanded to accommodate the case of a road for which
the direction of ﬂow is not important. In this case energy suppliers can take advantage of
the reduced coeﬃcient of friction in either direction away from the city. Using similar steps,
this leads to the supply function being given by:
                                            
                                   ∗       2                πs2 Δ̂3
                            S
                         W =W           1 − s , where W ∗ =
                                           3                (μgd)2
                           Δ̂ ≡ Δ ((π + 2g(ρ))/π)1/3

which is of course very similar to the ﬂow of the river case. Summarizing:

Proposition 7 Consider an improvement in river or road transportation that changes ρ = 1
to some ρ < 1, then this improvement: (1) has the same eﬀect on a city’s energy supply as
does an increase in the power density of its surrounding resources; and (2) increases energy
supply most in situations where resources have high power density.

    This is a very important result because it extends all our earlier results on power density
to results concerning the existence of rivers or roads for transport. For example, we know
that a unique general equilibrium still exists; the existence of a river or road (modeled as a
movement from ρ = 1 to some ρ < 1) shifts the supply curve for energy outwards lowering
the relative price of energy while raising the equilibrium energy supplied, ﬁnal output and
the number of intermediate goods in the energy system; access to a river or improved road
transportation raises both consumption and output per capita at all population levels while
it raises the density of individuals at which output and consumption per capita peak.

4.6.2   Summary

The way is now clear for us to introduce a sorting mechanism that allocates population
across space to investigate the role energy density may play in determining the location
and geography of economic activity. For example, we could follow Henderson (1975, 1973)
and introduce a process of city formation by developers; alternatively, we could follow more

                                               35
recent work by Fujita et al. (1996) by introducing competing regions and trade to examine
the motives for mobile labor to agglomerate in one region.
   While many mechanisms for sorting the population across locations could be fruitfully
added to our Energy-Economy model, this paper’s purpose is to ask whether there is a
causal relationship between the density in available energy supply and the resulting density
in economic activity. Any empirical study of this relationship seems diﬃcult, if not outright
heroic, in any contemporary economy with multiple energy sources (fossil fuels, renewables,
and nuclear), with energy sources not tied to geographic locations (nuclear), and with ag-
glomeration patterns that have both driven, and been driven by, the availability of dense
energy sources (does anyone think the suburbs would exist without the automobile, fossil
fuels, and nearby reﬁneries?).
    Sorting out all of these complications to identify the role of energy density would be
diﬃcult if not impossible. To eliminate some of these complexities, we have chosen to look
back to a simpler period in our history when all energy was in fact green energy, and all
economies were, in fact, organic economies. This simpler setting oﬀers to us the possibility
of identifying the role of energy density in shaping the geography of economic activity.


5      The Malthusian Application
To allow market size to respond endogenously to the conditions set by a landscape’s energy
resources we start by examining an Isolated State whose market size is determined solely
by population growth. We adopt a Malthusian mechanism for population growth since it
is simple, well understood, and arguably appropriate given our empirical application covers
years well before any demographic transition; indeed our data comes from a time (1086-1801)
and a place (England) where Malthus himself observed the forces he identiﬁed at work.19
But villages, hamlets, and cities do not exist in isolation. They are geographically proximate
competitors for population. Therefore we also extend the results from our analysis of the
Isolated State to allow for migration both within and across regions.
  19
     There is an ongoing debate over the usefulness of the Malthusian model as a means to understand
population growth in England over this time period. While there are several issues at dispute, one basic
problem is that almost any population history can be rationalized by the Malthusian model if we allow for
shifts in the preventive check over time. Since these shifts are usually motivated by forces outside the model,
they are clearly diﬃcult to evaluate empirically. Consequently, while Clark (2007) presents an unabashed
Malthusian view of the world prior to 1800, Allen (2008) disputes much of this evidence and argues the
application is simplistic and often problematic. A more favorable recent evaluation, using cross country
data to the year 1500, is presented in Ashraf and Galor (2011).




                                                      36
5.1       The Isolated State
We adopt a very standard Malthusian speciﬁcation where population growth responds to
increases in consumption per capita, but amend it to allow for a higher death rate arising from
crowding in cities. There is a baseline birth rate, η0 , and baseline death rate, δ0 , with η0 −
δ0 < 0 representing the net rate of population reduction when consumption per capita is zero.
This baseline population growth is then adjusted by assuming births rise proportionately with
consumption per capita, η1 c and deaths fall proportionately with consumption per capita
δ1 c, where c = C/L. During the Malthusian era, death rates in cities were known to be much
higher given their poor sanitation and crowding. We incorporate this into our population
dynamics by assuming death rates due to crowding rise proportionately with population
density, δ2 L. As a result, the birth and death rate functions are given by:

                                           η(c) = η0 + η1 c                                              (40)
                                         δ(c, L) = δ0 − δ1 c + δ2 L


       Hence the population responds according to:20
                                   •
                                  L = L[[η0 − δ0 ] + [η1 + δ1 ]c − δ2 L]                                 (41)

   In the standard Malthusian set up δ2 = 0, and subsistence consumption is a constant
independent of city size. Once we allow city size to aﬀect death rates, consumption must
rise with city size to hold population growth at zero. Deﬁne the Malthusian line as the
combination of consumption per person and population consistent with zero population
growth. We deﬁne the Malthusian M − line as:

                                                  δ 0 − η0   δ2
                                       cM (L) =            +      L                                      (42)
                                                  δ1 + η1 δ1 + η1

where cM (L) is the per capita consumption needed to keep the population constant in a city
with population size L.
    Since we have already characterized how consumption per person changes with market
size and power density it is now apparent that:

Proposition 8 In the Increasing Returns case, there exists a critical level of power density,
Δcrit > 0 ; if power density is below this critical value, Δ < Δcrit then the only steady state
  20
    An implicit assumption in this analysis is that everyone lives in some form of agglomeration, be it beside
a manor, village, town, or city. Adding a ﬁxed purely rural population is easy to accomplish but adds little
to our results.

                                                     37
                         c
                                                                    M-line

                                                                       E-line

                                                    B




                             A

                                                                             c(L;Δ')


                                                           c(L;Δ)
                             LA                  LB                             L




                                  Figure 5: The Isolated State

has L = 0 and the landscape is vacant; (iii) if Δ > Δcrit then there are three steady states:
steady state zero has zero population L0 = 0 and a vacant landscape; steady state one has
a positive population L1 > 0 but relatively low population density; steady state three has a
positive and larger population L2 > L1 > 0.

    This result establishes a link between the density of available energy resources, and the
density of economic activity in the region. It is shown graphically in Figure 5. Let c(L; Δi )
deﬁne the curve giving consumption per capita in city i as a function of labor L and its
power density Δi . If available resources are not dense, then no city can exist and a vacant
landscape must result. This is the case shown in the ﬁgure by the c (L; Δ) curve which lies
everywhere below the M − line. When resources do oﬀer suﬃcient power density, Δ > Δ,
then two possible city sizes emerge: small cities (point A) and large cities (point B).
    It is obvious that small cities oﬀer residents lower consumption per capita, but less obvious
that they oﬀer lower death rates and longer lifetimes as well. To see why note that when
all individuals are identical, we can interpret δ(c, L) as the instantaneous death rate for any
citizen in a city giving the pair {c, L}. Since birth rates equal death rates along the M −line
and birth rates rise with c, it is now clear that death rates at B exceed those at A. We can
in fact go further to calculate expected lifetime consumption at any steady state. To do so,
assume a zero discount rate for simplicity, and then the expected lifetime consumption for




                                               38
any individual living in city i is given by:
                                                  ∞
                                    ei =               ci exp−{t−τ }δ(y,L) dt                       (43)
                                               τ

                                    ei = ci /δi                                                     (44)

where the last equality holds in steady state. We can compare the expected lifetime con-
sumption any individual could expect in any city by simply looking at ei across cities.
   It proves useful to construct a line representing all combinations of {c, L} yielding a given
e. To ﬁnd the combinations of consumption per capita and population giving an expected
lifetime consumption per person equal to e, use the death rate δ(y, L) from (40) in (44) and
rearrange to ﬁnd the following relationship which we refer to as the E − line:

                                                           e
                                  cE (e, L) =                    [δ0 + δ2 L]                        (45)
                                                        1 + δ1 e


       One such E − line is shown in Figure 5. Several properties of E − lines follow directly.
Holding expected lifetime consumption, e, constant, the E − line is just a linear relationship
between population size and consumption per person. Points above the E − line associated
with any given e, correspond to combinations of consumption and population sizes yielding
higher expected lifetime consumption than e; points below correspond to lower expected
lifetime consumption than e. Any given E − line is drawn conditional on e; raising e shifts
the E − line upwards. Higher expected lifetime consumption implies both a higher vertical
intercept, and a steeper slope, for the E − line. The E − line, evaluated at e = e∗ must
pass through the steady state yielding e∗ . Finally, although it is not obvious, the E − line
going through any steady state is ﬂatter than the associated M − line going through the
same steady state.21
    Using this construction reconsider the two possible interior steady states shown in Figure
5. Since the small city steady state at A falls below the E − line going through the large city
steady state at B, it must provide lower expected lifetime consumption per capita than the
large city steady state. In this sense the large city steady state welfare dominates the small
city steady state. In addition, under the Malthusian adjustment mechanism, the steady
states at zero and at B are stable. Whereas the steady state at A is not. This implies that
  21
    Some algebra will show this, or some logic chopping can explain it. Movements along the E line must
reﬂect equal proportionate changes in consumption and death rates; changes in consumption cause less than
proportionate changes in the birth rate since the birth function is aﬃne; this implies movements along an
E line away from a steady state generates a situation where deaths exceed births and hence this movement
must be below the corresponding M line. The M Line is ﬂatter than the E line through any steady state.


                                                           39
small cities when they exist are fragile constructs. A small negative perturbation leads to
their disappearance; a small positive perturbation starts the process of transformation into
large cities. Small cities are therefore both temporary and not very productive phenomena;
large cities are far more productive and far more permanent features of the landscape.
    These results should be contrasted with the case when increasing returns are weak, since
this case produces almost standard Neoclassical results.

Proposition 9 In the Almost Neoclassical Case: (i) there exists one interior steady state
with L > 0 and this interior steady state is stable under the Malthusian adjustment mecha-
nism; (ii) population density at the interior steady state is increasing in power density; and
(iii) there exists a steady state at L = 0 but this steady state is not stable.

   City size is uniquely determined by power density in the Almost Neoclassical case;
whereas cities could be large or small in the Increasing Returns case. In the Almost Neo-
classical case any agglomeration or village smaller than the (unique) steady state will grow
to become a city; in the Increasing Returns case, relatively small agglomerations die out cre-
ating city death, or they may grow large and stabilize. In the Almost Neoclassical case every
landscape can support a city; whereas in the Increasing Returns case there is a minimum
power density required. In short, the Increasing Returns case paints a far richer view of city
formation and growth where multiplicity of outcomes, instability, and thresholds determine,
in conjunction with the natural environment, the geographic distribution of population and
economic activity.


5.2     Within and Across County Migration
Thus far we have assumed our cities are truly Isolated States: their own population growth
determines market size. Since there is no inter-city migration, and no simultaneous small or
large city pair feeding and sustaining each other, we have only a very partial understanding
of how the distribution of power densities across space may inﬂuence the distribution of cities
and their size. The ability of the population to migrate changed greatly over our 800 year
sample period, and therefore it is important to understand how migration interacts with
the distribution of power densities to determine city sizes. For example, prior to the Black
Death serfdom limited the mobility of the population but the resulting wage pressures after
the Black Death enhanced the power of serfs. These forces led to the Peasant revolt in 1381,
the elimination of serfdom by c.1500, and a corresponding increase in mobility.22
  22
   See Wrigley (2010, Chapter 5) for an extensive discussion of population growth and migration from the
mid sixteenth to the mid nineteenth century.



                                                  40
                              c
                                                                             M-line


                                                               C                  eB-line
                                                           B       C'
                                                A'

                                                      A




                                                                                      c(L;ΔC)
                                                                                c(L;ΔB)
                                                                            c(L;ΔA)
                                               L A'       LB   LC'                       L




                           Figure 6: Migration in the three county example

      We introduce migration by constructing a simple three point distribution linking power
density to city sizes and migration. This example highlights many of the features of the
mapping from power density to city size, and has the beneﬁt of being transparent.

5.2.1      A 3 County Example

To understand how ﬂows of migration aﬀects city size, consider Figure 6. We have drawn
three Isolated States which diﬀer in the power density of their neighboring resources. By
assumption, C has the highest power density and A the lowest; in addition we have assumed
we are in the Increasing Returns case.23 Also shown in Figure 6 is the Malthusian or
M − line giving those combinations of consumption per person and population generating
zero population growth. The intersection of this line with our three consumption per capita
curves generates the associated stable steady states labelled A, B and C.
    Now consider the migration decision. Start with city B, which we will refer to as the
middle city. At B, there is an associated consumption per person and population size; and
using (43) we can calculate the expected lifetime consumption per capita any resident of
B would obtain. Denote this eB , and using now familiar methods we ﬁnd the following
relationship
                                              eB
                             cE (eB , L) =            [δ0 + δ2 L]                      (46)
                                           1 + δ1 eB
which we will refer to as the eB -line since it is the E − line evaluated at steady state B which
gives eB . By construction the eB -line must pass through point B, and it is ﬂatter than the
 23
      The interested reader is invited to follow through our analysis with the Almost Neoclassical case.


                                                          41
M − line as shown.
    It is immediate then that points labelled A and C  in Figure 6 oﬀer the same expected
lifetime consumption per capita as at B. Point A is however above the M − line: its
consumption level exceeds that necessary to generate zero population growth and, in the
absence of migration, its population level would necessarily rise from LA . Indeed - without
migration - its population would increase until the city reached the no-migration steady state
at A. An alternate possibility is that this constant excess ﬂow of population could migrate
instead to city C thereby holding its current population at LA and its current expected
lifetime consumption equal to that oﬀered at B. Now consider city C. Residents in this
city would have the same expected lifetime consumption as those at B, if it was to grow and
reach point C  . But of course point C  is below the M − line, and hence consumption per
capita at this level falls short of that necessary to generate zero population growth. Without
further adjustments, its population would decline from the level LC  towards its no-migration
steady state at C. The now obvious alternative is for city C to remain at C  and receive
a constant ﬂow of population from city A. If the ﬂows from city A to C balance we have
identiﬁed a steady state of the system with migration. For future reference we will label
steady state expected lifetime consumption in a migration steady state when there are three
cities (labelled A, B and C) as e∗ABC .
    In theory, Figure 6 shows how a given distribution of power densities across previously
Isolated States maps into a steady state distribution of city sizes with active migration. We
have assumed here that cities diﬀer in the power density of their available resources as they
would if they came from diﬀerent counties. This interpretation is however overly restrictive.
Cities within the same county may diﬀer in power densities if some have access to low friction
alternatives like rivers or roads while other cities in their county do not. Therefore, our
three cities could be in one county, two counties, or three counties.
    The migration steady state has several important features that generalize to the many
region case. First, migrants ﬂow from small cities to big cities. Big cities oﬀer higher
consumption per capita but higher death rates. Migration does not equalize consumption or
real wages across the population centers, but it does equalize expected lifetime consumption.
Second, migration widens the distribution of city sizes. The biggest city got bigger and the
smallest city got smaller. Third, for any city or region sending migrants we ﬁnd a rise in
productivity as consumption (and output) per person rises. In addition overall productivity
may also rise - migrants move to a region with higher average productivity and lessen the
Malthusian pressures keeping productivity low in their sending regions. Fourth, migration
is associated with an increase in the birth rate in sending regions but depresses it in the
large city receiving it.


                                             42
5.2.2   Existence

Our analysis thus far assumes the existence of a middle city B with zero migration and an
expected lifetime consumption of e∗B = e∗ABC . Extending the analysis to solve for the steady
state consumption per person is not diﬃcult since e plays the role of a price that clears the
market for migrants. To see this imagine removing city B entirely from our analysis, and
then draw in the associated E − lines for city A and city C evaluated at their zero migration
steady states in Figure 6. In this case, since we are considering the no migration steady
states, denote these the e∗A − line and the e∗C − line respectively.
    Consider ﬁrst the e∗C − line through point C. At this level of expected lifetime consump-
tion, deaths in city C match births; but if this level of consumption was maintained in A,
then its clear that births would far exceed deaths. A would “like” to supply migrants to C
but there is no demand for them. Therefore, the expected lifetime consumption represented
by the E − line through C is too high to represent a steady state with migration. Now
consider the e∗A − line through A. At this level of expected lifetime consumption, deaths
in city A match births but if this level of expected consumption was to be maintained in C
then it is clear that deaths would exceed births in C. C has a demand for migrants but there
is no supply coming from A. Therefore, the expected lifetime consumption represented by
the e∗A − line through A is too low to represent a steady state with migration. Recall that
as we increase expected lifetime consumption the E − line shifts up and becomes steeper.
This raises the supply from A and decreases the demand from C in a continuous manner.
Since we had excess demand evaluated at e∗A and excess supply at e∗C , there will exist a
e∗C > e∗AC > e∗A where they balance, and this deﬁnes our steady state.
     To generalize this argument some new notation is helpful. Recall c(L; Δi ) deﬁnes the
curve giving consumption per capita in city i as a function of labor L and its power density
Δi . Now consider the intersection of this curve with a given E − line. Assuming an
intersection exists, let L(e, Δi ) denote the (largest) strictly positive value of the population
at the intersection between an E − line evaluated at e and the consumption per capita
curve associated with Δi . In our analysis above we implicitly assumed the intersection at
L(e∗C , ΔA ) > 0 existed; that is, there was a strictly positive population level in city A which
could support the expected lifetime consumption in the no migration steady state of city C.
It should also be apparent that every consumption per capita curve has a maximum expected
lifetime consumption it can support which is given by the tangency of an E − line and the
consumption curve c(L; Δi ). Denote the maximum expected lifetime consumption city i
with density Δi could sustain as emax                                                     max
                                      Δi . By deﬁnition then the population level L(eΔi , Δi )
is the smallest positive population city i could sustain in any migration steady state. Then
we know that if e∗C < emax              ∗
                         ΔA , then L(eC , ΔA ) > 0 and city A can survive in a migration steady


                                               43
state. Finally, we note that emax
                              Δi is strictly increasing in Δi ; and putting this all together
we obtain:

Proposition 10 Consider a ﬁnite number of Isolated States with surrounding resources hav-
ing power density Δi with the labels i = 1, 2....N chosen so that power density is strictly
increasing with N . Then if e∗N < emax
                                   Δ1 a steady state with active migration across all cities
exists.


       Proof: see Appendix.

5.2.3      City Death

The construction above rules out the possibility of any city being destroyed by migration. It
suggests however how such a result can occur. Consider a three city case using the notation
and assumptions from the previous proposition. Suppose a migration steady state occurs
because e∗3 < emax
               Δ1 . Since we know that expected lifetime consumption is strictly rising in
a city’s power density we can increase the power density of city 3 enough to violate this
condition. After we do so, it is now possible for the steady state with city 1 to disappear.
This will necessarily be true when we ﬁnd e∗23 > emax
                                                  Δ1 ; that is, when a migration steady state
between city 2 and city 3 produces a steady state expected lifetime consumption greater
than the maximum supportable in city 1. When this occurs, city 1 can not compete and it
loses its population.
    In a world with many cities and varying availability of energy resources, there will always
exist a middle consumption city like our previous construction of B. All regions with power
densities below this level will export people; while all those above it will import people. Of
course there is no need for the number of cities that receive or send people to match, in fact
one great city could receive almost all of the population while cities in every other region
send people to it. With this in mind, we now turn to our empirical examination of England
in the middle ages.


6        A Population History of England
The population history of England from 1000 AD to 1800 AD has been studied by legions
of academics with demographers, historians and economists producing literally hundreds of
contributions dissecting and debating this period at great length.24 Our goal here is not to
  24
   Several excellent book length treatments by Sir Tony Wrigley present a fascinating picture of English
demography and economics over this time period. Especially relevant are Wrigley (2010) that focusses on


                                                  44
dispute their ﬁndings but present for discussion a view of this history through the lens of
our theory. To do so we need to be speciﬁc about how we relate data to our theory; and
speciﬁc about what our theory says about the data.


6.1     Data
We have collected data from several diﬀerent sources to present a largely descriptive account
of the population history of this period. Population data is available from recent estimates
by Broadberry et al. (2011) for all 39 ancient English counties for ﬁve time periods: 1086,
1290, 1377, 1600 and 1800. We employ this data plus measures of county areas to generate
a series for population density across counties and time.


6.2     Units, Resources and Time periods
To link the theory to data several assumptions need to be made. To start we need to
associate a geographic unit with a region where resources are homogenous in terms of their
power density. Our data is at the county level and hence, while it is not ideal, we take
counties as our unit of analysis. There are 39 ancient counties (which excludes Wales and
Northern Ireland) in our data and together they constitute England. By assumption, all
locations in a county are surrounded by resources of the same power density, and therefore
all agglomerations of economic activity (villages, boroughs or cities) within a county have
access to resources with the same power density. However, by virtue of Proposition 7
even locations surrounded by resources of the same power density will diﬀer in terms of
the resources they can access. As a result, a city or village that can exploit a low friction
alternative such as a river or road can be thought of as one surrounded by more power
dense resources. The importance of this result is that it introduces a source of within county
heterogeneity so that any one county could support agglomerations of diﬀerent sizes and
there can be within county migration as described previously. Naturally, we expect counties
to diﬀer in the power density of resources and this may fuel across county migration as well.
    For the most part we assume the availability of resources is ﬁxed over time. For ex-
ample, the power density of renewable resources is ﬁxed over time since it reﬂects natural
blessings coming from solar insolation, rainfall, and soil conditions together with existing
rivers. Improvements in our ability to capture these ﬂows surely occurred as it did in many
other facets of economic life over this period. Therefore our working assumption is that the
energy issues; Wrigley (1969) and Wrigley (1978) are also valuable resources. Allen (2009) presents an
engaging and rigorous examination of the forces leading to the Industrial Revolution focussing on energy
sources, induced innovation and the role of international trade.



                                                  45
distribution of renewable resources is ﬁxed, but we allow their productivity to grow over time
at a common economy wide rate. For example, changes in the availability or productivity of
crops could have raised power densities; just as a changing climate during the Little Ice Age
could have lowered them.         We sweep all such changes into a residual called technological
progress by implicitly assuming their impact is common across counties. A clearly heroic
but necessary assumption.
   In similar fashion we treat coal as an energy source whose geographic location is exoge-
nous, but whose exploitation is dependent upon economic conditions determined within the
model and exogenous factors such as technological progress outside of the model. For exam-
ple, we take the existence of coal deposits at Newcastle and the slowly growing penetration
of coal in the energy supply as exogenous, but explain the coastal transport of Newcastle
coal to London coal within the model. Over most of this period coal was used as a source
of domestic and industrial heating. Only late in the period was coal used as a source of
power for pumping, stamping, etc. in an expanding list of industries. Given the size of coal
reserves in place we treat coal as inexhaustible during this period, and ignore the impact
of depletion on costs.25 There are three key diﬀerences between coal and renewables: coal
has a much greater power density; coal is a punctiform resource that appears in only select
locations; and, ﬁnally, an ability to use coal as an energy source changed drastically over the
period. Coal was about 10% of England’s energy consumption in 1600; 50% in 1700; and
75% in 1800.26


6.3     A Sketch of 700 Years
The population history over our entire sample period is shown in Panel A of Figure 7 (ignore
for the moment panel B). Panel A presents ﬁve data points representing population estimates
for the years 1086, 1290, 1377, 1600, and 1801. As shown England starts with a 1086
population of approximately 1.7 million and ends with a 1801 population of a little under 9
million; this growth however represents an anything-but-constant annual population growth
rate of 0.23 percent per annum. In fact this period is dominated by two cycles of growth and
subsequent plateau, although this is not readily apparent from the ﬁgure. The earliest period
from 1086 to 1290, although aﬀected by the Norman conquest and the resulting political
upheavals it created, was a relatively prosperous time for the population. Population growth
during the thirteenth century was robust and the population of close to 4.5 million citizens in
  25
     There is little in our analysis which needs amendment if energy comes from a non-renewable like coal.
Depletion raises the marginal cost of obtaining the resources, and this rises over time at a rate related to
the size of reserves, their power density, and demand. Given the size of coal reserves, assuming away rising
depletion costs seems innocuous. Empirical evidence on this point is provided in Chapter 4 of Allen (2009).
  26
     See Wrigley (2010, p. 37, Table 2.1).


                                                    46
                                   10000  7500
                       Population (1000s)
                             5000  2500
                                   0



                                                 1000   1100    1200    1300     1400   1500    1600   1700     1800
                                                                                   Year


                                                                       (a) Population
                                   7
                                   6
                       Log Population Density
                       2     3     1
                                   04     5




                                                 1086          1290            1377          1600        1801
                                                                                      Year


                                                                (b) Population Density

                   Figure 7: Population History of England: 1086-1801

1290 may have represented the country’s peak population given its almost exclusive reliance
on low density renewable energy sources at this time. While there are records of coal use
and shipping in the 13th century, the amounts involved are relatively small and the uses
made of coal limited. For example, there is no mention of coal use in the Domesday book of
1086, although there were small shipments of coal into London during this period. We view
the 1086 to 1290 period as one where England’s economy was organic, labor mobility was
low, and the Malthusian forces we have highlighted determined population growth. The
1290 population ﬁgure may have represented something close to a Malthusian steady state
for England.
    The Black Death struck England in the spring of 1348 and swept across the country with
great intensity for the next two years. Although records are far from exact, the population
plunged with those infected suﬀering a 70% mortality rate. Periodic outbreaks occurred

                                                                                47
during the next several hundred years, but this ﬁrst outbreak created the greatest and most
widespread loss of life. Not surprisingly, estimates for the aggregate population in 1377
are well below the 1290 peak. During the next three centuries the population recovered
slowly only surpassing its pre-plague levels by perhaps 1600. Although it is not apparent
from Panel A of the ﬁgure, the 1600 to 1800 period did not exhibit constant population
growth.27 The period started with a minor resurgence of the plague in 1625 and a major
one in 1665; the great ﬁre of London followed in 1666 and the Restoration in 1688. For
almost the entire century England is actively at war with either Scotland, France, or Spain.
These and other yet-to-be understood forces produced relatively slow population growth
until the 1730s.28 Thereafter population growth rose sharply. Most importantly, this
period witnessed the spectacular growth of London. London rose from perhaps 350,000 in
1650 to become Europe’s largest city by 1700 with over half a million inhabitants.
   By the end of our sample period in 1801, England was a key colonial player, the world’s
leading power, a proliﬁc trading nation, the world’s largest coal producer, and home to
Europe’s largest most cosmopolitan city of almost one million people - London.29 Coal use
rose signiﬁcantly over this early modern period starting with the introduction of a signiﬁcant
coal trade to London in the fourteenth century. At this time, most use was for domestic
heating although coal also found uses in a range of industries from lime and salt production
to smelting. As new mines opened in western England, Scotland, and Wales, the economic
incentives for adopting coal use grew and technical barriers were overcome in a whole host of
industries where coal replaced charcoal or wood. During this period coal moved from being
exclusively a source of domestic and industrial heat to a provider of mechanical power via
the Newcomen and Watt steam engines.


6.4     History through the Lens of Theory
Our theory makes several predictions linking the distribution of population over space to
the distribution of energy resources. To make any headway at all in mapping one to the
other, much simpliﬁcation is required. For example, we make no attempt to discuss our
model’s predictions out of steady state; we assume exogenous (and unmodelled) technological
progress drives long run economy wide changes in population levels; and we ignore completely
the important role international trade may have played in these events. In doing so we hope
to limit the discussion to elements which are novel to our theory, as there are already well
  27
     See for example the discussion in Wrigley (1969) Chapter 3 and especially Figure 3.3.
  28
     For example Wrigley (1969, p.96) reports London deaths in in 1603, 1625 and 1665 of 43,000, 63,000
and 97,000 respectively. In plague years one sixth to one quarter of a city’s population may die.
  29
     See Table 3.2 p. 61 Wrigley (2010) for estimates of London’s population from 1520-1800.



                                                  48
known and excellent book length treatments highlighting important features of this period.
   Without doing too much violence to the historical record we divide the 700 years from
1100 to 1800 into two periods reﬂecting the drastic changes moving England from an organic
economy in 1086 to what Wrigley would call a mineral based economy by the early 1800s.
We refer to the ﬁrst period as the Organic Economy period, since during this time period the
vast majority of energy used by households and industry was provided by renewable sources.
It starts with the Norman conquest in 1066 and ends with the onset of the Black Death in
the mid-14th century. The second period starts after the Black Death and runs until the
ﬁrst oﬃcial census in 1801. The Black Death provides a useful starting point for the second
period as it wipes the slate clean by lowering population levels.
   We refer to this second period as the Early Modern Era since it precedes the most tu-
multuous and rapid changes of the Industrial revolution that transformed England into a
true mineral based economy post 1800. We chose to stop our examination in 1801 since our
primary focus has been on the organic economy. The nineteenth century saw revolutionary
changes in energy use created by steam engines, railroads, electricity etc. and any exam-
ination of this period would require a wholesale investigation of the Industrial Revolution
which is well beyond the scope of this paper. The Early Modern Era oﬀers us something
more manageable: an economy in transition from almost complete reliance on renewables at
its beginning to one with signiﬁcant dependence on coal at its end.

6.4.1   The Organic Economy Period

To start our discussion we consider the second panel of Figure 7. The ﬁgure plots kernel
density estimates of the population densities in the 39 English counties across our ﬁve snap-
shot years. We present these ﬁgures in logarithms given the two orders of magnitude
diﬀerence across counties in their population densities. We smooth the raw data using a
kernel density estimator. Turning the ﬁgure 90◦ shows a series of density functions stacked
over time; keeping it vertical shows us how these densities are related over time.
    Consider ﬁrst just the initial years 1086 and 1290 which represent the organic economy
period. Our interpretation of this data is straightforward. With little migration across
countries and diﬀuse natural blessings across England, the geographic distribution of the
population should likewise be diﬀuse. The population level and its geographic distribution
in 1086 however reﬂected the impact of the Norman conquest, and the losses of life and dis-
location that occurred when William the Conqueror put down a series of revolts in northern
England. This is apparent in the lower tail of the 1086 population distribution. Several
northern counties were laid to waste and hence the geographic distribution of population
across counties in 1086 represents a disturbed initial condition for a system moving towards

                                             49
what we have assumed to be a Malthusian steady state in 1290. We identify this steady state
with the no-migration outcome of our model where a given geographic distribution of power
densities across England together with slow technological progress determine populations.
   Outliers on the lower end of the 1086 distribution are exactly those of the counties William
harried in the tumultuous period where Norman control over the North of England was in
jeopardy. These counties are (in order of least dense to most) Cumberland, Westmoreland,
Lancashire, Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire and Cheshire. These counties recovered
quickly and a simple plot of subsequent population growth rates on levels in 1086 is shown
in Panel A of Figure 8. The ﬁgure provides at least suggestive evidence that these lagging
counties were in fact catching up from this initial destruction during the next two hundred
years. Since the unit of analysis here is a county and counties can diﬀer quite substantially
in the power density of available resources, the lack of a tight ﬁt in this convergence style
regression is to be expected. With little migration, each county should be approaching its
own steady state conditional on the power density of neighboring resources and we have not
conditioned on the determinants of power density in each locale.
   One other feature of Figure 7 is that the overall distribution of population densities shifts
upwards during the 1086 to 1290 period. We think this overall change in population reﬂects
the workings of slow but steady technological progress relaxing the bonds of an organic
economy. Evidence for this interpretation is shown in panel B of Figure 8 below where we
compare the population distributions in 1086 and 1290 after recentering all observations by
subtracting their period speciﬁc means. Once we correct for mean diﬀerences in population
density across periods, the two distributions are quite similar (at least visually). The major
diﬀerence is again the counties wasted by William’s northern campaign. We can buttress
this visual inspection with a Kolomogorov-Smirnov test. This test will however reject
the null that the 1086 and 1290 (recentered) distributions are in fact identical, unless we
exclude at least one wasted county. If for example, we exclude the two most Northerly
counties bordering Scotland - Northumberland and Cumberland - we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the (recentered) distributions of population across the remaining counties is
the same in both 1086 and 1290 at the 10% level of signiﬁcance. With this smaller set of 37
counties, we do however reject at even the 1% level the hypothesis that the 1086 distribution
and either the 1600 or 1801 distributions are the same.
    There is as well a strong correlation across these periods on a county by county basis.
For example, the correlation between population densities across counties (in levels or logs)
across the two years is above .7 and the Spearman’s rank coeﬃcient is always above .65.
These last two results suggest a rather strong permanence in the population distribution
over this time period.


                                              50
                                                                        1.5
                        Annual Growth of Population Density (%): 1086-1290
                        0              .5               1



                                                                              1             2                        3         4
                                                                                       Log of Population Density in 1086


                      (a) Population Density and Population Density Growth
                          .8
                          .6
                          .4
                          .2
                          0




                                                                      -2          -1                  0                    1   2

                                                                                               1086              1290



                                                                                  (b) Population Density

                    Figure 8: Population History of England: 1086-1801

    Overall we take these results as evidence in favor of our theory’s view of the period. The
organic period featured a nation recovering after the conquest with wasted counties catching
up while others grew slowly towards their limits. There was little change in the geographic
distribution of population which is as it should be when migration is limited and key energy
resources are constant over time. A further examination of this period could evaluate our
theory more closely. We could for example relate the rank order of counties in terms of
population density to what our theory sets out as the determinants of power density using
data on solar insolation, precipitation, soil conditions and access to rivers and roads. At
present we do not have suﬃcient data for such a test, although it is worth noting that some
county speciﬁc attributes are obviously known. For example, even in 1086 Middlesex county
- which contains London - is the most dense county in England. This is of course long before
London became a hub for international trade, a recipient of coal shipments or even the capital

                                                                                                  51
of England. At this time, London’s location on the Thames (which was cleverly chosen by
the Romans) did however give it a far wider exploitation zone than inland cities with similar
natural environments. The Thames is a tidal river meaning ships can both enter and leave
with the current, while London’s location is far enough inland to protect from attack and
storms but close enough to beneﬁt from tidal ﬂows and a deep channel. During much, if
not all, of this time period London was sourcing wood resources from the Thames valley far
up river and coast-wise as well.30 According to Proposition 7, a low friction alternative such
as the Thames magniﬁes the power density of surrounding resources and should raise the
density of population centers as well.31
    In 1086 Middlesex county is the densest part of England with 54 people per square
kilometer, but importantly this is not far in advance of Suﬀolk at 31 and Norfolk at 28
persons per square kilometer. Whatever advantage the Thames granted to London it was
limited in an organic economy setting.

6.4.2    The Early Modern Era

Now consider the next three years in panel B of Figure 7. These years show a quite diﬀerent
pattern emerges as we enter the early modern era. The period starts with a population
distribution in 1377 not unlike that of 1290. As we have already shown the plague lowered
the national population tremendously, but as the density shows the incidence of death from
the plague was not uniform. Not surprisingly death rates were greatest in the most dense
counties (with the notable exception of Middlesex) and as a result the upper tail of the
distribution for 1377 is somewhat compressed. The next two snap shots for 1600 and 1801
present a radically changing and changed England. By the year 1600 two features stand
out. The ﬁrst is a narrowing of the population distribution across a majority of the counties.
The second is the run away growth of Middlesex county. By 1600 Middlesex county had a
density almost 9 times greater than its next competitor (Surrey); while the same calculation
in 1290 shows the ratio of Middlesex to the next competitor (Suﬀolk) is less than 2. In
1801, a similar feature appears, but now Middlesex is only 7 times as dense as its closest
competitor. Density is however now an astounding 1178 people per square kilometer. In
total the distributions shift upwards over time; develop a long right tail; and, have their
mass shift left. All three features are readily explained by our theory.
    We have already shown migration across cities both within and across counties tends to
   30
      See, for example, Figure 1, p. 459 from Galloway et al. (1996). The ﬁgure, although for a somewhat
later period, shows London’s zone extends up the Thames valley past Henley, and includes almost all of
Middlesex, and parts of Surrey, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Essex, Kent, and Hertfordshire.
   31
      See Hilbert (1977) for a discussion of early London. Since Londinium was in fact a Roman invention,
it was also the beneﬁciary of an ancient roman road system.


                                                   52
make big cities bigger and smaller ones smaller. If one big city in particular had ready access
to a new higher density energy source, then consumption per capita would rise in the city, its
population density would rise, and migrants would ﬂock to it. The city would grow despite
a rise in mortality. The remaining cities would lose population, and some villages or even
cities would cease to exist. These impacts tend to tighten the population distribution in the
sending counties, while lengthening the far right tail containing the receiving county. These
results come about when one city has diﬀerential access to a dense power source together
with the ability of the population to migrate.
   While the Thames is a constant advantage to London and operative during both periods,
the impact of the Thames would be much greater in the early modern era. To understand
why imagine river and coastal shipping allowed you to deliver a net 100 kg of fuel rather than
50 kg of fuel; with straw or crop residue each kg brings at best 10 MJ; so river access brings
you 500 MJ more energy than otherwise. If the fuel source is coal with 40 MJ per kg, then
river access brings you 2000 MJ more energy than otherwise. Since low friction alternatives
lower the energy cost per kg moved, while dense fuel sources deliver more joules per kg, it
is easy to see how the beneﬁt of a river is increasing in the power density of the fuel. If we
couple this fact with the increased mobility during this period, our theory predicts just such
a run a way pattern as the data depicts.


6.5     Some nagging questions
Our discussion has shown how it might be useful to think of our 700 year history in two
periods distinguished by their energy sources. The geographic distribution of the population
in the ﬁrst period was relatively stable; in the second period major changes took place. In
both periods one county emerged as an outlier, although the extent to which Middlesex
dominated the data changed over time. While these results are consistent with our theory
there are alternative explanations, some related empirical evidence in favor of our approach,
and at least one substantive question that needs an answer.

6.5.1   Supply or Demand Shocks and Reverse Causality

Some combination of technological progress and the rise of London because of international
trade could also explain much of the data presented. For example, we have already invoked
technological progress to explain rising densities over the entire period although some of these
increases may have come from income gains from trade. Since London was a major port,
international trade could also be the source of London’s growth, and the coal trade along the
east coast could be in response to London’s growth rather than the cause of it. Allen (2010)


                                              53
for example presents a convincing argument along these lines as part of his discussion of the
industrial revolution. At some level the diﬀerences between these interpretations is small.
Our explanation for the rise of London is primarily a supply side story. Coal deposits within
London’s exploitation zone led to its growth via migration ﬂows from the rest of England.
This growth would as well raise the attraction of London as a destination for imports and
an outlet for exports giving rise to greater trade. Allen’s interpretation is a demand side
story. Rising trade drove London’s growth which was facilitated by the proximity of coal
and the east coast coal trade. Since London being a port on the Thames is important to
both the shift in supply or shift in demand behind these interpretations it will be diﬃcult
to disentangle whether demand or supply considerations were key.
    To determine whether proximity to dense fuels is suﬃcient to create a dominant city the
size of London is diﬃcult and the relevant data less convincing. To evaluate this possibility
we should note that access to the new high density energy source – coal – aﬀected far more
than just London. In many, if not all, counties the population redistributed itself in ways
consistent with our theory. To see this we present in Figure 9 a plot showing the rank of
counties in terms of population densities in 1290 versus the same ranking in 1800. The
ranking is inverse: the least dense county is ranked 1 and the most dense county ranked 38.
If the rank order of counties did not change, then the counties most densely populated in
1290 would also be those most densely populated in 1801: all points would lie on a 45 degree
line. If there was a strong relationship over time, the data should show a strongly positive
relationship. As shown, there is very little - if any - relationship across these periods.
    The implication is clear and immediate - the distribution of population densities created
by the advent of coal and the beginnings of a mineral based economy in the early modern era
had little to do with the densities created by the forces of the organic economy determining
outcomes in 1290. A list of major cities and their population circa 1086 or 1290 with
a comparison in 1800 will show the same result, as will a comparison of county densities.
With the almost singular exception of London, the population redistributed itself over this
period from traditional centers of population to new coal rich areas. Centers of population
such as Norwich, York and Chester were eclipsed by Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds and
Sheﬃeld.32

6.5.2      Why isn’t Newcastle - London?

If proximity to dense energy resources creates great cities, then why didn’t Newcastle grow
into London? Or alternatively, why didn’t London fade into insigniﬁcance given its lack
of coal reserves? On the face of it, this appears to be a glaring contradiction in our
 32
      Chapter 3 of Wrigley (2010) contains a detailed account of these changes.


                                                     54
                            40
                            30
                      Rank in 1290
                          2010
                            0




                                      0        10          20         30        40
                                                       Rank in 1801




                                     Figure 9: Population Rank: 1290 vs. 1801

analysis. The contradiction is however more apparent than real, and its resolution highlights
an important feature of the theory that we have yet to discuss.
   Part of the problem is that we think of London as far from the coal reserves of Newcastle.
We associate distance on a map with diﬃculty to transport. In fact, the costs of water
transport are only a small fraction of land transport implying that reserves not on major
waterways were essentially trapped near their mine mouths. Estimates of overland transport
costs of coal not surprisingly vary widely, but all estimates indicate an almost prohibitive
cost of overland transport for any lengthy distance. For example, Turnbull (1987, 547)
reports the price of coal from the pithead doubles in 10 miles overland or 200 miles via
(coastwise) water. Using this metric, London is only the equivalent of 15 miles overland
from Newcastle. Massachele (1993, 273) however reports less onerous costs using data on
wheat shipments in the 14th century. He ﬁnds overland-to-river-to-coastwise transport costs
in the ratio of 8:4:1. Using this metric London is less than 40 miles from Newcastle. In
either case, transport costs are signiﬁcant and especially so in relation to the value of the
product. This is perhaps why the population centers in the Northwest of England grew so
quickly given their proximity to coal ﬁelds, but surely Newcastle was still closer to the mines
than London and so our original question remains.
    The answer to this question relies on a feature of the model we have chosen to ignore
in our analysis thus far. Throughout we have assumed that the exploitation zones for
distinct agglomerations did not intersect. This allowed us to generalize the analysis of an
Isolated State to a many city and many region country transparently. This is also the natural
starting assumption since the maximum size of an exploitation zone is given by that in the


                                                        55
Only Energy model (since this occurs when s = 1) and we have already shown how this zone
is a quadratic in power density. When energy resources have low power density, intersections
are not likely; when they are very dense intersections are far more likely.
   In the appendix we examine what happens when two cities compete for resources because
their exploitation zones intersect. Their intersection deﬁnes a contested zone where the
transport of resources to either center is proﬁtable, and we assume the division of the region
into exclusive zones depends on relative proﬁtability. As we show, the city with a higher
relative price for energy as measured by s commands most of the contested zone and will
obtain most of the resources. We should also recall that s is strictly increasing in the
population size of the city. Putting this logic together tells us that when a more populous
city’s exploitation zone intersects with a smaller city’s, it will draw most of the contested
energy resources to itself. In this case, the model predicts a form of inter-regional trade where
resources physically close to one center will be delivered to a larger but more distant center.
Since London was already England’s largest city before the early modern era by virtue of the
density of its surrounding resources and the beneﬁts of the Thames, the initial lead given to
it in the organic economy period made it - and not Newcastle - the largest beneﬁciary of the
coal reserves on the Tyne.
   This feature of the theory is of course very relevant in explaining why cities and countries
today not endowed with oil, coal or natural gas can still thrive and grow. It suggests that
sometime in their history their initial natural advantages gave them a size suﬃcient to become
attractive energy markets. And it was their initial success in the world of organic economies
that allowed them to source the far denser and far ﬂung energy resources we see in the world
today.

6.5.3   Food or Fuel Constraints?

Throughout we have aggregated all energy sources into one in order to highlight the role
of power density. In doing so we have ignored the distinction between energy constraints
coming from the costly collection of fuel for heating or industrial purposes (timber, straw,
dung) and energy constraints coming from the costly collection of fuel for human growth
and sustenance (crops, meat, dairy). While all of these fuels are the direct or indirect fruits
of solar power, distinguishing between them may be important in some cases. It is unlikely
that either the food or fuel constraints always bites ﬁrst; the tightness of these constraints
will likely be place and time speciﬁc. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that our
theory is equally applicable to situations where food as fuel constrains city size. A recent
and very interesting paper by Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian presents evidence directly on
point.

                                               56
                                Table 1: Crops and Power Density
 Crops    Yield per         Energy Value Acres to deliver Energy Content                  Power Density
          acre (kg)            (M J)         42 M J/day       (M J/kg)                      (W/m2 )
 Wheat       650                8,900            1.7             13.69                         .07
 Barley      820               11,400            1.4             13.90                         .08
 Oats        690               9,300             1.6             13.47                         .07
 Potatoes  10,900              31,900            0.5              2.92                         .24


    Nunn and Qian (2011) provide evidence linking the introduction of the potato from the
New World to higher population levels and urbanization rates in the Old World. While
measures of agricultural productivity may seem far aﬁeld from power density, it is important
to recognize that any estimate of a crop yield in terms of caloric payback per acre is, in
fact, an estimate of power density.33 For example, Nunn and Qian motivate their work
by providing estimates in terms of the number of acres of farmland required to provide 42
megajoules of energy per day for an annual crop cycle of one year (42 megajoules represents a
caloric budget of 10,000 calories per day for a family of two adults and three children). Since
joules per unit time must be proportional to Watts while acres are obviously a measure of
area, the ﬁgures from their Table 1 can be manipulated to obtain power densities of various
crops.34
   In Table 1 the ﬁrst three columns represent ﬁgures taken from Nunn and Qian’s Table 1;
the last two columns follow from simple manipulations of the ﬁrst three. Energy content,
e, is column two divided by one; power density, Δ, comes from multiplying column two by
1,000,000 to obtain joules, dividing this number by the number of seconds in a day to obtain
Watts, and then dividing by the number of squared meters required to produce this energy
ﬂow. The result is a measure of the power density for each crop shown in the last column.
    The Table shows two things. First, the power density of potatoes is at least three times
greater than the other staples! Second, given the ﬁgures in Table 1 it is interesting to
speculate why we tend to overlook the lowly potato. As the table shows the power density
of the potato doesn’t come from its enormous potential energy; in fact, its energy content,
measured in Joules/kg or e in our formulation is fully one third of the other staples. Instead
   33
      Care has to be taken to make sure we are calculating the net yield after accounting for other inputs. A
rise in yields due to manuring for example does not reﬂect an increase in the power density of the crop. In
the potato case, cropping requires more labor inputs than for most cereals and we may want to account for
these added energy costs to get a net energy yield ﬁgure. The table below does not contain this adjustment,
but it is simple to make in our framework since it corresponds to an adjustment for net energy supply. See
Nunn and Qian (2011) for a discussion of potential adjustments.
   34
      A megajoule is a 1million joules; an acre is equivalent to 4046 sq. meters; and a day contains 24x60x60
seconds. A Watt is a joule/second. Using these equivalences we can easily calculate the power densities
shown in the last column.


                                                     57
it is the ability of potatoes to provide extremely dense resources per unit area, or d in our
formulation. This information is given in column one which shows the potato providing
thirteen to sixteen as much as other staples. And this calculation brings out an important
point: any analysis which focusses on energy content (just one determinant of power density)
rather than power density itself, is likely to overlook how important the potato (or any other
energy source) can be in economic development.35
   Nunn and Qian use these estimates of the caloric payback per acre for various crops
(wheat, barely, oats and potatoes) to argue that the introduction of the potato could have
large eﬀects on incomes, and via this channel populations and urbanization rates post 1700
in the Old World. Their baseline estimates show a very signiﬁcant role for the potato: a
1% increase the amount of land suitable for potatoes in a country raises the urban share of
its population by .36%; and overall, the introduction of the potato is responsible for 26% of
the increase in the Old World population from 1700 to 1900. Combining these results with
our theory surely goes some way in explaining the ﬁndings of Nunn and Qian since higher
population levels and greater urbanization all follow directly from access to a higher density
energy source.
   While these are important results, they have only limited relevance to our speciﬁc case.
Nunn and Qian ﬁnd signiﬁcant impacts on populations starting only in 1750 which is long
after we observe large shifts in the population distribution across English counties. Ear-
lier improvements in English agriculture could however play a role in raising densities and
urbanization over our period.


7      Conclusions
This paper set out a simple general equilibrium model of an organic or green powered econ-
omy to understand both the past and potential future role renewable energy may play in an
economy. We developed a model where energy sources diﬀered in their power density, where
the collection and exploitation of energy was costly, and where improvements in the energy
system were complementary to energy exploitation. Within this context we showed how the
concept of power density could play a major role in determining the size and density of urban
agglomerations. An energy source twice as dense delivers 8 times the energy supply; power
density determines the peak level of consumption per capita and its supporting population;
roads and rivers eﬀectively magnify the power density of available resources; and power den-
  35
    Just as ignoring the speed with which a crop grows or the fallow period would likewise be unwise. These
two features are captured in the reliance of power density on a crop’s rate of growth r, and the intensity of
cropping γ.



                                                     58
sity itself was shown to be the product of three fundamental characteristics of energy sources
(renewability, dispersal, and energy content) plus a behavioral component reﬂecting energy
suppliers’ impatience.
   We showed how the strength of complementarities within the energy system determined
whether the model produced outcomes reﬂecting neoclassical features (the Almost Neoclas-
sical case) or features of strong increasing returns (the Increasing Returns case). Since the
Almost Neoclassical case produced familiar results we focussed throughout on the Increasing
Returns case. Here we found that increases in market size produced falling energy prices
and rising output and consumption per capita, but given the constraints imposed by the en-
ergy costs of collection and transport, energy costs eventually rose producing a single peaked
proﬁle for both output and consumption per capita, and a single dipped U-shaped proﬁle for
both energy and energy service prices. More dense energy sources produce greater peak con-
sumption, support larger populations at these peaks, and present an obvious power density
driven incentive for the agglomeration of economic activity. We labelled this tendency for
power dense resource environments to create population dense centers of economic activity,
the density-creates-density hypothesis.
   To investigate this hypothesis we needed a speciﬁc mechanism to sort population across
competing environments; a period when the energy system was relatively simple; and a
place where data on energy sources and agglomerations was available. Our solution was
to add a simple Malthusian mechanism to our Energy-Economy model and evaluate its
performance by linking the distribution of power densities across geographic space with
resulting population densities in English counties from 1086 to 1800. England provides a
wealth of detail, large cross county variation in resources, and a well documented shift from
a purely organic economy in 1086 to an economy where coal played a large role in 1800.
    Our Malthusian model showed how natural environments with suﬃcient power density
produced both small and large cities. Small cities are however fragile and not very productive
constructs that either die out or grow to large cities. Large cities are both more permanent
and more productive features of the landscape. In environments with low power density, no
agglomeration can arise.
    When we add migration in search of higher expected lifetime consumption we ﬁnd mi-
grants ﬂow from low power density locations to high power density locations; migration tends
to widen the distribution of city sizes and can produce city death; large cities oﬀer higher
per capita consumption but lower life expectancy than small cities; and the introduction
of a new dense energy source in one location raises incomes everywhere but redistributes
population towards the new dense source. Using these insights we reviewed the popula-
tion history of English counties from the Norman conquest to the start of the nineteenth


                                             59
century. It is impossible to over estimate the depth and breadth of scholarship dedicated
to understanding the population and economic history of this time and place, and our brief
sketch of this 700 years of history must surely do great violence to many important facts and
features of this period. Our hope is that our analysis throws new light on old questions, and
provides provocative new questions to answer. A direct implication of our theory is that the
massive redistribution of the English population to the virtually trapped, but power dense,
resources in the coal producing regions is perfectly explicable; and that the rise of London
to dominance by 1600 was due to its early, easy, and cheap access to the new high density
energy source - coal.       Whether our theory’s implications for migration, productivity, and
fertility patterns stand up to closer scrutiny is as yet unknown, but we are hopeful because
excellent work establishing a causal link from power densities to population sizes has already
be done.36
   With regard to the future, our look at the past has been illuminating. While our
energy system today is extremely complex and features an incredible transport of energy
from producers to consumers that suggests locations are irrelevant, it would be unwise to
underestimate the forces identiﬁed here. The power density and punctiform nature of fossil
fuels has created both the ability, and the necessity, for the energy system we see today. Any
signiﬁcant movement back to an organic economy in our future will create new geographic
winners and losers, require radical changes in our energy transportation system, and will
create strong pressures for the redistribution of economic activity towards those regions with
relatively dense, but still green, renewable resources.




 36
      See our earlier discussion of Nunn and Qian (2011).


                                                     60
8    References
Ashraf, Q. and Oded Galor. 2011. “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Mathusian Epoch.”
American Economic Review, 101(5):1-41
Allen, Robert C. 2001. “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the
Middle Ages to the First World War.” Explorations in Economic History, 38: 411-447.
Allen, Robert C. 2008. “A Review of Gregory Clark’s A Farewell to Alms: A Brief
Economic History of the World.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(4): 946–73.
Allen, Robert C. 2009. “The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective.” UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Allen, Robert C. 2011. Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bairoch, P. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the
Present. Translated by Christopher Braider. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Broadberry, S., B. Campbell, and B. van Leeuwen. 2011. English Medieval Popula-
tion: Reconciling Time Series and Cross Sectional Evidence. LSE: Discussion paper.
Bryce, R. 2010. Power Hungry: The Myth of “Green” Energy and the Real Fuels of the
Future. New York: Public Aﬀairs.
Clark, G. 2005. “The Condition of the Working Class in England, 1209-2004.” Journal of
Political Economy, 113(6): 1307-1340
Clark, G., and D. Jacks. 2007. “Coal and the Industrial Revolution, 1700-1869.” Euro-
pean Review of Economic History, 11(1), 39-72.
Clark, G. 2007. A Farewell to Alms: A brief Economic History of the World. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Davis, D. R. and Weinstein, D. (2002). “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geog-
raphy of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review, 92(5):12691289.
Deane, P. and W. A. Cole. 1967. British Economic Growth, 1688-1959: Trends and
Structure. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Droege, P., ed. 2009. 100% Renewable: Energy Autonomy in Action. London: Earthscan.
Dyer, Alan. 1995. Decline and Growth in English towns (1400-1640). UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Fouquet, R. 2008. Heat Power and Light. Edward Elgar
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. J. Venables. 2000. The Spatial Economy: Cities,
Regions, and International Trade. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Galloway, J.A., D. Keene, and M. Murphy. 1996. “Fuelling the City: Production and
distribution of ﬁrewood and fuel in London’s Region, 1290-1400.” The Economic History


                                          61
Review 49 (3), 447-472.
Galor, O. and O. Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVII (4), 1133-1191.
Hatcher, J. 1994. “England in the Aftermath of the Black Death.” The Past and Present
Society. 144:3-35.
Henderson, V. 1974. “The Sizes and Types of Cities.” American Economic Revie, 64:
540-656.
Henderson, V. 1980. “Community Development: The Eﬀects of Growth and Uncertainty”
American Economic Review. 70: 894-910.
Hilbert, C. 1977. London: The Biography of a City. revised edition, London: Penguin
Books London.
Markusen, J. 1990. “Micro-foundations of external economies.” Canadian Journal of Eco-
nomics, 23(3): 495-508.
Massachele, J. 1993. “Transport Costs in Medieval England.” The Economic History
Review, Vol. 46, No. 2, 266-279.
Mitchell, B. R. and P. Deane. 1962. Abstract of British Historical Statistics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Morillo, S. 1996. The Battle of Hastings: Sources and Interpretations. UK: The Boydell
Press.
Nef, J.U. 1966. The Rise of the British Coal Industry. Volumes One & Two. London:
Frank Cass & Co. Ltd.
Neher, P.A. 1990, Natural resource economics: conservation and exploitation. Cambridge
University Press.
Nunn, N. and N. Qian. 2011. “The Potato’s contribution to population and urbanization:
evidence from a historical experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 593-650.
Rauch, J.E. 1993. “Does history matter only when it matters little? The case of city-
industry location.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:843-867.
Samuelson, P.A. 1983. “Thunen at Two Hundred.” Journal of Economic Literature, 21(4):
1468-1488.
Schoﬁeld, J. 1984. The Building of London: From the Conquest to the Great Fire. London:
British Museum Publication Ltd.
Smil, V. 2006. Energy: A Beginner’s Guide. Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications.
Smil, V. 2008. Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics of Complex Systems.
MIT Press.
Smil, V. 2010. Energy Myths and Realities: Bringing Science to the Energy Policy Debate.
Washington, D.C.: The AEI Press.


                                           62
Turnbull, G. 1987. “Canals, Coal and Regional Growth during the Industrial Revolution”,
The Economic History Review, 40(4): 537-560.
Von Thunen, J.H. 1826. “Der Isolierte Staat.” In Beziehung auf landwrirtschaft und
Nationalekonomie. Hamburg.
Walker, D. 1995. The Normans in Britain. Historical Association Studies, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
World Energy Council. 2010. Survey of Energy Resources.
Wrigley, E.A. Industrial Growth and Population Change: A Regional Study of the Coal-
ﬁled Areas of North-west Europe in the Later Nineteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wrigley, E.A. 1962. “The Supply of Raw Materials in the Industrial Revolution.” The
Economic History Review, 15: 1-16.
Wrigley, E.A. 1969. Population and History. New York: McGraw-Hill (World University
Library).
Wrigley, E.A. and R. S. Schoﬁeld. 1981. The Population History of England, 1541-1871:
A reconstruction. London: Edward Arnold.
Wrigley, E.A. 1987. People, Cities and Wealth: The Transformation of Traditional Society.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wrigley, E.A., R. S. Davies, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schoﬁeld. 1997. English
population history from family reconstitution 1580-1837. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wrigley, E.A. 2003. “Energy Constraints and Pre-industrial Economics.” In Economia e
energia secc. XIII-XVIII S. Cavaciocchi (ed), 156-172. Florence, Le Monnier.
Wrigley, E.A. 2009. “Rickman revisited: the population growth rates of English counties
in the early modern period.” The Economic History Review. 62(3): 711-735
Wrigley, E.A. 2010. Energy and the English Industrial Revolution. Cambridge University
Press. Cambridge, UK.




                                           63
A      Appendix: Proofs
Proposition 1
From equation (20) we know the demand for energy is decreasing in pW /w, it approaches
inﬁnity when pW /w approaches zero and it approaches zero when pW /w approaches inﬁnity.
From equations (25) and (29) we know energy supply is increasing in pW /w as long as
σ > 1/z. Thus, to prove existence it is enough to show the supply function is zero when
pW /w is zero. From inspection of (28) we know that pW /pC is zero when pW /w is zero,
which implies s = 0. From (24) this implies T C  (W ) is zero which by equation (5) implies
energy supply is also zero.


Proposition 2
We ﬁrst show that an increase in market size raises the relative price of power to the wage,
that is d(pW /w)/dL > 0. Total diﬀerentiating the demand and supply equations and rear-
ranging we ﬁnd
                                  S = 6(1 − s) s + 3Δ
                                  W                                                   (A.1)
                                         3 − 2s
                                                 W
                                                     
                                   D = L −     p
                                   W                                                   (A.2)
                                                  w
where a variable with a hat on top means X̂ = dX/X. By the deﬁnition of s and equation
(28) we ﬁnd
                                                  
                                                 pW
                                    s = (1 − s) C                               (A.3)
                                                 p
and                                     W       
                           
                           pW     zσ − 1 p       1
                              =               +        
                                                       L                              (A.4)
                           pC      σ−1     w     σ−1
                                       = 0 and rearranging terms we ﬁnd
    Equating (A.1) and (A.2), setting Δ
                                  
                                      
                                    pW              6(1−s)2 1
                                    w          1−     3−2s σ−1
                                           =                                          (A.5)
                                    
                                    L          6(1−s)2 zσ−1
                                                            +1
                                                3−2s σ−1


Therefore, the relative price of power to the wage raises with market size if

                                                 6(1 − s)2
                                     σ−1>                                             (A.6)
                                                  3 − 2s


                                                64
The righthand side of the inequality is bound between 0 and 2 (because s can only take
values between 0 and 1). When σ ≥ 3/[1 − z] the lefthand side of the inequality is larger
than 3 so that the inequality always holds.
    Next, we show that an increase in market size raises the relative price of energy services
to the wage. To do so, ﬁrst take equation (28) and multiply both sides by w/pW and ﬁnd:
                                           W      
                             p
                              C   σ(1 − z) 
                                           p      1    
                                =             −        L                                   (A.7)
                              w    σ−1      w    σ−1

Replacing (A.5) in (A.7) we ﬁnd
                                  
                                 pC         σ(1−z)−1      6(1−s)2 1
                                   w           σ−1
                                                      −    3−2s σ−1
                                        =                                                  (A.8)
                                  
                                  L             6(1−s)2 zσ−1
                                                              +1
                                                 3−2s σ−1


Therefore, the relative price of manufactured goods increases with the size of the economy
if and only if
                                                 6(1 − s)2
                                  σ(1 − z) − 1 >                                      (A.9)
                                                  3 − 2s
As before, the righthand side in the inequality (A.9) is bounded between 0 and 2. When
σ > 3/(1 − z) we can see the lefthand side is always greater than 2 which ensures pC /w
increases monotonically with the size of the economy.


Proposition 3
The result follows directly from the proof of proposition 2. When σ < 3/(1 − z) the lefthand
side of (A.9) is less than 2. Thus, for s close to zero the condition is violated and an increase
in market size lowers the relative price of energy services to the wage. However, as the size
of the market increases, s also increases. To see this replace equations (A.4) and (A.5) back
in equation (A.3) to show:
                                                  zσ
                                     s          σ−1
                                        = 6(1−s)2 zσ−1     >0                              (A.10)
                                    
                                    L                  +1
                                            3−2s    σ−1

Hence, as the size of the market increases, s approaches 1 and the condition in (A.9) even-
tually holds.


Proposition 4
Because energy services are used in transportation, consumption is deﬁned as the residual of
output that remains after transporting the energy to the city: C = Y (L, W S ) − T C(W ∗ , Δ)

                                                   65
where Y (L, W S ) is given in (21), T C(W, Δ) in given in (5) and W S = W ∗ − T C(W ∗ ). We
are interested in characterizing consumption per capita (C/L) as a function of L and Δ.
Total diﬀerentiation of consumption per-capita C/L yields:

                                     d(C/L)   dC 1  C
                                            =      − 2                                           (A.11)
                                       dL     dL L L

To be able to sign the derivative we need to characterize each element in individually.
   To begin we need to ﬁnd dC dL
                                 . Totally diﬀerentiating consumption and making use of the
relation between energy supplied, energy extracts and energy used in transportation we ﬁnd
                                                          
                                             T CW ∗                         T CΔ
                   dC = YL dL + YW S     −                     dW S −               dΔ           (A.12)
                                           1 − T CW ∗                    1 − T CW ∗
                                         W
where from (24) we have T CW ∗ = pCp+pW > 0 and from equation (5) we have T CΔ < 0.
    Next, we want to ﬁnd relations that allow us to simplify equation (A.12) into something
more manageable. First, we can solve for pW /w using equation (20) and replace the result
in (28) to ﬁnd the ratio of prices
                                                      σ−1
                                                         1                      σ
                        pW    σ−1                 1            (Lz (W S )1−z ) σ−1
                          C
                            =     (1 − z)                                                        (A.13)
                        p      σβ                ασ                  WS
                                                                 W
Comparing this equation with (21) allows us to write ppC = (1 − z) WY S = T CW ∗ /(1 − T CW ∗ )
where the last inequality follows from (24). We also ﬁnd the marginal productivity of energy
in ﬁnal output is YW S = σ(1−z)  Y
                           σ−1 W S
                                    . Replacing these results in (A.12) we ﬁnd
                                                     
                                         1−z Y                          T CΔ
                      dC = YL dL +                        dW S −                dΔ               (A.14)
                                         σ − 1 WS                    1 − T CW ∗

      Now that we have simpliﬁed equation (A.12) we can set dΔ = 0 in (A.14) to ﬁnd

                                 dC   1 − z Y dW S
                                    =              + YL                                          (A.15)
                                 dL   σ − 1 W S dL
                                                                      zσ Y
      Replacing (A.15) and noticing from (21) that YL =              σ−1 L
                                                                             we can rewrite equation (A)
as:                                                              
                          d(C/L)         1 − z Ŵ S    zσ             Y    C
                                 =                  +                     − 2                    (A.16)
                            dL           σ − 1 L̂     σ−1             L 2  L




                                                 66
Replacing equation (A.10) in equation (A.1) we ﬁnd

                         Ŵ S                    6(1 − s)2 zσ
                                =                                        >0                 (A.17)
                          L̂        6(1 − s)2 (zσ − 1) + (3 − 2s)(σ − 1)

so that
                                                                         
      d(C/L)          1−z               6(1 − s)2 zσ             zσ           Y    C
             =                                                 +                  − 2       (A.18)
        dL            σ − 1 6(1 − s) (zσ − 1) + (3 − 2s)(σ − 1) σ − 1
                                    2                                         L 2  L

   Now we are ready to show that consumption per capita peaks when σ < 3/(1 − z). To
show that consumption per capita is single peaked, d(C/L)
                                                       dL
                                                             must be positive for small values
                                                      d(C/L)
of L, negative for large values of L and the sign of dL can change only once. First we
ﬁnd the critical value of L where the slope is zero by setting (A.18) equal to zero:
                                                                 
                  1−z               6(1 − s)2 zσ             zσ       C
                                                           +        =                       (A.19)
                  σ − 1 6(1 − s) (zσ − 1) + (3 − 2s)(σ − 1) σ − 1
                                2                                     Y
                                                                
                                              LHS                              RHS


    Taking the derivative with respect to L and replacing equation (A.10) we can show that
dLHS/dL < 0. From the deﬁnition of s we know that as the size of the market increases, the
price of energy services to the wage also increase and s approaches 1. This implies that the
                  zσ
LHS approaches σ−1    < 1 where the last inequality follows from the assumption of decreasing
returns to labor. We have characterized now the LHS as monotonically decreasing in L and
              zσ
approaching σ−1   < 1 for large L.
    Next, we show that the RHS is monotonically increasing in L. To see this we can express
C/Y = 1 − T C(W ∗ , Δ)/Y . From equations (A.15) and (A.17) we know dC/dL > 0, so it
must be true that Y increases faster than T C when the size of the marker increases. This
implies that when L increases, T C/Y decreases eventually reaching 0 when L approaches
inﬁnity. This implies that the RHS increases as a function of L and reaches 1 for very large
L.
    Given that LHS is monotonically decreasing in L and RHS is monotonically increasing
with L, then LHS and RHS intersect if and only if LHS|L=0 > RHS|L=0 . To calculate
                                                  1−z        6zσ          zσ
LHS|L=0 simply set s = 0 to ﬁnd LHS|L=0 = σ−1           6(zσ−1)+3(σ−1)
                                                                       + σ−1 . To calculate RHS|L=0
                                                  3
we ﬁrst need to recall that T C(W ∗ , Δ) = 23 (μgd)
                                               πΔ      3                                     ∗
                                                    2 s which from (30) is equal to T C(W , Δ) =
2 sW S
3 1−2s/3
         . Now, using pW /pC = (1 − z)Y /W S and from the deﬁnition pW /pC = s/1 − s we
ﬁnd C/Y = 1 − 23 (1−s)(1−z)
                     1−2/3s
                            . Hence when L approaches zero, RHS|L=0 = 1+2z           3
                                                                                        < 1. Putting
these two result together, there will be an intersection, and this intersection will be unique
when σ < 3/(1 − z). This is the Increasing Returns Case. If σ > 3/(1 − z) there is no


                                                    67
intersection and C/L is monotonically decreasing with the size of the market. This is the
Almost Neoclassical case.
   The proof for production per capita is similar. Production is equal to Y = αβ (σ −
  1 z            σ/(σ−1)
1) ασ L (W S )1−z          . The rate of change of production per capita can be written as
=
Y   1−(1−z)σ +
             L    (1−z)σ ∗ . Replacing equation (A.17) we ﬁnd that
                         W
L      σ−1          σ−1


             
             Y
                     1 − (1 − z)σ (1 − z)σ             6(1 − s)2 zσ
             L
                 =               +                                                     (A.20)
             
             L          σ−1         σ − 1 6(1 − s)2 (zσ − 1) + (3 − 2s)(σ − 1)

We know s approaches zero as L approaches zero, so production per capita ﬁrst raises with
the size of the market when the previous equation is positive, that is when σ < 3/(1 − z).
For large L production per capita always falls because as s approaches 1, the expression Y /L
                                                                                         L
                                                                                             
            1−(1−z)σ
approaches    σ−1
                     which is negative, assuming decreasing returns to labor in equilibrium.
If σ > 3/(1 − z), then production per capita falls monotonically with the size of the market.


Proposition 5
                                   = 0 and rearranging terms we ﬁnd
Equating (A.1) and (A.2), setting L
                                
                                    
                                  pW
                                  w                  3
                                         = − 6(1−s)2 zσ−1        <0                    (A.21)
                                  
                                  Δ                         +1
                                               3−2s   σ−1


Replacing (A.21) in (A.2) we ﬁnd dW D /dΔ > 0. Rearranging the expression in (A.14) and,
given W S = W D in equilibrium, we ﬁnd dC/dΔ > 0.


Proposition 6
The key result to prove here is that the peak of consumption per capita increases with Δ.
That is, both the C/L and L are larger at the peak when Δ increases. The proof follows
from equations (A.18) and (A.19). Given the characteristics of LHS and RHS in equation
(A.19), if LHS increases with Δ and RHS decreases with Δ for all L, then it is necessarily
true that L increases with Δ (See Figure 10).
   We start calculating the result of the LHS:

       dLHS                12zσ(1 − z)(2 − s)(1 − s)             ds
            =−                                                      >0                 (A.22)
        dΔ     (3(σ + 2zσ − 3) + 2(7 − σ − 6zσ)s + 6(zσ − 1)s ) dΔ
                                                             2 2




                                                68
                                            Δ1 < Δ 2
                                                                          RHS(Δ1 )

                                                                          RHS(Δ 2 )

                                                                          LHS(Δ 2 )
                                                                          LHS(Δ1 )




                              L1           L2                            L




                              Figure 10: Consumption per-capita

where ds/dΔ < 0 directly from equations (A.1)-(A.5). Similarly, for the RHS we have

                                   dRHS   2(1 − z) ds
                                        =              <0                                      (A.23)
                                    dΔ    (3 − 2s)2 dΔ

Then peak value of L increases with Δ.
   To show that the peak of consumption per capita increases with Δ we simply need to
show that C/L is an increasing function of Δ for all L.

                                    d(C/L)   dC 1  C dL
                                           =      − 2                                          (A.24)
                                      dΔ     dΔ L L dΔ
                                                  d(C/L)       dC 1
were the second term is equal to zero, so that      dΔ
                                                           =   dΔ L
                                                                      > 0 directly from Proposition 5.


Proposition 7, 8 and 9
In the text.


Proposition 10
The slope of the E-Line is positive which implies its point of tangency with the c(emax  Δi ; Li )
                                                                                                  i)
will occur to the left to the maximum for c(e; Li ). So it follows from Proposition 6 that ∂c(e;L
                                                                                             ∂L
increases with Δ. Hence a higher Δi requires the corresponding E-line that is tangent to


                                                 69
                                                                                         Δi       ∂c(emax ;Li )
c(e; Li ) to be higher. As e increases, so it does ∂E−line
                                                     ∂L
                                                           . This implies an increase in ∂L
                                                                           max
at the new point of tangency which deﬁnes an increasing function eΔi (Δi ). That is, the
point of tangency for any city will be higher the higher is its power density. Thus, if the
migration equilibrium expected lifetime consumption is such that e∗N < emax
                                                                        Δ1 and by deﬁnition
 ∗                                                        ∗
eN ≤ eΔN then there will be an intersection between the e −Line and all the c(e; Li ) curves,
       max

                 ∗
         Δ1 ≤ e ≤ e ΔN
for any emax         max




B      Why Newcastle didn’t become London
Cities within regions are proximate and may compete for energy resources which would in
turn aﬀect their exploitation zones, energy supply, etc. To examine how this interaction
may play out we consider the case of only two cities that are close enough to have their
exploitation zones overlap in an area we call the contested zone. Label these two cities A
and B, with exploitation zones of radii RA and RB respectively. We assume the distance
between the two cities is small enough to create a contested zone (RAB < RA + RB ) but
large enough to exclude the city cores from this zone (RAB > RA and RAB > RB ).37 Energy
producers on the zero rent margin for city A will necessarily ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to go to
city B; and likewise producers on the zero rent margin for city B will ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to
go to city A. In between these clear cut cases there will exist a set of energy producers that
are indiﬀerent between bringing their energy to city A or city B. Consider energy producer
I that holds Δ units of power and is located inside the intersection of the two exploitation
zones. The distance from energy producer I to city core A is RAI and the distance from
energy producer I to city core B is RBI .
   Proﬁts for energy producer I are given by


                                         A Δ − (pA + pA )(μgd)RAI
                                  ΠAI = pW       W    C
                                                                                                       (B.1)

                                         B Δ − (pB + pB )(μgd)RBI
                                  ΠBI = pW       W    C
                                                                                                       (B.2)

   The producer has Δ watts of power to sell, but pays costs proportional to the energy
cost of delivering them to either core. The energy costs of transport are simply (μgd/Δ) for
each watt of power moved one meter. Therefore energy costs to core A are (μgd/Δ)ΔRAI =
(μgd)RAI and similarly for city B.
   The energy producer will be indiﬀerent between the two cities if the amount of con-
  37
     Other cases are clearly possible to investigate but harder to deal with analytically. For example, if the
city cores are very close together the indiﬀerence curve takes on a diﬀerent shape, but our simulation shows
the results we focus on below are very similar.



                                                     70
sumption goods obtained from each city are equalized. That is, proﬁts measured in terms of
consumption goods must be equal for the indiﬀerent energy supplier. That is, the indiﬀerent
supplier must be found where:
                                       ΠAI    ΠBI
                                         C
                                            = C                                       (B.3)
                                       pA      pB
In addition, we also know that energy suppliers on the margins of each city’s exploitation
zone earn zero proﬁts at current prices. Therefore the zero rent producers must satisfy:

                                   A Δ − (pA + pA )(μgd)RA = 0
                            ΠA = p W       W    C
                                                                                           (B.4)

                                  B Δ − (pB + pB )(μgd)RB = 0
                            ΠB = pW       W    C
                                                                                           (B.5)

   By using (B.1), (B.2), (B.4), and (B.5) the indiﬀerence condition (B.3) can be written as

                                             (1 − sA )
                             (RA − RAI ) =             (RB − RBI )                         (B.6)
                                             (1 − sB )
   This condition deﬁnes a curve dividing the contested zone according to whether sA > sB .
Note if sA > sB then RA −RAI < RB −RBI and city A gets the biggest share of the contested
zone. Not surprisingly, the city with the highest relative price for energy gets the lion’s share
of the contested zone.
    To fully characterize this curve we need to understand how the position of the indiﬀerent
energy producer changes inside the contested zone. We have assumed thus far that our
indiﬀerent producer is on the straight line joining the two city centers, but this is just one
point. To solve for the entire line consider the angle formed between the line segment AB
and the line segment AI. Call this angle φ and use the law of triangles to ﬁnd the following
condition:
                             2       2     2
                           RBI   = RAI + RAB   − 2RAI RAB cos(φ)                         (B.7)
                                                                        ∗
Using equations (B.6) and (B.7) we can now ﬁnd an expression for RAI      (φ) that determines
the position of the indiﬀerent energy producer for any given φ.
   Figure 11 shows how this curve is determined by the relative size of the exploitation zones.
In each ﬁgure the curve splitting the contested zone is marked by a red dotted line. The
area to the left of this curve belongs to city A, while city B takes the remainder. In Figure
13(a) the two regions are identical, hence the two cities split the contested zone equally. In
Figure 13(b) Region A is larger than Region B and captures most of the contested zone.
Holding sB constant, as sA approaches 1 all of the contested area belongs to city A and as
sA approaches zero, all of the contested area belongs to city B.



                                               71
                  s A = sB


             RA                RB



     A                                       B
                   RAB




         (a) Two regions are equal




                  s A > sB



             RA                     RB

         A                               B
                         RAB




 (b) Region A is larger than Region B

Figure 11: Regions of Exploitation



                     72
   In the case of symmetric regions shown by the ﬁrst ﬁgure the solution to the curve is
somewhat simpler. When regions are symmetric RAI = RBI and the indiﬀerent energy
                                 ∗
producer is situated a distance RAI  away from the city A forming an angle φ with the
segment AB:
                                                         ∗        RAB
                                                        RAI =                                                     (B.8)
                                                                2 cos(φ)
which is what one would expect given that the set that describes this “indiﬀerence curve” is
a straight line that divides the contested area in two.
   With this characterization in hand we can solve for the energy supplied to each city which
is given by the following integral:
                         φcr           ∗
                                        RAI                               π          RA
        W =2×
         S
                                              v(Δ − μgd · v)dvdϕ +                          v(Δ − μgd · v)dvdϕ    (B.9)
                      0             0                                 φcr          0


where φcr is the angle that determines the intersection between the two areas of exploitation
and it is the solution to

                                           2    2    2
                                          RB = RA + RAB − 2RA RAB cos(φcr )                                      (B.10)

which is given by:
                                                      2    2    2
                                                                                                      
                                                      RA − RB + RAB                               RAB
                          φcr = arccos                                     = arccos                              (B.11)
                                                         2RA RAB                                  2RA

where the second inequality follows from the assumption of symmetry.
  The solution to this integral gives a supply curve again quite similar to our earlier results.
Speciﬁcally:

                               
                  Δ3 2        2
 W = (π − φcr )
    S
                      s 1 − sA + Ψ                                               (B.12)
                (μgd)2 A      3
       2
                                                                           
     RAB  Δ                1                           1
  Ψ=           tan(φcr ) − μgdRAB (arctanh(tan(φcr )) + sec(φcr ) tan(φcr )) > 0 (B.13)
        4                  3                           2

    Several results follow from these calculations. First, any contested zone lowers energy
supply from what it would have been in its absence. The explicit formulation given above
takes out a pie slice from the exploitation zone with radial circumference of φcr , and then
adds back in the net energy delivered from the triangle of the exploitation zone (within this
pie slice) that the city actually gets to keep Ψ > 0. Second, energy supply is smaller the
closer are the cities together and of course larger the more dense is the energy source to


                                                                73
begin with. Putting these results together with those from earlier sections, it is clear that
cities with overlapping exploitation zones can only exist if power density is suﬃciently high
(recall density must exceed a certain minimum to support a positive population); and the
distance between cities who could overlap in exploitation zones needs to be greater in poor
less power dense regions, but could be quite small in power dense rich regions. Third, even
if a city is surrounded by dense resources a distant city with a large exploitation zone may
end up beneﬁting from those resources since they will be transported to it rather than the
closest city. A large exploitation zone results from, all else equal, a large population since
s is increasing in population size.   Therefore, London and Newcastle’s exploitation zones
did intersect; and coal was carried to London rather than Newcastle because its value was
higher there.




                                             74
