NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIVIDENDS AS REFERENCE POINTS:
A BEHAVIORAL SIGNALING APPROACH
Malcolm Baker
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 18242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18242
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

Baker gratefully acknowledges the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18242.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Dividends as Reference Points: A Behavioral Signaling Approach
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 18242
July 2012
JEL No. D03,D82,G35
ABSTRACT
We outline a dividend signaling approach in which rational managers signal firm strength to investors
who are loss averse to reductions in dividends relative to the reference point set by prior dividends.
Managers with strong but unobservable cash earnings separate themselves by paying high dividends
but retain enough earnings to be likely not to fall short of the same level next period. The model is
consistent with several features of the data, including equilibrium dividend policies similar to a Lintner
partial-adjustment model; modal dividend changes of zero; stronger market reactions to dividend
cuts than increases; relative infrequency and irregularity of repurchases versus dividends; and a core
mechanism that does not center on public destruction of value, a notion that managers reject in surveys.
Supportive new tests involve nominal levels and changes of dividends per share, announcement effects,
and reference point currencies of ADR dividends.
Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

I.

Introduction
Managers share a number of common views about their dividend policies, as shown in

the survey by Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005). They strive to avoid reducing
dividends per share (of the 384 managers surveyed, 93.8% agreed); they try to maintain a smooth
dividend stream (89.6%); and, they are reluctant to make changes that might have to be reversed
(77.9%). They follow such policies because they believe that there are negative consequences to
reducing dividends (88.1%), which they believe convey information to investors (80%). While
caution is merited in interpreting any survey responses, the Brav et al. results are further
consistent with Lintner’s (1956) own survey and interviews, his partial-adjustment model, and a
large empirical literature demonstrating a significant response to dividend announcements.
While managers appear to view dividends as some sort of signal to investors, they also
suggest that standard dividend signaling models are not focused on the correct mechanisms. For
example, the proposition that dividends are used to show that their firm can bear costs such as
borrowing external funds or passing up investment was summarily rejected (4.4% agreement, the
lowest in the entire survey). The idea of signaling through costly taxes did not receive much
more support (16.6%). Again, while we might not expect managers to admit public destruction
of value even in an anonymous survey, these findings suggest there is more to the story than the
economic mechanisms driving well-known signaling models such as Bhattacharya (1979), Miller
and Rock (1985), John and Williams (1985), Kumar (1988), Bernheim (1991), Allen, Bernardo,
and Welch (2000), and Guttman, Kadan, and Kandel (2010).
In this paper we use prospect theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) to motivate a
signaling model of dividend policy with behavioral foundations. We focus on two features of the
prospect theory value function. We use the concept of reference-dependence: values and

1

perceptions are based on losses and gains relative to a reference point. We also assume loss
aversion: there is a kink at the reference point whereby marginal utility is discontinuously lower
in the domain of losses. Reference-dependence and loss aversion are supported by a considerable
literature in psychology, finance and economics, as we briefly review later.
The essence of our stylized model is that investors evaluate current dividends against a
psychological reference point established by past dividends. Because investors are particularly
disappointed when dividends are cut, dividends can credibly signal information about earnings.
The model is inherently multiperiod, which leads to more natural explanations for the survey
results above and other facts about dividend policy such as the Lintner partial-adjustment model,
which emerges in equilibrium, and which static signaling models cannot address. While it is
difficult to measure investor utility functions per se outside the laboratory, we perform some
novel tests that get at the core intuitions of the approach.
To provide a bit more detail, the model uses reference point preferences as the
mechanism for costly signaling. The manager’s utility function reflects both a preference for a
high stock price today and for avoiding a dividend cut in the future. In the first period, the
manager inherits an exogenous reference level dividend, and receives private information about
earnings. The manager balances the desire to signal current earnings by paying higher dividends
with the potential cost of not being able to meet or exceed a new and higher reference point
through the combination of savings from the first period and random second-period earnings. In
equilibrium, managers that cannot meet the inherited dividend level pay out everything in the
first period, as the marginal cost of missing the reference point is high; managers with
intermediate first-period earnings pool to pay the reference dividend; and managers with strong
first-period earnings pay out a fraction that raises the reference level for the future but, given

2

their savings and expected second-period earnings, to a level they are relatively confident that
they can maintain.
This simple model is consistent with several facts about dividend policy that cannot be
handled in static models. First, the modal dividend change is zero. In a rational continuous
setting, there is no special significance to paying the same dividend as last period.1 Second, for
reasonable parameter values, firms with high or stable earnings engage in a partial-adjustment
policy that resembles the Lintner model. Third, firms are punished more for dividend cuts than
they are for symmetric raises, and so avoid raising the dividend to a level that will be difficult to
sustain. Fourth, the approach offers an explanation for why repurchases are less frequent than
dividends despite their tax advantage: Unlike dividends per share, the key parameters of a
hypothetical “regular” repurchase program cannot be specified in salient and repeatable numbers.
Finally, the mechanism of the model is novel and not inconsistent with the available survey
evidence. Strong types do not publicly burn money with certainty, but rather they implicitly burn
expected utility by risking falling short the next period; for reasonable parameter values, actual
utility burning by strong firms does not usually occur in equilibrium.
The approach suggests some new tests as well. They revolve around the idea that a
dividend that creates a reference point forms a powerful signal. Psychological evidence, as well
as casual introspection, shows that memory and salience play a role in the formation of reference
points. One potential empirical manifestation is that dividends per share will be concentrated in
round numbers, which are more memorable and deviations from which are thus more noticeable.
(Static models, by contrast, are continuous ascribe no particular role to round number dividends

1

Guttman et al. (2010) show that an extension of the Miller-Rock model can generate sticky dividends, but point out
that such equilibria are just a subset of multiple pooling equilibria. In the loss aversion approach, the reason to focus
on sticky dividend levels is straightforward.

3

and cannot treat changes at all.) Another possible empirical manifestation is that repetition of a
particular dividend level also ingrains a reference point. These are not direct predictions of the
model, because we do not model memory and salience, but rather are predictions of the general
intuitions of signaling around a moveable reference point.
In empirical tests we confirm that dividend levels and changes are typically made in
round numbers, e.g. multiples of five or ten cents. Managers that raise dividends strive to exceed
round number thresholds. The market reacts asymmetrically when past levels are not reached
versus when they are exceeded (a known result), especially when these changes cross a round
number (a new result). This asymmetry is more pronounced when the same dividend per share
has been paid for several consecutive quarters. As a placebo test, we examine ADRs, where we
find that the reference point and round numbers are denominated in foreign currency. In this
sample, there is no clustering and nothing special about the market’s reaction around zero
dividend changes in U.S. dollars. Investors have settled on a reference point currency even
though the dividend’s economic value to some investors, and perhaps the firm’s ability to pay
that value, fluctuates with the exchange rate.
The approach complements other papers that connect dividends and reference points or
prospect theory. In particular, Shefrin and Statman (1984) argue that dividends improve the
utility of investors with prospect theory value functions if they also mentally account (Thaler
(1999)) for dividends and capital gains and losses separately. This approach is however very
different in that dividends serve no signaling purpose, rely on curvature in the value function,
and have no particular relationship to a Lintner policy. Another recent contribution is Lambrecht
and Myers (2012). In their model, managers maximize the present value of the utility of rents
that they can extract from profits. They smooth dividends and prefer a Lintner policy because

4

they have habit formation preferences and rents move in lockstep with dividends given the
budget constraint. We discuss these papers and other related research. More generally, our paper
adds to the literature on behavioral corporate finance surveyed by Baker and Wurgler (2012).
Section II reviews the relevant literature on reference-dependent utility. Section III
describes the model. Section IV discusses its compatibility with known facts of dividend policy.
Section V tests novel predictions. Section VI concludes.

II.

Background: Reference-Dependence and Reference Points
In the time since Markowitz (1952) and Kahneman and Tversky (1979) proposed theories

of choice based on utility that depends not only on the level of economic states, but on changes,
the literatures on empirical choice behavior and the psychological analysis of value have
advanced considerably, as have their applications to economics and finance. We first review this
literature more generally, then apply it to dividends.

A.

Reference-Dependent Utility and Loss Aversion
We focus on two central features of the prospect theory value function: that utility

depends on changes in states relative to a reference point, and that losses bring more pain than
symmetric gains bring pleasure. Our applications to dividends do not require a full review of
prospect theory, which as a whole is a theory of choice under uncertainty.
Tversky and Kahneman (1991) review the classic literature on loss aversion. Kahneman
and Tversky (1979) introduced loss aversion to reflect then-known patterns in choice behavior.
The subsequent literature suggests its relevance in a wide range of applications. One implication
of loss aversion is what Thaler (1980) termed the endowment effect. Kahneman, Knetch, and

5

Thaler (1990) found that the value of an item increases when it is considered already in one’s
endowment. A literature has developed on differences between the willingness to pay for a small
improvement versus willingness to accept a small loss, another reflection of loss aversion.
(These literatures suggest the ballpark figure that losses matter slightly more than twice as much
as gains, a figure that we employ in our numerical example.) Finally, a related phenomenon is
status quo bias. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) documented a preference for the status quo
even when costs of change are small relative to potential benefits, such as in choices about
medical plans.

B.

Reference Points
Several aspects of reference points in the context of dividend policy deserve discussion.

If “gains” and “losses” matter, how are they defined? In other words, what is the reference point
and how is it formed? Can it change? What determines its strength? Can there be multiple
reference points? The literature on prospect theory does not provide general answers to these
questions. The relevant reference point depends on the setting. In static choice situations, it is
often obvious. For example, in the applications and experiments above, the reference point is the
decision maker’s current position. But in many circumstances, “current position” is not always
so well defined. In Abel (1990), for example, the reference point for utility includes others’
current consumption levels.
A more complicated situation arises when the decision maker has some control over the
framing of an outcome. Thaler (1999) reviews the concept of mental accounting, in which the
decision maker may, for example, choose to define reference points and segregate outcomes so
as to strategically maximize his happiness under a prospect theory value function.

6

Shefrin and Statman (1984) apply these ideas to explain why investors like dividends,
although their perspective is very different than ours. Shefrin and Statman argue that investors
prefer to mentally divide returns into capital gains and dividends and consider each separately.
Their explanation employs a third feature of the prospect theory value function—its concavity in
gains and convexity in losses. Dividends allow investors to flexibly repackage what would
otherwise be a large capital loss into a slightly larger capital loss and a dividend. If the capital
loss is large, then a slightly larger loss causes little extra pain, while the dividend can be
accounted for as a gain relative to a reference point of no dividend and thus a return to the value
function where marginal utility is high. Likewise, if there is a large positive return, making the
capital gain slightly smaller does not decrease utility much, while the ability to treat the dividend
as a separate gain allows for an additional, disproportionate utility increase.
Reference points can also differ in their temporal character. In dynamic situations with
uncertainty, the reference point is even harder to generalize about. It may involve the future, not
just the present. In Koszegi and Rabin (2006, 2009), agents are loss averse over changes in
beliefs about future outcomes such as consumption. Here, expectations about the future make up
the reference point. For example, utility might depend in part on the prospect of a raise.
Past circumstances can also supply powerful reference points. Genesove and Mayer
(2001) find that people resist selling their homes below its purchase price. Shefrin and Statman
(1985) find that the purchase price of a security serves as a reference point. Odean (1998)
confirms this, and also suggests, like Arkes, Hirshleifer, Jiang, and Lim (2008), that such
reference points can change over time, albeit sluggishly. Baker and Xuan (2009) argue that the
stock price that a new CEO inherits is an important reference point for raising new equity. The

7

idea of one’s prior consumption as a reference point for the utility of current consumption is
represented through internal habit formation preferences as in Constantinides (1990).
In settings where the past supplies the reference point, its power may depend on the
strength of the associated memory. Most of the literature does not incorporate the role of
memory, however. A probability distribution is not memorable, and a rational expectation about
the future is going to be continuous and somewhat indeterminate. The particulars of past
consumption levels may not be memorable. In general, factors that increase the strength of a
memory include repetition and rehearsal (Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968)), elaboration (Palmere et
al. (1983)), distinctiveness (Eysenck and Eysenck (1980)), salience, associated effort (Tyler et al.
(1979)), or emotional association. For individual numbers, ease of recall matters. Phone
companies sell phone numbers that include round numbers or repeated digits at a premium.
A stock’s 52-week high provides an interesting example of a memorable number that for
some purposes forms a reference point. The shareholder may have a positive association with
that level. It is a specific and salient number. It can be constant (repeated and rehearsed) for up to
52 weeks, but also varies over time. Heath, Huddart, and Lang (1999) find that employee
exercise of stock options doubles when the stock price tops its 52-week high. Recent peak prices
are important for the pricing and deal success of mergers and acquisitions (Baker, Pan, and
Wurgler (2012)).

C.

Past Dividends as Reference Points
This discussion shows that theory alone cannot identify “the” reference point. In this

paper we hypothesize that in the context of dividend policy, past dividends are reference points
against which current dividends are judged. Our hypothesis touches on many of the concepts

8

discussed above. The reference point we hypothesize is based on past experience, as in the
disposition effect of Shefrin and Statman. It is also dynamic, as in internal habit formation.
Fluctuations in the dividend upset expectations about future dividends. Baker, Nagel, and
Wurgler (2007) find that many investors consume the full amount of their dividends, drawing
attention further to their level.
Dividends are also packaged to be memorable. They are formally and explicitly
announced at discrete and regular intervals, which encourages the formation of memory. The
same level is often repeated for many quarters in a row, further encouraging memory.
Anecdotally, they tend to be announced with special fanfare and management commentary upon
initiation or increases. Conversely, dividend decreases are downplayed, accompanied by excuses
or explanations that frame the action as repositioning for growth. Dividend cuts are
disproportionately announced on Fridays and often after the market close (Damodaran (1989)).
As we shall see, dividends cluster at round numbers, and changes are commonly in roundnumber intervals or designed to meet or exceed a round-number threshold. The memorability of
prior dividends is central to our theory—it increases their power as reference points and,
consequently, current dividends as signals.

III.

A Model of Signaling With Dividends as Reference Points
We present a stylized dividend signaling model with reference dependence. The model

uses nonstandard investor preferences, not public destruction of firm value through investment
distortions or taxes, to provide the costly signaling mechanism.
There are two key ingredients. First, a reference point appears in a representative
investor’s objective function. There is a kink in utility, so that a drop in dividends just below the

9

reference point is discontinuously more painful than a small increase in dividends is pleasurable.
Second, in common with all signaling models, the manager cares about the current estimate of
firm value as well as the long-term welfare of shareholders.
Reference points shape dividend policy in several ways. On one hand, to the extent that
today’s dividend is the reference point against which future dividend payments will be judged,
the manager would like to restrain current dividends, saving some resources for the next period
to make up for a possible shortfall in future income. On the other hand, setting aside effects on
future shareholder welfare, the manager would like to pay a dividend today that exceeds the
current reference point. Moreover, because the manager also cares about the current estimate of
firm value, he might also increase dividends beyond the current reference point to signal private
information about the firm’s ability to pay. This sort of signaling mechanism works because
firms with limited resources are unwilling to incur the expected future costs of missing an
endogenous reference point.

A.

Setup
The model has two periods: t = 1 and 2. There are two players: a benevolent manager and

an investor with reference dependent preferences. In the first period, the investor arrives with an
exogenous reference point for dividends d0. In some ways, this is a single snapshot in a
multiperiod model. While the inherited reference point could in principle be endogenized, we
believe the technical costs would be large compared to the benefits in extra realism or intuition.
The manager also receives private information about cash earnings ε1 and pays a dividend d1 in
the first period. This dividend forms a new reference point for the second, liquidating dividend
d2. Today’s dividend d1 relative to d0 tells the investor something about the manager’s private

10

information and hence the value of the firm. In the second period, the manager simply pays d2.
There is no discounting.
Manager utility. The manager cares about what the investor thinks about ε1 today. He
also cares about the investor’s long run utility. This objective function is in the spirit of standard
signaling models like Leland and Pyle (1977), Miller and Rock (1985), or Stein (1989), which
use weighted averages of the dividend-adjusted stock market price and the investor’s long-run
utility. Our simplified objective function is:

Em λ Ei [ε1 ] + (1− λ ) u ( d1, d2 | d0 ),

(1)

where d1 and d2 are the period specific dividends of the firm, u is the investor’s utility function,
given an exogenous initial reference point of d0, and Em and Ei are the expectations operators for
the manager and the investor, respectively.2
Investor utility. The interesting aspect of this signaling model is that the investor has a
kink in his preferences for dividends d1 and d2. The first kink is around an exogenous reference
point for first-period dividends d0 and the second kink is around an endogenous reference point
for second-period dividends:

u ( d1, d2 | d0 ) = d1 + b ( d1 − d0 ) 1d1<d0 + d2 + b ( d2 − d1 ) 1d2 <d1. .

(2)

Put simply, the investor cares about fundamental value, or total dividend payments, but
with a twist. The level of the reference point comes from historical firm dividend policy, and b is
greater than zero so that the marginal utility of dividends falls discontinuously at the reference
2

As in the standard signaling models, we do not microfound lambda. The usual argument for this general class of
utility functions is that the adjusted stock price, separate from fundamentals, has a direct impact on the manager’s
welfare through compensation or corporate control or an indirect impact through the interests of short-term
investors. Also, rather than compute a stock price, we put the investor’s expectation of ε1 directly into the manager’s
objective. This is an innocuous assumption, because in equilibrium the stock price will be a linear transformation of
the expectation of ε1.

11

point; the pain of coming up short is high. This utility function is in the spirit of prospect theory
with a kink at a reference point. We leave out the complexity of curvature. The second-period
reference point equals first-period dividends d1 by assumption. In reality, the reference point and
the intensity of the reference point b may be determined by a long history of levels and changes
in dividend policy. The fact that each dividend payment forms a separate reference point also
requires a practice of narrow framing. This is not a reference point applied to total ending wealth,
but rather a reference point applied much more narrowly both across stocks and time, in the spirit
of Barberis, Huang, and Thaler (2006).
Information. In the absence of a signaling motive, the first-best would have a benevolent
manager saving any resources above the first-period reference point, both to lower the reference
point created for the second period and to save resources to meet this lower reference point in the
event of low second-period earnings. We now introduce the signaling problem. For simplicity,
the manager has no control over the cash earnings of the firm. Note that this is a bit different
from a traditional signaling model where the manager must destroy firm value to impress the
capital markets. There is also no fundamental agency problem as there is in Lambrecht and
Myers (2012). The manager is not able to keep the cash for himself, and no firm value is
intentionally created or destroyed with dividend policy.3 This is, at least in spirit, more consistent
with what managers say in surveys about their dividend policy.
The fundamental value of the firm appears in two installments,

ε1 + ε 2 .

(3)

3

We say “intentionally” because in any model that requires costly external finance as a production input, dividends
destroy value through the budget constraint. We wish to distinguish standard signaling models where this is the
driving mechanism, as opposed to a generic side effect.

12

Think of these as cash earnings that are not observable to the investor. This is obviously an
extreme assumption of asymmetric information. It is worth noting the key elements of the
assumption, which might each seem more reasonable. First, the manager must have some
informational advantage in learning ε1 over the investor. Otherwise, there is no signaling
problem. Second, the payment of the observable dividend must form the investor’s reference
point, not the firm’s reported financials, such as earnings per share or cash balances. Otherwise,
the manager has no lever to signal his information about ε1. For simplicity, we assume that the
second-period cash earnings are have a uniform distribution, ε 2 ~ U [0,2] .

We have considered extensions of the model where the source of the information
asymmetry is over ε2, a quantity that would not appear explicitly in any financial statements.
This assumption produces similar results, although the effects of the budget constraint described
in the next paragraph can change. The simpler model that we examine here has a mechanical link
between type in terms of firm quality and current resources.
Budget constraint. There is no new equity or debt available to finance the payment of

dividends and no excess cash balances available in the first period. The most the manager can
pay in the first period is ε1, and the most he can pay in the second period is ε2 plus any savings
from the previous period. This leads to the following constraints:
0 ≤ d1 ≤ ε 1 and d 2 = ε 1 + ε 2 − d1 .

(4)

These follow from the assumptions of no new financing and a benevolent manager.

B.

Equilibrium
There are three effects that appear in the manager’s objective function in Eq. (1). First,

there is sometimes an advantage to paying out dividends immediately. Consider a first-period
13

dividend below the reference point d0. Setting aside the effect on the second-period reference
point, these dividends will be valued on the margin at b+1 times the payout, instead of simply the
payout. This is a net benefit to investor utility in Eq. (2) of bd1. Above d0, there is no marginal
benefit from merely shifting payout from the second period forward. Second, by increasing the
dividend today, the investor’s estimate Ei[ε1] of the unobservable cash earnings rises through an
equilibrium set of beliefs that map dividend policy to cash earnings. This enters into the
manager’s utility function directly in Eq. (1). Third, increasing the dividend in the first period,
for either of these rationales, produces an expected future cost to investor utility that comes from
the possibility of falling short of the reference point set for the second period.
Substituting in the budget constraint from Eq. (4), and taking expectations over the

ε 2 ~ U [0,2] distribution, leads to an expected cost conditional on today’s dividend of
2


ε 
b  d1 − 1  ,

2

(5)

provided d1 is more than half of cash earnings. Intuitively, there is no cost if the manager adopts
a conservative dividend policy of paying half of cash earnings. The expected cost is quadratic as
dividends rise from this point and increasing in the intensity of the reference point b>0.
Combining the three motivations, the manager’s utility function from Eq. (1) simplifies to
2


ε 
(1− λ ) b ( d1 − d0 ) 1d1<d0 + λ Ei [ε1 | d1 ] − (1− λ ) b  d1 − 1  1d1>ε1 .
2
2

(6)

The cost of falling short of the initial reference point is relevant only at low levels of first-period
dividends, the signaling motive is present for all levels, and the expected cost of falling short of
the new reference point is relevant only when first-period savings alone cannot cover it.
Given these considerations, there are three ranges of dividend policies in equilibrium.
There is a high payout ratio for firms with the extra motivation to clear the initial reference point
14

of d0. Next, managers cluster at d0 once this motivation drops out of Eq. (6). Finally, there is a
lower payout ratio for firms well above the initial reference point, who nonetheless pay higher
dividends to separate themselves from each other and from the pool at d0. The form of the partial
pooling equilibrium is not dissimilar to that in Guttman et al. (2010), though the nature of the
signaling mechanism is quite different and perhaps more importantly, in our approach it is clear
why dividends pool at the prior period’s level as opposed to some arbitrary level.

Proposition 1. There exists an equilibrium dividend policy in which

d1 = ε1 for ε1 < d0
d1 = d0 for d0 < ε1 < ε*
d1 = 12 ε1 + 1−λλ ⋅ 1b for ε1 > ε*
with associated equilibrium beliefs of:
Ei[ε1 | d1] = d1 for d1 < d0
Ei[ε1 | d1] =

1
2

(d

0

+ ε * ) for d1 = d0

Ei[ε1 | d1] = 2 ( d1 − 1−λλ ⋅ 1b ) for d1 > 12 ε *+ 1−λλ ⋅ 1b .
where ε* solves:

λ 12 (ε * − d0 ) − (1− λ )b

((

λ
1−λ

)

2

⋅ 1b ) − (d0 − 12 ε * )2 = 0.

Incentive compatibility here requires a manager with ε1 < d0 to be willing to pay d1 = ε1.
This is not essential. There are other slightly more complicated and perhaps more realistic
equilibria, where there is a discontinuous drop in dividends just to the left of d0 as well as to the
right. These equilibria also allow for lower levels of b. More importantly, a manager with ε1 = ε*
15

must be indifferent between paying d0 and paying 12 ε *+ 1−λλ ⋅ 1b . For this to hold, the signaling
benefit of shifting the investor’s expectations from

1
2

(d

0

+ ε * ) to ε* must equal the cost

differential of evaluating Eq. (5) at d0 and at 12 ε *+ 1−λλ ⋅ 1b . This leads to the simple quadratic
equation in the proposition. There is no claim of uniqueness, so a sufficient proof and simplest
illustration of Proposition 1 is a numerical example.
Example. Suppose the manager cares equally about stock price and utility, i.e. λ = 0.5. If

d0 is 1 and b is 2.5, then Proposition 1 indicates that the equilibrium cutoff ε* is 1.6. For ε1 above
1.6, the first-period dividend is 12 ε 1 + 0.4 . This exactly trades off the marginal signaling benefit
per unit of dividends of 2.0, using investor beliefs implicit in Proposition 1, against the secondperiod marginal cost, i.e. the first derivative of Eq. (5), of 5 ⋅ (d1 − 12 ε 1 ) = 5 ⋅ (0.4) = 2.0 . For ε1
between 1.0 and 1.6, the first-period dividend is simply d0, or 1.0. At ε1 equal to 1.6, where there
should be indifference, the signaling benefit of separating from this pool is 1.6 minus the average
of ε* = 1.6 and d0 = 1.0, which is 0.3. The cost from Eq. (5) is 2.5 ⋅ (0.42 – 0.22) = 0.3. This cost
is decreasing in ε1, so there is no incentive for any of the managers clustered at d1 = 1.0 to raise
the first-period dividend. For ε1 below 1.0, the first-period dividend is ε1. Here, the manager is
limited by the budget constraint. The marginal first-period benefit per unit of dividends of 2.5
plus the marginal signaling benefit per unit of dividends of 1.0, using investor beliefs implicit in
Proposition 1, totals 3.5. This exceeds the second-period marginal cost just below d0 of
5 ⋅ (1 − 0.5) = 2.5. So, dividends are at a corner solution of d1 = ε1 from Eq. (4).
The intuition is straightforward. There is a powerful incentive to try to reach the existing
reference point of d0 both to satisfy the kinked investor utility and to raise investor beliefs
discontinuously from d0 to

1
2

(d

0

+ ε * ) . There is a steep rise in dividends per unit of cash
16

earnings, or a 100% payout ratio, below the reference point. Then, there is clustering at d0. Even
firms that could pay somewhat more choose not to, because of the costs of setting a high
reference point for the second period. Eventually, there is a jump in dividends once cash earnings
become sufficiently high. At that point, though, dividend policy is still fairly conservative, with
managers saving a large fraction of dividends in reserve for the second period. In other words,
there is a more gradual rise in dividends per unit of cash earnings. See Panel A of Figure 1.
Another way to see this is by plotting the histogram of dividend changes in Panels B and
C of Figure 1. We assume that first-period cash earnings ε1 are normally distributed,4 with a
mean of

1
2

(d

0

+ ε * ) . There is a spike in the distribution at the reference point in Panel B.

Moreover, even when we remove this spike in Panel C, there is still a jump in the distribution
moving from the range just to the left of the reference point to the range just to the right. The
distribution of dividend changes otherwise has a lower and longer tail of larger dividend cuts to
the left of the reference point.
Finally, we plot the market reaction to dividend announcements in Panel D of Figure 1.
This is measured as the percentage change in expected utility in Eq. (1) from before the
announcement. The interesting behavior is in the narrow range around the reference point. The
drop in utility per unit of dividends is steeper to the left of the reference point than to the right.
Missing the reference point by just a tiny amount leads to a drop of

1
2

(ε

*

− d0 ) in the investor’s

expectation. But it takes a discontinuous increase in dividends of 12 ε * + 1−λλ ⋅ 1b − d0 to achieve the
equivalent increase in expectations. As a result, there is a kink in the reaction at exactly d0.

4

This is for purposes of illustration, but a sum of uniform variables converges quickly to a normal distribution, so if

one conceives ε1 as such a sum then the relationship to the uniform distribution of ε2 in the model is not entirely
unnatural, particularly in the dividend initiation case.

17

Next, we turn to comparative statics. In particular, we are interested in how these patterns
change with a change in the cost b of falling below the reference point.

Proposition 2. In the equilibrium described in Proposition 1, ε* and the market reaction to d1 <

d0 are increasing in b.

Put another way, Proposition 2 says that there is more clustering of dividends at the reference
point d0 as the intensity of reference point preferences increases. As a result, the market reacts
more negatively to a narrow miss. More information is revealed.
Again, we show this by example in Figure 2. The comparison is between b equal to 2.1
and b equal to 2.3. The exact b is not important. A similar equilibrium can be sustained at higher
d0 and lower b; these parameters make for clear pictures (as b = 2.5 in the proof yields round
numbers). As we have no prior on the level of the reference point, this confirms that the
assumptions required to support equilibrium here are not unreasonable ones. In each case, we
recenter the ex ante distribution of ε1 at a mean of

1
2

(d

0

+ ε * ) and repeat the plots from Figure 1.

Note the effects of a higher b and hence ε *. There is more clustering and a larger spike in the
distribution of dividend changes at d0. The market reaction is more negative when dividends fall
just short, the reaction is flatter above it, so that the kink at zero is more pronounced.

C.

Reference dependent behavior
Similar results obtain if we replace reference dependent preferences with reference

dependent behavior. For example, we have analyzed a setup in which investors sell their shares
to risk-averse arbitrageurs with a probability that rises as the dividend falls below a reference
18

point. The possibility of a dividend-induced dislocation in share price creates the same three
incentives for the manager: to restrain dividends to lower the hurdle for the future; to clear
today’s reference point and avoid the associated share price hit; and to increase dividends and
tomorrow’s reference point to signal firm quality. Such a model delivers additional predictions
about volume, which we test below. Otherwise, however, it adds complexity and is somewhat
further removed from the psychology of reference dependence. In practice, both types of
reference dependence may exist.

IV.

The Model and Prior Evidence

Dividend policy is so awash with empirical facts that any new model could be assessed
almost as much on its ability to fit those facts as on the success of novel predictions. We consider
several stylized facts here in light of the model. While it certainly cannot explain all of the facts,
a model of signaling with reference points captures some of them at least as well as existing
approaches, of which the best known are Bhattacharya (1979), Miller and Rock (1985), John and
Williams (1985), Kumar (1988), Bernheim (1991), and Allen, Bernardo, and Welch (2000). To
keep the discussion finite we will not make broad comparisons to models based on agency
problems, catering motives, clientele effects, or other non-signaling issues.

A.

Surveys
Dividend policy is an explicit choice of executives and the board. Although survey results

should always be treated cautiously, the concern that managers’ behavior may be guided not by
their own hands but by an unseen higher market force that they cannot articulate is harder to

19

justify here. Thus, we view the fact that our model is consistent with what managers say about
dividend policy, or at least not directly inconsistent with it, as a success.
The strongest results fit well with our setup. For example, as noted in the Introduction,
the Brav et al. (2005) survey of 384 executives revealed strong agreement that shareholders will
react negatively to cuts in the dividend, whereas the reward for increases is modest. Executives
believe that dividends convey information. As a result, they strive to keep a stable dividend
policy. These are straightforward predictions of the model. It is intrinsically dynamic and the
stability of dividends is a central feature. Once a reference point is established, even weak firms
will strive to minimize the difference between it and current dividends.
While standard signaling theories also predict that lower dividends are associated with
lower market values, executives reject them as based on unrealistic foundations. As noted in the
Introduction, executives say that they do not use dividends to show that their firm can withstand
the costs and scrutiny associated with raising external capital, or to show that their firm can pass
up good projects and still perform well. Only a small minority of executives endorsed signaling
through taxes; Brav et al. summarize taxes as of “second-order importance” (p. 521).
Brav et al. followed up on their survey with in-depth interviews of 23 executives. They
noted that “not a single interviewed executive told us that his or her firm had ever thought of
increasing payout as a costly means of separating itself from competitors” (pp. 522-523).5 Note
that our model doesn’t explicitly rely on public destruction of value to create a credible signal, so
in that sense it would not conflict with this aspect of the evidence.
Finally, it is notable that standard signaling theories do not naturally focus on dividends
per share. But it is natural to do so in the reference point context. Moreover, standard signaling

5

In a signaling model we would interpret “competitors” as firms of different “types.”

20

theories predict a continuous market reaction. There is nothing special about stability or the
historical level of payouts, such that falling short of this level would produce a discontinuous
reaction. Dividend policy is defined in more “economic” terms in standard models, such as
dividend yield or payout ratio, which are less salient to the average investor. Dividend policy
measured in these units would not make natural reference points, however, perhaps explaining
why stability of the level of dividends per share is the most common target. We will return to the
salience of dividends per share in our own empirical tests.

B.

Dividend Policy and the Lintner Model
Miller (1986) suggested that the Lintner (1956) model was a behavioral model, as

opposed to originating from a traditional maximization problem. Given reasonable parameter
values, our model does have dividends following a partial-adjustment policy; more generally,
they are smoothed relative to earnings (Fama and Babiak (1968)).
In particular, the Lintner model takes last period’s dividend as the reference level against
which current dividends are determined. In our model, firms confident of being able to sustain
high dividends will adopt a policy in which they pay out slightly above half of current earnings
(exactly half in the case of extreme reference point preferences). They adopt this payout ratio
because they do not want to set a reference level that may be too high for themselves next period,
but do wish to separate themselves from a pool of firms with intermediate prospects which keep
dividends extremely smooth—indeed, constant. On average, dividends are increasing in earnings
but less than one-for-one, and all firms are focused on changes relative to the reference level set
by lagged dividends. All of this adds up to Lintner-like empirical predictions.

21

The models of Bhattacharya (1979), Miller and Rock (1985), and John and Williams
(1985) are static and focus on levels, not changes. The model of Allen, Bernardo, and Welch
(2000) is also presented in terms of levels, though they outline a possible multiperiod extension
that would be compatible with smoothing. The model of Kumar (1988) leads to smoothing to the
extent that firm productivity does not vary much over time.
The cross-section of smoothing behavior is also reasonably consistent with our model.
Michaely and Roberts (2012) study dividend policy in public versus private firms. The
presumption is that private firms are less subject to asymmetric information problems. Thus,
there is less expectation that their dividend policy would adhere to the predictions of our
signaling model. In particular, Michaely and Roberts find that private firms engage in much less
smoothing. In our framework, the interepration would be that private firms have less need for
precautionary savings to be sure to meet the prior period’s dividend. If they pay a lower
dividend, little is revealed to insiders. Leary and Michaely (2011) find another robust pattern in
the cross-section, that high earnings firms are more likely to smooth dividends. This is exactly
what the medium and high “types” in our stylized model will do.
In a recent paper, Lambrecht and Myers (2012) provide an alternative motivation for the
Lintner model and smoothing. It is not a signaling model so we do not include it in our contrasts
with traditional signaling models. We would just argue that there remains room for additional
explanations of the Lintner model, in that it is questionable that thousands of large, established,
public U.S. firms smooth their payouts because a coalition of habit-formation managers prefer to
smooth out their stealing. In any event, Lambrecht and Myers’s model makes predictions
involving habit persistence, adjustment costs, target payout ratios, investor protection, and

22

managerial impatience. These concepts are basically orthogonal to those of our own model and
do not relate to our own tests.

C.

Announcement Effects
Even if executives disavow standard signaling models, shareholders clearly care about

dividends. Aharony and Swary (1980) examine cases in which dividend announcements occur
separately from earnings announcements. The average cumulative abnormal return in a 21-day
window surrounding a dividend decrease was on the order of five percentage points. The average
cumulative abnormal return surrounding a dividend increase was closer to one percentage point.
See also Charest (1978) and Yoon and Starks (1995) and subsequent papers documenting
dividend announcement effects.
That dividend cuts would be received especially poorly is a prediction of the model. The
main effect is that cutting a dividend, even slightly, is fully revealing and betrays the firm as one
that cannot afford even that reference level dividend. In any case, none of the standard signaling
models offers a direct explanation for the asymmetry in announcement effects.

D.

Repurchases vs. Dividends
As Grullon and Michaely (2002) point out, some of the most popular dividend signaling

models, including Bhattacharya (1979), Miller and Rock (1985), and the further investigation of
Miller and Rock by Guttman et al. (2010), imply that dividends and repurchases are perfect
substitutes. This is not consistent with the fact that repurchases are considerably less frequent
and less regular.

23

The reference point approach suggests a simple reason why dividends are superior
signals: There is only one number to remember. But there are at least two parameters of a
repurchase program: the purchase price (or price range for a Dutch auction) and the number of
shares sought. Of these, only the price is salient to investors, and obviously a firm cannot commit
to repurchasing shares at the same constant price quarter after quarter. Moreover, each investor
receives a dividend, but it is not required that each investor engage in a repurchase; in fact, only
those selling out need to any attention at all. Put simply, repurchase programs are hard to specify
in salient and memorable terms, even if they are financially equivalent.

V.

New Tests

In addition to explaining known stylized facts at least as well as standard signaling
model, our approach suggests some new tests. The core idea is that the power of dividends as a
signal is proportional to their use as reference points. Firms that wish to signal in the manner of
our model will not hide their dividend, especially when it is not a decrease. We do not model b,
but the intuition of in our model is that firms will design dividends to be salient and easy to
recall. Some of our tests below are based on these intuitions. By contrast, standard signaling
theories feature highly sophisticated investors who can solve complicated signal extraction
problems; the least of their troubles would be remembering that last period’s dividend was
$0.1325 per share. Indeed, for one-period models, there is no need to remember anything.

A.

Salience, Ease of Recall, and Repetition
What makes a number like dividends per share memorable? As noted earlier, round

numbers are easier to remember. Quarterly repetition of the same dividend helps as well. In our

24

main sample of U.S. dividend payers, we examine whether dividends and dividend changes
concentrate on round numbers, whether the use of salient numbers affects how the market reacts
to dividend changes, and whether repetition increases the strength of a particular dividend level
as a reference point as measured by the market reaction to changes. Again, we do not model
salience or memorability, so ours are tests of general intuitions surrounding the model that do not
apply very clearly to other signaling models. After this, we consider a sample of ADRs and how
dividend reference points fail to translate across currencies.

B.

Main Sample
Our primary sample of U.S. dividend payments is summarized in Table 1. We obtain

dividend data from the Center for Research on Security Prices (CRSP) database. We start with
all records in the event database with a distribution code (CRSP: DISTCD) equal to 1232. These
are ordinary taxable dividends paid at a quarterly frequency. We further limit the sample to firms
with a share code (CRSP: SHRCD) of 10 or 11. This restricts our attention to ordinary common
shares and eliminates most companies incorporated outside the U.S., Americus Trust
Components, closed-end funds, and REITs. Such firms have dividend policies that may have
reference points denominated in non-dollar currencies or have regulatory or contractual
restrictions on dividend policy. We also eliminate dividend payments of $0, dividend payments
greater than $2.00 per share (these are rare, and we wish to avoid skewing computations of
nominal changes), and dividends for which there is no declaration date (CRSP: DCLRDT).
Otherwise, the entire CRSP database ending in 2009 appears in Table 1. The data here start with
the beginning of the CRSP file in 1926, but restricting attention to more recent periods does not
change the economic or statistical conclusions below.

25

Our main variable of interest is the raw dividend payment per share. It is easier to think
about dividend policy as clearing a threshold or creating a new reference point in raw, rather than
split-adjusted terms. The median dividend payment is $0.195. For changes in dividends, we have
a choice. We can examine only changes where no split has occurred since the last dividend or we
can look at split adjusted differences. For the CRSP sample, where quantity of data is not a
problem, we look only at pure changes, where no split has occurred. Even with the more
restrictive definition of pure changes, we have hundreds of thousands of observations. The
majority of quarterly dividend changes are zero, and only a small fraction is negative. We also
look at whether a dividend change clears a threshold of $0.10, $0.05, or $0.025. For the median
dividend payment, reaching the next $0.10, for example, would require an increase of $0.05.
We also examine the length of a dividend streak, under the assumption that a longer
dividend streak ingrains a reference point and makes the market reaction to missing it stronger.
The median streak in our sample is 4, meaning that the typical dividend decision follows four
quarters of constant dividends. There is considerable heterogeneity in streaks, with streaks of
more than 12 quarters not uncommon.
To measure the market reaction to a dividend announcement, we compute a three-day
abnormal stock return around the declaration date. This is the simple return (CRSP: RET) for the
firm in the day before, the day of, and the day after a dividend declaration minus the return of the
CRSP value-weighted index over the same window. On average, a dividend declaration is met
with approximately a 20 basis point abnormal return. The median abnormal return is also zero.
This is a sample of firms that did not omit a dividend, so a slightly positive average is not
surprising. We also measure volume over the period from the dividend declaration through three

26

days after. We normalize this volume by taking the log difference between the average daily
declaration date volume and the average daily volume in the previous 90 calendar days.

C.

Round Numbers and Reaching for Thresholds
Dividends are paid in round numbers. This is apparent in a simple histogram of dividends

per share in Panel A of Figure 3. A nickel per share is the modal dividend, a dime the second
most common amount, and a quarter is very nearly the third most common amount. There are
notable spikes at other round multiples of $0.05. Panel B shows that the most common values for
the second and third digits are 0.050, followed by 0.000, and to a much lesser extent 0.025 and
0.075. Other round multiples of 0.01 are somewhat less common, and non-round values are rare.
Aerts, Van Campenhout, and Van Canegham (2008) use Benford’s law to show that “0” is an
unusually common second digit in dividends, a similar but more limited result. A plot makes the
widespread use of round numbers of various types, and specific numbers such as five and ten
cents, quite obvious.
Changes are also made in round numbers. Figure 4 shows dividend changes when no split
occurs between dividend payments. The most obvious patterns in dividend changes match our
model in Panels B and C of Figure 1 exactly: the very large mass at exactly zero, also noted by
Guttman et al. (2010) and others; a discontinuity between negative and positive changes even
when the mass point at zero is removed; and considerably more clustering just above zero than
just below zero. Panel A shows the discontinuity at zero. Little else is even perceptible because
the density at zero renders the rest of the distribution inconsequential. When we remove zero
changes in Panel B, clustering just to the right of zero is much more apparent. Again, the density
above zero is many times the density at equivalent changes below zero. When we further split

27

the sample into increases and decreases, it is also clear that the left tail of the distribution of
dividend cuts in Panel D is longer than the right tail of dividend increases in Panel C, as we
observed in Panel C of Figure 1.
Another pattern is the tendency for increases to reach a threshold, presumably
contributing to the salience of the new level. By threshold, we are referring to the next round
number in dividends per share. For example, the next $0.10 threshold for a firm paying $0.11 is
$0.20, the next $0.05 threshold is $0.15, and the next $0.025 threshold is $0.125. We view this as
somewhat akin to the gap in the distribution in Panel B of Figure 1. To be appreciated for raising
the dividend, firms must do so in more than a trivial way.6
Figure 5 shows this pattern. When we center the change in dividends—for dividend
increases only—on one of these thresholds, it is apparent that the modal increase is exactly to the
next threshold. In each case, we look in the neighborhood of the threshold, within but not
including $0.025 above and below the threshold. For example, for the firm that is currently
paying $0.11, Panel A shows that paying $0.20 is much more likely than paying $0.19 or $0.21.
Panel B shows the same result around the next $0.05 threshold, and Panel C shows the next
$0.025 threshold.
One question is whether this is simply restating the fact from Figure 3 that firms tend to
pay dividends in round numbers. We also check situations where a firm is not starting at a
$0.025 threshold in Panels D, E, and F. The same pattern appears. Apparently, many boards
think of communicating dividend policy in an easily recalled dollar per share quantity, rather the
alternative of a specific total dollar payout to be divided equally among shareholders.
6

It is also worth keeping in mind that in practice, even a relatively small increase in the quarterly dividend that does
not cross a threshold could amount to a substantial increase, and thus a meaningful signal, when considered in
present value terms. In any event, the gap in the distribution in Figure 1 Panel B can be made arbitrarily small with
appropriate parameter values, and thus be made to look just like the increases plotted in Figure 4.

28

D.

Market Reaction
Figure 6 shows the market reaction to changes in dividends per share. We split the

sample into increments of $0.05 in Panel A or $0.025 in Panel B around zero change. We round
down to the nearest threshold, so that a dividend increase of $0.01 is included in the zero
dividend change group, and a dividend cut of $0.01 is included in the $0.025 cut group. Next, we
compute the median 3-day abnormal return for each group. The pattern in both Panels is similar.
Dividend cuts are greeted with a larger negative return than dividend increases of the same
magnitude. The difference is roughly a factor of two. In fact, the whole response curve is quite
similar to the pattern predicted by the model in Panel D of Figure 1. While the apparent
concavity is not a direct prediction of the simple model, a more elaborate model of investor
preferences could in principle deliver this sort of pattern.
We examine this pattern econometrically in Table 2, where we estimate piecewise linear
regressions of the market reaction on the change in dividends per share to trace out the patterns
in Figure 6 in a regression framework. We are particularly interested in the shift in slope below
and above zero. The first regression is a simple linear regression. Each $0.01 change in dividends
leads to an 11 basis point market reaction.
This obscures a highly nonlinear relationship where changes around zero are much more
important than larger movements. The second, piecewise linear regression shows that small cuts
in dividends up to $0.025 are greeted with a market reaction of 76 basis points for each $0.01
change. Small increases in dividends up to $0.025 are greeted with a market reaction of 36 basis
points, or approximately half the slope that we observe in dividend cuts. There are similarly large
differences in the next increments, though the reaction per $0.01 of dividend change drops off
quickly. As a summary test, we compare the sum of the three coefficients between -$0.10 and

29

zero to those between zero and +$0.10. The slope for dividend cuts is larger both economically
and statistically, as one might have guessed from Figure 6. In the final specification, we repeat
the analysis with a coarser estimation of slopes, combining the slope between cuts or increases of
less than $0.025 with those that are between $0.025 and $0.05. The conclusions are the same.
Table 3 provides additional evidence that dividend cuts, in particular, get investors’
attention. The table shows that the stronger market reaction comes with stronger volume. We
repeat the analysis in Table 2 but replace the market reaction with abnormal value as the
dependent variable. Both dividend increases and decreases are associated with higher than
normal volume. The negative coefficients below zero and the positive ones above zero in the
piecewise linear regressions suggest a v-shaped pattern around zero dividend change. The
coefficients are slightly larger in absolute value for cuts than increases, however. In the range
from zero to a cut of $0.025, every $0.01 cut in dividends is associated with an increase in
volume of 686 basis points, or almost seven percent more than normal volume. Similar dividend
increases are also associated with higher volume but the rate is somewhat smaller at 606 basis
points. The difference is not huge in economic terms, but the joint test of the differential
sensitivity of volume to dividend changes above and below zero is statistically strong. Also,
dividend decreases can be fairly large, bringing the total increase in volume to a more
economically significant level.
We also look for patterns around threshold dividend changes. Instead of sorting the
sample around zero dividend change, we sort it around the next $0.10, $0.05, or $0.025
threshold. This means implicitly that we are capturing both the threshold above and the threshold
below the current level of dividends in our sorts in Figure 7 and our piecewise linear regressions
in Table 4, which themselves use threshold breakpoints. Figure 7 shows a similar pattern.

30

Changes that do not cross a round number threshold elicit a neutral market reaction, changes that
cross a threshold from below have a positive reaction similar to that in Figure 6, and changes that
cross a threshold from above have a slightly stronger negative reaction than in Figure 6. The
numerical results in Table 4 show this somewhat more clearly. The change in market reaction per
$0.01 change in dividends below the lower threshold is 113 basis points, versus 76 basis points
in Table 2. The same comparison for thresholds of $0.05 is 72 basis points versus 66 basis
points. For dividend increases the differences are smaller at 41 versus 36 basis points, and for a
$0.05 increase, the effect is actually somewhat smaller at 22 versus 28 basis points. In short,
threshold effects are important on the downside, suggesting that round number thresholds are
important reference points.
Another test of reference points is to examine dividend streaks. If memory is an
important part of reference point formation, then repeated dividends of the same amount per
share would presumably be stronger reference points. Hence, cutting or raising a dividend after a
long streak may have stronger market reactions. The basic idea is that long streaks constitute
stronger reference points, so there should be more clustering and the patterns in Table 2 should
be more pronounced as the streak lengthens. We plot clustering around successive streaks in
Figure 8, examining streaks of length one through 16 separately. We emphasize the general
rising trend clustering as the streak length increases. The exceptions are intuitive. A large
number of firms reevaluate their dividend policy annually, so there is a drop in clustering after a
streak of 4, 8, 12, and 16. Removing the impact of annual periodicity strengthens this conclusion.
Next, we consider the market reaction. We partition the sample into three categories:
Decisions following a change in the prior quarter; decisions following no change for up to four
quarters, the periodicity of the typical annual board review of dividend policy; and dividend

31

decisions following no change for more than four quarters. Again, we do this analysis once with
sorts in Figure 9 and once with a piecewise linear regression in Table 5. The results are as
predicted. The no streak sample has essentially no difference between the effect of a decrease
and increase in the neighborhood of zero, but the patterns are stronger as the streaks get longer.
For example, in the long streak sample, the market reaction to dividend cuts is stronger
than gains, and also stronger than the unconditional coefficients in Table 2 at 106 basis points
per $0.01 change in dividends just below zero, versus 76 basis points in Table 2. The market
reaction to a dividend increase is also larger at 54 versus 36 basis points in Table 2, despite being
half of the reaction to a dividend cut in Table 4. Taken together, these results suggest that
repetition increases the strength of a reference point.

E.

BP-Amoco: A Case Study
Our last set of tests involves dividends on American Depository Receipts (ADRs). An

ADR allows U.S. investors to purchase shares in a company that is incorporated abroad and
listed on a foreign exchange, but without executing a transaction on a foreign exchange in a
different currency. Because of foreign exchange volatility, the dividend policy of a firm with an
ADR trading in the U.S. is by definition unable to create a reference point in two different
currencies simultaneously.
The case of BP-Amoco shown in Figure 10 provides a fascinating demonstration of how
the reference point is set to appeal to the relevant investor base. In December of 1998, British
Petroleum acquired Amoco to form BP-Amoco. BP was listed on the London Stock Exchange
but also traded through an ADR. Panel A shows that prior to the merger, Amoco had increased
dividends by $0.025 each year for the prior four years. BP had increased dividends by £0.0125

32

semiannually for the previous two years. Not surprisingly, the dollar dividend on the ADR was
hardly so regular.
The merger required some reconciliation between these two different but equally rigid
policies. The reconciliation was for BP to now fix dividend increases in dollar terms. Moreover,
for the several years following the merger, the rate of increase in BP dividends exactly matched
Amoco’s old rate of increase, amounting to $0.025 each year. The common British policy of
semiannual payment, however, was kept. Dividend policy in the transition was thus managed
carefully so as not to upset dollar-dividend reference points that had been created for Amoco
shareholders over years, presumably since they now owned a large fraction of BP shares.

F.

ADR Sample
For a broader analysis, we start with a list of ADRs and matched parents from Datastream

over the period from 1990 through 2009 described in Table 6. We restrict the sample to firms
with an ADR traded on the New York Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, and other U.S. OTC
exchanges. This gives us a preliminary list of 4,916 Datastream codes for ADRs and their
parents. Despite this large initial number of potential firms, the coverage and quality of
Datastream dividend data is much lower than CRSP, so our tendency in forming a sample is one
of inclusion rather than restricting attention to the cleanest situations. Some of the parents appear
more than once, meaning that there is more than one ADR for a given parent firm. We treat these
as separate observations.
For these Datastream codes, we gather information on dividends paid per share
(Datastream: DD) in each month. We restrict attention to the following dividend types
(Datastream: DT): QTR, HYR, YR, FIN, INT. While we would like to limit attention only to

33

quarterly dividends, semi-annual and annual dividends are more common abroad. We also
include dividends designated as final and intermediate under the assumption that many of these
are regular dividends during the course of a fiscal year. We exclude a small number of
observations where an ADR pays a dividend in a foreign currency, despite apparently trading on
a U.S. exchange, or the parent pays a dividend in U.S. dollars. These are likely data errors. We
are able to find 19,046 dividends for ADRs and 32,177 dividends for their parents. Given the
smaller quantity of data, we use split-adjusted values, so we can examine changes in more cases.
Our primary interest is whether or not a reference point is created through the payment of
ADR dividends. When we compute changes, we require that the dividend type be constant from
one period to the next. Quarterly dividends are reported to be more common in the ADRs in
Datastream than in their matched parents, for reasons that are not clear, so we lose more data
when we look for clean changes in the parent sample. The dividend type typically stays the same
in consecutive records for ADRs, while the dividend type is the same in only 9,196 of 29,211
consecutive parent records.
The dividends per share for the parents are paid in a wide range of currencies, from Yen
to Euro, so the levels of dividends per share are sometimes an order of magnitude higher. The
median for ADRs is $0.194. The median dividend payment for the parent sample is 1.2, which
includes many small dividend payments in more valuable currencies and many large ones in less
valuable currencies. There is no unambiguous way to put all of these currencies on level terms,
without losing the essential nature of a reference point analysis, so we leave them in raw terms.
Our specific tests involve the market reaction around zero dividend changes for ADRs.
We compute announcement returns for the ADR sample by merging declaration dates from
Worldscope (Datastream: DECQ1-DECQ4) to Datastream return indexes (Datastream: RI) for

34

the five-day window surrounding the declaration date. Dividend payments are matched to
declaration dates that occur for up to three previous months in an attempt to increase coverage.
We also use a slightly larger window to capture the lower quality of Worldscope’s declaration
dates. The average announcement return is approximately 60 basis points and the median is zero.

G.

A Placebo Test
We conduct a final and perhaps preferred test that reinforces the suggestion from the BP-

Amoco case. Namely, that zero change in dollar dividends has no special significance for ADRs.
In other words, investors do not care about dividend cuts per se, rather they care about a cut from
a mutually agreed upon reference point. Because reference points cannot hold simultaneously in
two currencies, ADR dividends in most cases freely cross the zero change boundary and the
market reaction is similarly unremarkable in this range.
Figure 11 shows the dividend policy of ADRs measured in both dollars and local
currency. Dividend changes in US dollars are centered on zero change, but the mass point at zero
in Panel A is very far from what we saw in Table 1 for the CRSP sample. Moreover the
asymmetry between dividend cuts and increases is barely apparent in Panel B when we eliminate
zeros from the sample. By contrast, when measured in local currency, there is a much clearer
delineation at zero. Non-zero dividend changes are comparatively rare in Panel C, and when we
exclude zero changes in Panel D, a preference for small increases over decreases is readily
apparent. It is noteworthy that these effects are less pronounced in the parents-of-ADRs sample
than in the CRSP sample of Figure 4. Part of this is because we broadened the sample as much as
possible, perhaps at the cost of including some special or liquidating dividends, and part of this

35

may be because the Datastream data is lower quality. In any event, it is plain that dividend policy
is more often decided in local currency than dollar terms.
We examine the market reaction to these changes in Table 7. The first observation is that
the relationship between dividend changes and the market reaction is everywhere less
economically and statistically significant. The R-squared drops from 0.0136 to 0.0034.
Moreover, there is no asymmetry in the neighborhood of zero. The marginal reaction to small
cuts is on average about the same as the reaction to small increases. Together, these results
suggest that neither ADR boards nor investors view past dividends – paid in dollars – as an
important reference point. Again, the corollary from this placebo test is that changes in dividend
policy are important because of an endogenously chosen and acknowledged reference point, not
because changes in this neighborhood would otherwise have been economically important.

VI.

Conclusion

Standard dividend signaling theories posit that executives use dividends to destroy some
firm value and thereby signal that plenty remains. The money burning typically takes the form of
tax-inefficient distributions, foregone profitable investment, or costly external finance. The
executives who actually set dividend policy overwhelmingly reject these ideas—yet, at the same
time, are equally adamant that “dividends are a signal” to shareholders and that cutting them has
negative consequences.
We develop what we believe to be a more realistic signaling approach. We use core
features of the well-documented prospect theory value function to create a model in which past
dividends are reference points against which future dividends are judged. The theory is
consistent with several important aspects of the data, including survey evidence, patterns of

36

market reaction to dividend announcements, dividend smoothing and the Lintner partialadjustment model, and the preference for regular dividends over regular repurchases. We also
find support for its broader intuition that dividends are paid in ways that make them memorable
and thus serve as stronger reference points and signals.

37

References

Abel, Andrew B., 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses,
American Economic Review 80, 38-42.
Aerts, Walter, Geert Van Campenhout, and Tom Van Caneghem, 2008, Clustering in dividends:
Do managers rely on cognitive reference points? Journal of Economic Psychology 29,
276-284.
Allen, Franklin, Antonio E. Bernardo, and Ivo Welch, 2000, A theory of dividends based on tax
clienteles, Journal of Finance 55, 2499-2536.
Arkes, Hal, David Hirshleifer, Danling Jiang, and Sonya S. Lim, 2008, Reference point
adaptation: Tests in the domain of security trading, Organizational Behavior and Human
Decisions Processes 105, 67-81.
Atkinson, R. C., and R. M. Shiffrin, 1968, Human memory: A proposed system and its control
processes, In The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Volume 2), K.W. Spence and
J.T. Spence, eds., New York: Academic Press, 89-195.
Baker, Malcolm P., Stefan Nagel, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, The effect of dividends on
consumption, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 38:1, 231-292.
Baker, Malcolm, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2012, The effect of reference point prices on
mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Baker, Malcolm P., Richard R. Ruback, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, Behavioral corporate
finance: A survey, In The Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate
Finance, Espen Eckbo ed, New York: Elsevier/North Holland.
Baker, Malcolm, and Yuhai Xuan, 2009, Under new management: equity issues and the
attribution of past returns, Harvard University working paper.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard Thaler, 2006, Individual preferences, monetary
gambles, and stock market participation: A Case for Narrow Framing, American
Economic Review 96, 1069-1090.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1991, Tax policy and the dividend puzzle, Rand Journal of Economics
22, 455-476.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, 1979, Imperfect information, dividend policy, and the bird in the hand
fallacy, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 10, 259-270.
Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Payout policy in
the 21st century, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 483-527.
Charest, G., 1978, Dividend information, stock returns, and market efficiency, Journal of
Financial Economics 6, 297-330.
Constantinides, George, 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle,
Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.
38

Damodaran, Aswath, 1989, The weekend effect in information releases: A study of earnings and
dividend announcements, Review of Financial Studies 2, 607-623.
Fama, Eugene F., and Henry Babiak, 1968, Dividend policy: An empirical analysis, Journal of
the American Statistical Association 63, 1132-1161.
Heath, Chip, Stephen Huddart, and Mark Lang, 1999, Psychological factors and stock option
exercise, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 601-627.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, 2001, Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence
from the housing market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1233-1260.
Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution
hypothesis, Journal of Finance 57, 1649-1684.
Guttman, Ilan, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2010, Dividend stickiness and strategic
pooling, Review of Financial Studies 23, 4455-4495.
John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signalling equilibrium,
Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kahneman, Daniel, J. Knetch, and Richard H. Thaler, 1990, Experimental tests of the
endowment effect and the Coase theorem, Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-1348.
Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin, 2006, A model of reference-dependent preferences,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 1133-1166.
Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin, 2009, Reference-dependent consumption plans, American
Economic Review 99, 909-936.
Kumar, P., 1988, Shareholder-manager conflict and the information content of dividends, Review
of Financial Studies 1, 111-136.
Lambrecht, Bart M., and Stewart C. Myers, 2012, A Lintner model of dividends and managerial
rents, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Leary, Mark T., and Roni Michaely, 2011, Determinants of dividend smoothing: Empirical
evidence, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3197-3249.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Markowitz, Harry, 1952, The utility of wealth, Journal of Political Economy 60, 151-158.
Michaely, Roni, and Michael R. Roberts, 2012, Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from
private firms, Review of Financial Studies 25, 711-746.

39

Miller, Merton H., 1986, Behavioral rationality in finance: The case of dividends, Journal of
Business 59, S451-S468.
Miller, Merton H., and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information,
Journal of Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Odean, Terrence, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53,
1775-1798.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1988, Status quo bias in decision making, Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,
Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and ride
losers too long, Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.
Stein, Jeremy, 1989, Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655-669.
Thaler, Richard H., 1980, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1, 39-60.
Thaler, Richard H., 1999, Mental accounting matters, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
12, 183-206.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1991, Loss aversion in riskless choice: A referencedependent model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1039-1061.
Yoon, Pyung Sig, and Laura T. Starks, 1995, Signaling, investment opportunities, and dividend
announcements, Review of Financial Studies 8, 995-1018.

40

Panel C. Histogram of dividend changes, excluding zero

Cash Earnings (ε1)

Panel A. Equilibrium dividends as a function of cash earnings

Panel D. Market reaction to dividend changes

Panel B. Histogram of dividend changes

Figure 1. Equilibrium dividend policy. We plot the equilibrium in Proposition 1 for parameter values d0 = 1, b = 2.1, and λ = 0.5. Panel A shows the
relationship between first-period dividends d1 and cash earnings ε1. Panel B plots the same data as a histogram. For this plot, we need the distribution of cash
earnings ε1. We assume a normal distribution with a mean equal to the average of d0 and ε*, and a standard deviation of 0.15. Panel C reproduces Panel B,
excluding dividend changes of zero. Panel D shows the market reaction to dividend changes. This is the percentage change in expected utility from Eq. (2).

Dividends (d1)

Panel C. Histogram of dividend changes, excluding zero

Cash Earnings (ε1)

Panel A. Equilibrium dividends as a function of cash earnings

Panel D. Market reaction to dividend changes

Panel B. Histogram of dividend changes

Figure 2. Equilibrium dividend policy: Weak and strong reference points. We plot the equilibrium in Proposition 1 for parameter values d0 = 1 and λ = 0.5.
We repeat Figure 1, comparing the results for b = 2.1 and b = 2.3.

Dividends (d1)

Figure 3. Dividends per share. Histogram of dividends per share and the second and third digits of dividends per
share. Panel A shows the distribution of announced dividends per share, while Panel B shows the distribution of the
second and third decimal in the announced dividends per share. The sample includes all records from the CRSP
event file with a Distribution Codes (DISTCD) of 1232 (ordinary taxable cash dividends, paid quarterly) with a
Share Code (SHRCD) of 10 or 11 (ordinary common shares, excluding companies incorporated outside the US,
Americus Trust Components, closed-end funds, and REITs) and nonmissing data on the amount of the dividend and
the declaration date.

0

5

Density

10

15

Panel A. Dividends per share

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
Raw Dividends Per Share

0

100

Density

200

300

Panel B. The second and third decimal in dividends per share

.01

.02.025.03

.04
.05
.06
divamt_digit

.07.075.08

.09

.1

Figure 4. Changes in dividends per share. Histogram of changes in dividends per share. Panel A shows the
distribution of changes in dividends per share, Panel B shows the distribution of changes in dividends per share,
excluding zero, Panel C shows the distribution of dividend per share increases, and Panel D shows the distribution
of dividend per share decreases. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a threemonth window with no stock splits.
Panel B. Excluding zero

Panel C. Increases in dividends

Panel D. Decreases in dividends

0

10

20

Density
30

40

50

Panel A. Changes in dividends

0

.1

.2
.3
Raw Change in Dividends Per Share

.4

.5

Figure 5. Reaching thresholds in dividends per share. Histogram of changes in dividends per share with changes
centered on the next threshold. A threshold is defined as the next round number (0.1, 0.05, or 0.025) above the past
level of dividends. Panel A, B, and C show the distribution of changes centered on the next round number. Panels D,
E, and F show the distribution changes centered on the next round number, when the current dividend is not a round
number. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a three-month window with no
stock splits.
Panel A. Threshold = 0.1

Panel D. Threshold = 0.1

Panel B. Threshold = 0.05

Panel E. Threshold = 0.05

Panel C. Threshold = 0.025

Panel F. Threshold = 0.025

Figure 6. Market reaction to changes in dividends per share. Average 3-day abnormal return by change in
dividends per share. Panel A groups changes in dividends per share into groups of 0.05, while Panel B groups
changes in dividends per share into groups of 0.025. The groups are formed by rounding the changes in dividends
per share down to the nearest threshold. 3-day abnormal returns are computed as the sum in the three days
surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted
stock index return. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a three-month window
with no stock splits.
Panel A. Changes in dividends per share are grouped to the nearest 0.05

Panel B. Changes in dividends per share are grouped to the nearest 0.025

Figure 7. Market reaction to threshold changes in dividends per share. Average 3-day abnormal return by
change in dividends per share relative to the next threshold. A threshold is defined as the next round number (0.1,
0.05, or 0.025) above the past level of dividends. Panel A shows changes in dividends per share centered around the
next 0.1 threshold, Panel B shows changes in dividends per share centered around the next 0.05 threshold, and Panel
C shows changes in dividends per share centered around the next 0.025 threshold. Announcement returns between
the two lines correspond to changes in dividends that do not cross a threshold from above or below. 3-day abnormal
returns are computed as the sum in the three days surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference
between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted stock index return. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is
further limited to changes over a three-month window with no stock splits.
Panel A. Threshold = 0.1

Panel C. Threshold = 0.025

Panel B. Threshold = 0.05

Figure 8. Clustering following dividend per share streaks. The number of observations and the clustering
percentage for streaks of up to four years. We divide the sample of dividend announcements into those where the
dividend changed from the previous period, a streak of 0, where the dividend remained the same after being changed
the previous period, a streak of 1, and so on. The clustering percentage at a streak of 1 is the percentage of firms that
do not change their dividend after having changed their dividend in the previous period. The clustering percentage at
a streak of 2 is the percentage of firms that do not change their dividend after having maintained their dividend at the
same level for the previous two periods. And so on.

100%

90,000
80,000

90%

70,000
60,000

80%

50,000
40,000

70%

30,000
20,000
10,000

60%

0

40%

50%

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Streak

Number of Observations

Clustering Percentage

Figure 9. Market reaction following dividend per share streaks. Average 3-day abnormal return by change in
dividends per share. Changes in dividends per share are sorted into groups of 0.05, by rounding the raw dividend per
share down to the nearest threshold. We partition the sample into situations where the dividend was changed in the
previous period (No Streak), where the dividend was not changed in the previous period, but it was changed within
the last four periods (Streak of 4 or Less), and where the dividend was not changed in the previous four periods
(Streak of More Than 4). 3-day abnormal returns are computed as the sum in the three days surrounding the
dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted stock index return.
The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a three-month window with no stock splits.

Panel B. Post-Merger Dividend Levels

Panel D. Post-Merger Dividend Changes

Panel A. Pre-Merger Dividend Levels

Panel C. Pre-Merger Dividend Changes

Figure 10. BP-Amoco dividend policy. Split-adjusted dividends per share for BP, Amoco, and the merged company. BP and Amoco merged in December of
1998 forming BP-Amoco. Panels A and C show dividend levels and changes prior to the merger. Panels B and D show dividends after the merger.

Panel B. ADRs, Changes in Dividends Per Share, Excluding Zero

Panel D. Parents, Changes in Dividends Per Share, Excluding Zero

Panel A. ADRs, Changes in Dividends Per Share

Panel C. Parents, Changes in Dividends Per Share

Figure 11. Changes in dividends per share. Histogram of changes in dividends per share. Simple changes in consecutive dividends per share (DD) from
Datastream for the following Datastream types: QTR, HYR, YR, FIN, INT. Panels A and C shows the distribution of changes in dividends per share, and Panels
B and D show the distribution of changes in dividends per share, excluding zero. Panels A and B show ADRs, and Panels C and D show parent companies.

Dividends Per Share
Second and Third Digit
Change in Dividends Per Share
Change to Next 0.1 Threshold
Change to Next 0.05 Threshold
Change to Next 0.025 Threshold
Constant Dividend Streak
3-Day Announcement Return

N
391865
391865
327816
327816
327816
327816
383809
327026

Mean
0.245
0.038
0.003
-0.059
-0.031
-0.015
6.670
0.002

Median
0.195
0.045
0.000
-0.050
-0.030
-0.020
4
0.000

SD
0.214
0.028
0.030
0.041
0.034
0.031
8.264
0.040

5
0.038
0.000
0.000
-0.100
-0.050
-0.025
1
-0.053

25
0.100
0.010
0.000
-0.087
-0.050
-0.025
2
-0.017

75
0.326
0.060
0.000
-0.040
-0.020
-0.005
8
0.019

95
0.625
0.085
0.030
-0.010
0.000
0.015
23
0.063

Table 1. Summary statistics. The sample includes all records from the CRSP event file with a Distribution Codes (DISTCD) of 1232 (ordinary taxable cash
dividends, paid quarterly) with a Share Code (SHRCD) of 10 or 11 (ordinary common shares, excluding companies incorporated outside the US, Americus Trust
Components, closed-end funds, and REITs) and nonmissing data on Dividends Per Share and the declaration date. Second and Third Digit are the second and
third digits after the decimal place in Dividends Per Share. Change in Dividends Per Share is computed only over three-month windows (with an allowance for
the fact that gaps between dividend payments are frequently two or four calendar months) with no stock splits. A threshold is defined as the next round number
(0.1, 0.05, or 0.025) above the past level of dividends. Dividends Per Share are measured relative to a threshold rather than lagged Dividends Per Share. Constant
Dividend Streak is the number of past periods where Dividends Per Share remained unchanged. 3-Day Announcement Return is computed as the sum in the three
days surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted stock index return.

Table 2. Market reaction to changes in dividends per share. Piecewise linear regressions of average 3-day
abnormal return on change in dividends per share. 3-day abnormal returns are computed as the sum in the three days
surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted
stock index return. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a three-month window
with no stock splits.
1

b

2

Coef

[T-stat]

10.95

[22.38]

b-∞,-0.2
b-0.2,-0.1
b-0.1,-0.05
b-0.05,-0.025
b-0.025,0
b-0.05,0
b0, 0.05
b0, 0.025
b0.025, 0.05
b0.05, 0.1
b0.1, 0.2
b0.2, ∞
N
R2

b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1

3

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

-4.83
-0.93
11.03
52.13
75.77

[-3.27]
[-0.21]
[1.28]
[2.40]
[4.66]

35.78
12.77
5.41
-4.43
-0.09
327,026
0.0066

[26.73]
[5.63]
[2.46]
[-2.02]
[-0.09]

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

-4.83
-0.79
8.96

[-3.28]
[-0.18]
[1.12]

65.93

[11.93]

27.96

[39.80]

0.81
-3.94
-0.12

[0.38]
[-1.79]
[-0.12]

327,026
0.0136

84.97

(0.000)

327,026
0.0135

46.12

(0.000)

Table 3. Market reaction to changes in dividends per share: Abnormal Volume. Piecewise linear regressions of
average 3-day abnormal volume on change in dividends per share. 3-day abnormal volume is computed as the log
difference between the average daily volume in the three days surrounding the dividend declaration date and the
average daily volume in the 90 calendar days preceding the announcement. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is
further limited to changes over a three-month window with no stock splits.
1

b

2

Coef

[T-stat]

29.73

[5.45]

b-∞,-0.2
b-0.2,-0.1
b-0.1,-0.05
b-0.05,-0.025
b-0.025,0
b-0.05,0
b0, 0.05
b0, 0.025
b0.025, 0.05
b0.05, 0.1
b0.1, 0.2
b0.2, ∞
N
R2

b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1

3

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

95.84
77.50
-374.41
-576.20
-686.12

[4.93]
[1.52]
[-3.58]
[-1.94]
[-2.94]

605.63
360.93
79.66
-63.96
-7.90
288,740
0.0001

[20.10]
[7.18]
[1.89]
[-1.55]
[-0.50]

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

95.88
76.86
-365.25

[4.93]
[1.51]
[-3.74]

-637.73

[-9.46]

522.41

[33.72]

30.74
-58.70
-8.19

[0.77]
[-1.43]
[-0.52]

288,740
0.0069

590.51

(0.000)

288,740
0.0069

449.84

(0.000)

Table 4. Market reaction to changes in dividends per share: Clearing a threshold. Piecewise linear regressions
of average 3-day abnormal return on change in dividends per share relative to the next threshold. A threshold is
defined as the next round number (0.1, 0.05, or 0.025) above the past level of dividends. Column 2 shows changes in
dividends per share centered on the next 0.025 threshold, and Column 3 shows changes in dividends per share
centered around the next 0.05 threshold. 3-day abnormal returns are computed as the sum in the three days
surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the CRSP value-weighted
stock index return. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a three-month window
with no stock splits.
1

b

2

Coef

[T-stat]

10.17

[23.12]

b-∞,-0.2
b-0.2,-0.1
b-0.1,-0.05
b-0.05,-0.025
b-0.025,0
b-0.05,0
b0, 0.05
b0, 0.025
b0.025, 0.05
b0.05, 0.1
b0.1, 0.2
b0.2, ∞
N
R2

b-0.05,-0.025-b0, 0.025
b-0.1,-0.05-b0, 0.05

3

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

-5.33
2.56
14.60
113.31
7.13

[-3.76]
[0.53]
[1.44]
[8.56]
[9.56]

40.60
-1.53
8.31
-5.98
0.26
249,498
0.0056

[24.72]
[-0.46]
[2.80]
[-2.69]
[0.25]

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

-5.11
2.11
72.18

[-3.96]
[0.52]
[14.03]

5.93

[13.59]

22.08

[15.04]

0.90
-5.49
0.57

[0.29]
[-2.47]
[0.55]

327,026
0.0124

72.71

327,026
0.0102

(0.000)
49.35

(0.000)

Table 5. Market reaction following dividend per share streaks. Average 3-day abnormal return by change in
dividends per share. We partition the sample into situations where the dividend was changed in the previous period
(No Streak), where the dividend was not changed in the previous period, but it was changed within the last four
periods (Streak of 4 or Less), and where the dividend was not changed in the previous four periods (Streak of More
Than 4). T-stats and p-values are on differences from the No Streak sample. 3-day abnormal returns are computed as
the sum in the three days surrounding the dividend declaration date of the difference between the total return and the
CRSP value-weighted stock index return. The sample from Figure 1 and Table 1 is further limited to changes over a
three-month window with no stock splits.
No Streak

Streak<=4

Streak>4

Coef

[T-stat]

Coef

[Diff
T-stat]

Coef

[Diff
T-stat]

b-∞,-0.2
b-0.2,-0.1
b-0.1,-0.05
b-0.05,-0.025
b-0.025,0

-7.81
18.32
-1.62
4.03
31.96

[-4.40]
[2.26]
[-0.08]
[0.09]
[1.22]

-3.82
-0.32
24.03
9.45
79.37

[1.79]
[-1.90]
[0.97]
[0.10]
[1.29]

-1.68
-7.22
1.27
73.21
106.15

[3.40]
[-3.14]
[0.12]
[1.24]
[1.86]

b0, 0.025
b0.025, 0.05
b0.05, 0.1
b0.1, 0.2
b0.2, ∞

44.15
12.43
3.33
-4.09
0.72

[8.51]
[1.32]
[0.31]
[-0.51]
[0.31]

29.48
15.25
11.29
-5.61
-1.86

[-2.70]
[0.29]
[0.71]
[-0.18]
[-1.00]

54.03
2.30
-5.73
-1.94
1.41

[1.65]
[-0.97]
[-0.79]
[0.25]
[0.23]

N
R2

b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1
b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1
- No Streak b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1

327,026
0.0147

-25.54

(0.206)
87.90

(0.002)

161.09

(0.000)

Panel A. US ADRs
Dividends Per Share, Split Adjusted
Change in Dividends Per Share
5-Day Announcement Return
Panel B. Parents
Dividends Per Share, Split Adjusted
Change in Dividends Per Share
Change in Dividends Per Share, All
0.438
0.022
0.006
42.307
-5.042
0.094

31,828
8,968
28,877

Mean

10,634
8,478
3,574

N

1.199
0.005
0.000

0.210
0.002
0.000

Median

878.1
1973.1
1144.0

2.504
1.108
0.060

SD

0.0
-2.1
-4.4

0.018
-0.228
-0.088

5

0.2
0.0
0.0

0.080
-0.012
-0.023

25

5.5
0.2
0.2

0.471
0.044
0.031

75

34.0
5.0
5.7

1.354
0.301
0.116

95

Table 6. Summary statistics. The sample includes all ADRs from Datastream and their matched parents with nonmissing data on dividends per share and
without an apparent practice of paying different levels of annual versus interim dividends. The sample includes all ADRs from Datastream with a trading history
between 1990 and 2009 on a US exchange in US$. We limit the sample to the following Datastream dividend types (DT): QTR, HYR, YR, FIN, INT. We
compute clean changes that require the consecutive dividends to be of the same type (DT). These data are merged onto the Datastream returns data. For ADRs,
we compute 5-day returns surrounding announcement dates (DECQ1, DECQ2, DECQ3, or DECQ4 from Worldscope via Datastream) where we have a clean
change in dividends per share. Returns are Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. We look back up to three months to find a matching announcement date, and
we use announcement dates from ADR-Parent pairs to enlarge the sample. The returns use the Datastream return index (RI) up to five weekdays surrounding the
announcement date, with no adjustment for market movements.

Table 7. Market reaction to changes in dividends per share for ADRs. Piecewise linear regressions of average 5day announcement return on clean changes in dividends per share. The sample is described in Panel A of Table 6.
We compute 5-day returns surrounding announcement dates (DECQ1, DECQ2, DECQ3, or DECQ4 from
Worldscope via Datastream) where we have a clean change in dividends per share. We look back up to three months
to find a matching announcement date, and we use announcement dates from ADR-Parent pairs. The returns are
based on the Datastream return index (RI) up to five weekdays surrounding the announcement date.
1

b

2

Coef

[T-stat]

0.21

[1.20]

b-∞,-0.2
b-0.2,-0.1
b-0.1,-0.05
b-0.05,-0.025
b-0.025,0
b-0.05,0
b0, 0.05
b0, 0.025
b0.025, 0.05
b0.05, 0.1
b0.1, 0.2
b0.2, ∞
N
R2

b-0.1,0-b0, 0.1

3

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

0.32
-3.26
-6.33
20.68
7.25

[1.27]
[-0.39]
[-0.31]
[0.62]
[0.33]

15.76
15.30
-24.39
7.94
-0.00
3,574
0.0006

[0.89]
[0.66]
[-1.86]
[1.44]
[0.06]

Coef

[T-stat]
(p-val)

-0.33
-3.53
-3.92

[1.27]
[-0.43]
[0.22]

12.43

[1.12]

15.01

[1.84]

-24.22
7.92
0.00

[-2.12]
[1.46]
[0.06]

3,574
0.0034

14.93

(0.54)

3,574
0.0033

17.72

(0.28)

