                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MARKET SIZE, DIVISION OF LABOR, AND FIRM PRODUCTIVITY

                                           Thomas Chaney
                                             Ralph Ossa

                                        Working Paper 18243
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18243


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




We are grateful to Pol Antras, Holger Breinlich, Alejandro Cunat, Elhanan Helpman, Gianmarco
Ottaviano,Henry Overman, Stephen Redding, and Tony Venables. We also thank the editor, Robert
W. Staiger,and two anonymous referees, for their thoughtful comments. All remaining errors are
ours.This workextends the second chapter of Ossa’s Ph.D. dissertation originally entitled "Trade
Liberalization, Outsourcing,and Firm Productivity". The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarilyreflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Thomas Chaney and Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Market Size, Division of Labor, and Firm Productivity
Thomas Chaney and Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 18243
July 2012
JEL No. F10,F12,L22,L25

                                              ABSTRACT

We generalize Krugman's (1979) 'new trade' model by allowing for an explicit production chain in
which a range of tasks is performed sequentially by a number of specialized teams. We demonstrate
that an increase in market size induces a deeper division of labor among these teams which leads toan
increase in firm productivity. The paper can be thought of as a formalization of Smith's (1776) famous
theorem that the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market. It also sheds light on how market
size differences can limit the scope for international technology transfers.


Thomas Chaney
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.chaney@gmail.com

Ralph Ossa
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ralph.ossa@chicagobooth.edu
Introduction

In this paper, we develop a simple general equilibrium model in which an increase in

market size leads to an increase in the division of labor which brings about an increase

in …rm productivity. In particular, we generalize Krugman’s (1979) seminal ‘new trade’

model by opening the black box of the production function and allowing for an explicit

production chain in which a range of tasks is performed sequentially by a number of

specialized production teams. An increase in market size induces a deeper division of

labor among these teams which leads to an increase in …rm productivity. Underlying

this is a trade-o¤ between the …xed costs associated with establishing a team and the

marginal costs associated with the degree of specialization of the team which …rms solve

di¤erently depending on the size of the market.

       At the broadest level, the paper can be thought of as a formalization of Smith’s

(1776) famous theorem that the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market

in an environment in which the division of labor takes the same form as in his pin

factory.1 By embedding the pin factory into a framework of monopolistic competition,

it overcomes the dilemma emphasized by Stigler (1951: 185) that “either the division

of labor is limited by the extent of the market, and characteristically, industries are

monopolized; or industries are characteristically competitive, and the theorem is false

or of little signi…cance”. An increase in market size leads to both a deeper division of

labor within …rms as well as the entry of new …rms.

       While our theory is not explicit about the nature of the increase in market size,

the usual interpretation of the Krugman (1979) model suggests trade liberalization as

a natural example. Recently, many empirical studies have focused on the productivity

e¤ects of trade liberalization (e.g. Pavcnik 2002; Tre‡er 2004). Their results suggest

that there are important trade-induced improvements in industry productivity either
   1
    Recall that in Smith’s (1776: 7) pin factory “one man draws out the wire, another straights it, a
third cuts it, a fourth points it, a …fth grinds it at the top for receiving the head (...)”.




                                                 2
through gains in average …rm productivity (‘…rm productivity e¤ect’) or through the

reallocation of market share from less to more productive …rms (‘reallocation e¤ect’).

While our theory cannot speak to the reallocation e¤ect, it can be thought of as a

micro-foundation of the …rm productivity e¤ect.2

      As such, the paper contributes to a growing literature on the sources of the …rm pro-

ductivity e¤ect. Previous work has mainly emphasized …xed costs (e.g. Krugman 1979),

learning by exporting (e.g. Clerides, Lach, and Tybout 1998), competition-induced in-

novation (e.g. Aghion et al. 2005), or a horizontal focusing on core competencies by

multi-product …rms (e.g. Eckel and Neary, 2010; Bernard, Redding, and Schott, 2011).

Only McLaren (2000) also studies the productivity gains of a trade-induced vertical

restructuring of production. Both the source of the productivity gains as well as the

link between trade liberalization and the vertical restructuring of production are very

di¤erent in his model, however.

      An additional implication of our model is that seemingly superior technologies de-

veloped in larger markets, characterized by lower …xed costs of establishing teams and a

…ner division of labor across teams, may not be appropriate for smaller markets. Firms

in developing countries may therefore not have an incentive to adopt technologies from

developed countries even if they are freely available to them. This observation o¤ers a

novel explanation for the localized character of technology which is usually rationalized

by arguing that important components of technology are tacit in nature (e.g. Keller,

2004: 753). It essentially elaborates on the remark of Stigler (1951: 193) that Amer-

ican production methods will often be too specialized to be an appropriate model for

industrialization in developing countries.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we lay out the basic model,

solve for the optimal organization of production, characterize the general equilibrium,

analyze the e¤ects of an increase in market size, consider the scope for international
  2
    Well-known formal treatments of the reallocation e¤ect include Melitz (2003) and Bernard et al
(2003).


                                                3
technology transfers, and o¤er some concluding remarks.



1        Basic setup

There are L consumers who are endowed with one unit of labor each. They have access

to n …nal goods over which they have ‘love of variety’-preferences

                                                  n
                                                  X
                                            U=           u (xi )                                       (1)
                                                   i=1


where u(xi ) is the utility derived from consuming x units of …nal good i which is

continuous and di¤erentiable and satis…es u0 (xi ) > 0 and u00 (xi ) < 0. Consumers
                                                             P
maximize this utility subject to their budget constraints 1 = ni=1 pi xi , where pi is the

price paid for good i and the wage rate is normalized to 1.

        As can be seen from the …rst order conditions of the consumers’maximization prob-
                                                                        u0 (xi )
lems, the resulting demands have elasticity " (xi ) =                  xi u00 (xi ) .   Following Krugman

(1979), we assume that "0 (xi ) < 0 which is equivalent to assuming that the demand

curves are less convex than in the constant elasticity case (linear demand curves would

be an example). This assumption ensures that an increase in market size leads to an

increase in …rm output which is necessary for market size to a¤ect the division of labor
                                                             1
within …rms. We also assume that "(0) > 1 +                      and that there exists an x > 0 such

that " (x) = 1 + 1 , where        is a cost parameter to be de…ned below.3 These parameter

restrictions guarantee the existence and uniqueness of a monopolistically competitive

equilibrium.

        The production of each …nal good requires the sequential performance of a number

of tasks. Early tasks are concerned with obtaining raw materials which are then re…ned
    3
     A polynomial of degree higher than 2 for the function u (x) would satisfy this condition, as would any
sum of more than one power function of x. For instance, the quadratic function u (x) = ax x2 =2 with
x 2 [0; a=2] yields a linear demand system and the following simple expression for the demand elasticity,
" (x) = a=x 1, which satis…es "0 (x) < 0, " (0) > 1 + 1= , and x = 2+1= a
                                                                             such that " (x) = 1 + 1 .




                                                    4
successively in later production stages. The set of these tasks is represented by a

segment of length normalized to 2 which we call the production chain. To produce

the …nal good, all tasks ! 2 [0; 2] have to be performed sequentially. If only tasks

! 2 [0; ! 1 ], 0 < ! 1 < 2, are performed, a preliminary good ! 1 is obtained. This

preliminary good ! 1 can then be transformed into a more downstream preliminary

good ! 2 , 0 < ! 1 < ! 2 < 2, by performing the additional tasks ! 2 [! 1 ; ! 2 ] and so

on. One unit of each task is required to produce one unit of the …nal good. Similarly,

one unit of the relevant subset of tasks is required to produce one unit of a preliminary

good.4

        All production tasks associated with a given …nal good are performed by production

teams within a single …rm. Before being able to perform any tasks, a team needs to

acquire a core competency c 2 [0; 2] in the production chain which requires f units of

labor. To perform one unit of each task in the range [! 1 ; ! 2 ], the team then further

needs
                                                          Z    !2
                                                      1
                                     l (! 1 ; ! 2 ) =               jc   !j d!                      (2)
                                                      2       !1

units of labor where          > 0 so that it gets worse at performing a given task the further

away that task is from its core competency. Teams are symmetric in the sense that the

parameters f and           are the same across teams. The …rm can choose how many teams

are established, which core competencies they acquire, and which production tasks they

perform.



2        Optimal organization of production

Equation (2) implies that the cost of producing one unit of output is minimized if

each task is performed by only one team, the teams’core competencies are uniformly

distributed along the production chain, and each team performs a symmetric range of
    4
        A similar representation of the production process has been used by Dixit and Grossman (1982).



                                                          5
tasks around its core competency. The minimum total cost of producing y units of

output conditional on a given number of teams t can therefore be written as

                                                  Z   1
                                                                 !
                                                      t
                                TC = t f + y              ! d!                          (3)
                                                  0


                           2
since each team performs   t   tasks of which half are to the right and half are to the left

of its core competency.

   The optimal number of teams solves a trade-o¤ between …xed and marginal costs.
                                                                                       yt
This trade-o¤ can be seen most clearly by rewriting equation (3) as T C = tf +           +1   .

On the one hand, more teams imply higher …xed costs since more core competencies

need to be acquired. On the other hand, more teams imply lower marginal costs since

each team performs a narrower range of tasks around its core competency. Minimizing

this expression with respect to t yields

                                                          1
                                               y          +1
                                     t=                                                 (4)
                                             +1f

   Hence, the optimal number of teams is increasing in output. Intuitively, higher

output makes marginal costs more important relative to …xed costs so that it is optimal

to set up a larger number of more highly specialized teams. Notice that the range of

tasks performed by each team is inversely proportional to the number of teams since the

production chain is of a given length and production tasks are equally divided among

teams.

   As is easy to verify, equations (3) and (4) imply that the average cost is given by

                                              +1f          +1
                                   AC =                                                 (5)
                                                y

Notice that the average cost is decreasing in output so that the production technology

exhibits increasing returns to scale. Underlying this are two distinct e¤ects which can


                                              6
                                                                      tf        R   1
                                                                                    t
be seen most clearly by expressing the average cost as AC =            y   +t       0   ! d! using

equation (3). First, the average cost falls because the …xed costs get spread over more

units of output. Second, the average cost falls because the number of teams is increased

to rebalance …xed and marginal costs. Only the former e¤ect is present in Krugman

(1979).5 The second e¤ect magni…es the …rst e¤ect since the number of teams is chosen

to minimize costs.

        While the details of equations (3) - (5) clearly depend on functional form assump-

tions, they capture what seems to be a general point: if production tasks are divided

among specialized teams who need to incur a …xed cost to acquire a core competency

and get worse at performing a task the further away it is from their core competency,

the optimal number of teams is increasing in output since the increase in output makes

marginal costs more important relative to …xed costs. We therefore state this result as

proposition 1:


Proposition 1 The optimal number of teams is increasing in …rm output.


Proof. Follows immediately from equation (4).



3        General equilibrium

Firms interact in a monopolistically competitive fashion in the sense that they maximize

pro…ts taking the marginal utility of income as given and enter until all pro…ts are

driven down to zero. Free entry implies that prices are equal to average costs and pro…t
                                                                                         "(x)
maximization implies that …rms charge a proportional mark-up               (x) =        "(x) 1   over

marginal costs. The equilibrium is characterized by the following two conditions,

                                             +1f      +1
                                      p=                                                          (6)
                                               y
    5
    Indeed, the model would reduce to Krugman (1979) if the number of teams were not a choice
variable.


                                              7
                                             (y=L)       +1f      +1
                                    p=                                                         (7)
                                              +1           y

      The …rst condition follows immediately from equation (5). The second condition

combines the goods market clearing condition y = Lx with the fact that marginal costs
                          1     +1 f    +1
are given by M C =        +1       y         which is obtained by straightforward manipulation

of equation (5).6 The relationships (6) and (7) are two equations in the two unknowns p

and y which we refer to as the FE (free entry) curve and the PM (pro…t maximization)

curve in the following. The FE curve is downward-sloping. The PM curve is made up
                                                         (y=L)
of two multiplicative terms. The …rst term,               +1 ,   is smaller than 1 at zero because

" (0) > 1 + 1 , increasing in y because "0 (x) < 0, and crosses 1 at some …nite x because

" (x) = 1 + 1 . The second term is the same term as the FE curve. Therefore, the PM

curve intersects the FE curve only once from below, as illustrated in Figure 1, so that

p and y are uniquely pinned down.7 Given y, the equilibrium t can then be determined

from equation (4).

      Notice that equations (6) and (7) imply that mark-ups are constant in equilibrium

even though preferences are not of the constant elasticity form. This is due to the fact

that changes in the optimal division of labor ensure that marginal costs and average costs

fall proportionately in …rm output so that mark-ups have to be constant for zero pro…ts

to prevail. This exact proportionality of marginal costs and average costs depends on

special functional form assumptions and should not be taken literally. However, it may

prove useful as a modeling tool in other applications which seek to allow for a relatively

general demand system without losing the tractability of constant elasticity preferences.
  6
      All subscripts have been dropped to re‡ect the symmetry of the equilibrium.
  7
      Notice that the PM curve does not have to be downward sloping.




                                                     8
4    Increase in market size

We …rst analyze an increase in market size which is captured by an increase in the

number of consumers L. As can be seen from equations (6) and (7), an increase in

market size leaves the FE curve unchanged but leads to a downward shift of the PM

curve. Intuitively, an increase in the number of consumers implies that each consumer

gets less of a given quantity of output which increases demand elasticities and reduces

mark-ups, other things equal. As illustrated in Figure 2, this downward shift of the

PM curve implies that …rms charge less and produce more which is associated with an

increase in the number of teams per …rm as indicated by equation (4). Intuitively, the

larger market allows …rms to sell more which makes them establish a larger number of

more highly specialized production teams.

    Since average costs are simply the inverse of …rm output per worker, the fall in

average costs associated with the increase in …rm output also represents an increase

in …rm productivity. Recall that average costs fall because the …xed costs get spread

over more units of output and the number of teams is increased to rebalance …xed and

marginal costs. Hence, while the model continues to feature the original Krugman (1979)

…rm productivity e¤ect, it also features a new …rm productivity e¤ect which operates

through an increase in the vertical division of labor. The latter e¤ect magni…es the

former e¤ect since the degree of the vertical division of labor is chosen optimally by

…rms.

    Hence, an increase in market size indeed leads to an increase in the division of

labor which is associated with an increase in …rm productivity. It must be emphasized,

however, that this result depends on the fact that …rm output is increasing in market

size which, in turn, depends on the assumption that the demand curves are less convex

than in the constant elasticity case. If utility was instead of the constant elasticity form

as in Krugman (1980), the number of …rms would simply increase proportionately with

market size so that individual …rm output would remain unchanged. With this caveat

                                             9
in mind, we state this result as proposition 2:

Proposition 2 An increase in market size leads to an increase in the division of labor

which is associated with an increase in …rm productivity.

Proof. Follows immediately from Figure 2 and equation (4).



5        Technology transfer

We now consider the scope for technology transfers from a Northern country to a South-

ern country, where …rms in the Northern country operate seemingly superior technolo-

gies. To analyze technology transfers, we must …rst de…ne what a technology is. In the

context of this model, a technology has two key components. The …rst corresponds to

the e¢ ciency with which a …rm is able to train specialized production teams around a

core competency and is captured by the …xed cost f .8 The second corresponds to the

degree of division of labor within a …rm and is captured by the number of specialized

production teams t.

        So far, we have treated only the …xed cost f as a parameter and allowed …rms to

optimally choose their organization t. This endogenous choice was meant to capture

a long-run adjustment during which incumbents either reorganize or lose out to bet-

ter organized entrants. It is plausible, however, that both the …xed cost f and the

organization t have to be jointly transferred in the case of international technology

transfers. This is because the organization of production solves a complex logistical

problem so that a Southern …rm is unlikely to be able to rearrange the production chain

of a Northern …rm to appropriately re‡ect local constraints.

        Given the premise that technology transfers entail both f and t, it is now easy to

see that a Southern …rm might be unwilling to adopt a seemingly superior Northern
    8
     Of course, the e¢ ciency with which a …rm is able to train specialized production teams around a
core competency also depends on the parameter . However, our point can be made most clearly with
reference to the parameter f so that we focus on it in the following.


                                                 10
technology. In particular, suppose that the North has a larger market (LN > LS ) and

lower …xed costs (fN < fS ) so that the division of labor is …ner there (tN > tS ). If

a Southern …rm then adopts the Northern technology, its pro…tability increases on the

one hand due to the lower …xed cost but decreases on the other hand as a result of the

suboptimally large number of teams. The former e¤ect dominates the latter one only

if the market size di¤erences underlying the di¤erences in the optimal organization of

production are su¢ ciently small.

      As a result, international technology transfers may not occur even though Northern

…rms are unambiguously more productive and make their technology freely available

to Southern …rms. We believe that this o¤ers a novel perspective on the notion of

appropriate technology (e.g. Basu and Weil, 1998) and a novel explanation for the

localized character of technology which is usually rationalized by arguing that important

components of technology are tacit in nature (e.g. Keller, 2004: 753). We state our

reasoning more rigorously as proposition 3:


Proposition 3 For any di¤ erence in market size between a larger North and a smaller

South (LN > LS ), there exists                   > 0 such that no Southern …rm would want to adopt

a Northern technology characterized by the Northern vertical division of labor tN unless

it o¤ ers them a reduction in their …xed cost at least as large as                          .


Proof. Proposition 2 and equation (4) imply that tN > tS . From equation (3) and the

optimal choice of t given f , it follows directly that a Southern …rm’s maximum pro…ts,

 S,   are decreasing in f and decreasing with departures away from the optimal tS :                                       S
                                                 @ S            @ S                             @2
satis…es    S   (fS ; tS ) >   S   (fS ; tN ),    @f   < 0,      @t   (fS ; tS ) = 0, and       @t2
                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                         < 0. Therefore

there exists a        > 0 such that         S    (fS ; tS ) =    S    (fS     ; tN ). For any reduction in the

…xed cost smaller than             , i.e. fS           < fN < fS , we have           S   (fS ; tS ) >        S   (fN ; tN ),

and no Southern …rm would adopt the Northern technology (fN ; tN ) despite its strictly

lower …xed cost.


                                                          11
Conclusion

“As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the

extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in other

words, by the extent of the market.” In this paper, we have demonstrated that this

famous theorem of Smith (1776: 16) can be rationalized by embedding a production

chain of the sort found in his pin factory into Krugman’s (1979) seminal ‘new trade’

environment. In a nutshell, we …rst established that the division of labor is limited by

the extent of …rm output and then demonstrated that …rm output is increasing in the

extent of the market. We also showed that in such an environment, seemingly superior

technologies developed in large markets may not be appropriate for smaller markets

thus limiting the scope for international technology transfers.




                                           12
References

 [1] Aghion, P., Burgess, R., Redding, S., Zilibotti, F, 2005. Entry liberalization and in-

    equality in industrial performance. Journal of the European Economic Association

    3, 291-302.

 [2] Basu, S., and D. Weil. 1998. Appropriate technology and growth. Quarterly Journal

    of Economics 113(4): 1025-1054.

 [3] Bernard, A., Eaton, J., Jensen, J., Kortum, S., 2003. Plants and productivity in

    international trade. American Economic Review 93, 1268-1290.

 [4] Bernard, A., Redding, S., Schott, P., 2011. Multi-product …rms and trade liberal-

    ization. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

 [5] Clerides, S. K., Lach, S., Tybout, J.R., 1998. Is learning by exporting important?

    Micro-dynamic evidence from Columbia, Mexico, and Morocco. Quarterly Journal

    of Economics 113, 903-947.

 [6] Eckel, K., Neary, J.P., 2010. Multi-product …rms and ‡exible manufacturing in the

    global economy. Review of Economic Studies 77, 188-217.

 [7] Dixit, A., Grossman, G. M., 1983. Trade and protection with multi-stage produc-

    tion. Review of Economic Studies 49, 583-594.

 [8] Keller, W., 2004. International Technology Di¤usion. Journal of Economic Litera-

    ture 42: 752-782.

 [9] Krugman, P., 1979. Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international

    trade. Journal of International Economics 9, 469-479.

[10] Krugman, P. 1980. Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of

    Trade. American Economic Review 70(5): 950-959.


                                            13
[11] Melitz, M., 2003. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate

    industry productivity. Econometrica 71, 1695-1725.

[12] McLaren, J., 2000. Globalization and vertical structure. American Economic Re-

    view 90, 1239-1254.

[13] Pavcnik, N., 2002. Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evi-

    dence from Chilean plants. Review of Economic Studies 69, 245-276.

[14] Smith, A., 1776. An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations.

    Volume 1. London, UK: Strahan and Cadell.

[15] Stigler, George J., 1951. The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the

    Market. Journal of Political Economy 59, 185-193.

[16] Tre‡er, D., 2004. The long and short of the Canada-U.S. free trade agreement.

    American Economic Review 94, 870-895.

[17] Tybout, J., 2003. Plant- and …rm-level evidence on the "new" trade theories.

    In: Kwan Choi, E., Harrigan, J. (Eds.), Handbook of International Trade, Basil-

    Blackwell, Oxford.




                                          14
p




                                         PM

                                         FE
                                               y



      Figure 1: General equilibrium




p




p
p'                                       PM
                                         PM’
                                         FE
                                               y
          y   y’


     Figure 2: Increase in market size




                    15
