                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              UNDERSTANDING PEER EFFECTS IN FINANCIAL DECISIONS:
                     EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                         Leonardo Bursztyn
                                           Florian Ederer
                                           Bruno Ferman
                                          Noam Yuchtman

                                        Working Paper 18241
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18241


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




We would like to thank Sushil Bikhchandani, Aislinn Bohren, Arun Chandrasekhar, Shawn Cole, Rui
de Figueiredo, Fred Finan, Uri Gneezy, Dean Karlan, Navin Kartik, Larry Katz, Peter Koudijs, Kory
Kroft, Nicola Lacetera, David Laibson, Edward Leamer, Phil Leslie, Annamaria Lusardi, Kristof Madarasz,
Gustavo Manso, Ted Miguel, Kris Mitchener, Adair Morse, Paul Niehaus, Andrew Oswald, Yona
Rubinstein, Andrei Shleifer, Ivo Welch, as well as numerous seminar participants for helpful comments
and suggestions. Juliana Portella provided excellent research assistance. We also thank the Garwood
Center for Corporate Innovation, the Russell Sage Foundation and UCLA CIBER for financial support.
Finally, we thank the management and staff of the cooperating brokerage firm for their efforts during
the implementation of the study. There was no financial conflict of interest in the implementation of
the study; no author was compensated by the partner brokerage or by any other entity for the production
of this article. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Peer Effects in Financial Decisions: Evidence from a Field Experiment
Leonardo Bursztyn, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman
NBER Working Paper No. 18241
July 2012, Revised February 2013
JEL No. C93,D03,D14,D83,G0,G11,M31

                                             ABSTRACT

Using a high-stakes field experiment conducted with a financial brokerage, we implement a novel
design to separately identify two channels of social influence in financial decisions, both widely studied
theoretically. When someone purchases an asset, his peers may also want to purchase it, both because
they learn from his choice ("social learning") and because his possession of the asset directly affects
others' utility of owning the same asset ("social utility"). We find that both channels have statistically
and economically significant effects on investment decisions. These results can help shed light on
the mechanisms underlying herding behavior in financial markets.


Leonardo Bursztyn                                   Bruno Ferman
UCLA Anderson School of Management                  School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza                                  The George Washington University
Los Angeles, CA 90095                               2201 G Street NW, Funger Hall, Suite 611
bursztyn@ucla.edu                                   Washington, DC 20052
                                                    bferman@gwu.edu
Florian Ederer
UCLA Anderson School of Management                  Noam Yuchtman
110 Westwood Plaza                                  Haas School of Business
Los Angeles, CA 90095                               University of California, Berkeley
florian.ederer@anderson.ucla.edu                    Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                    and NBER
                                                    yuchtman@haas.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

People’s choices often look like the choices made by those around them: we wear what is fashionable,

we “have what they’re having,” and we try to “keep up with the Joneses.” Such peer eﬀects have

been analyzed across several ﬁelds of economics and social psychology.1 Motivated by concerns

over herding and ﬁnancial market instability, an especially active area of research has examined

the role of peers in ﬁnancial decisions. Beyond studying whether peers aﬀect ﬁnancial decisions,

diﬀerent channels through which peer eﬀects work have generated their own literatures linking peer

eﬀects to investment decisions, and to ﬁnancial market instability. Models of herding and asset-

price bubbles, potentially based on very little information, focus on learning from peers’ choices

(Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000; Chari and Kehoe, 2004). Models in which individuals’ relative

income or consumption concerns drive their choice of asset holdings, and artiﬁcially drive up some

assets’ prices, focus on peers’ possession of an asset.2 In this paper, we use a high-stakes ﬁeld

experiment, conducted with a ﬁnancial brokerage, to separately identify the causal eﬀects of these

channels through which a person’s ﬁnancial decisions are aﬀected by his peers’.

        Identifying the causal eﬀect of one’s peers’ behavior on one’s own is notoriously diﬃcult (see, for

example, Manski, 1993). Correlations in the investment or consumption choices of socially-related

individuals might arise without any causal peer eﬀect: for example, peers select into social groups
    1
      In the economics literature, theoretical models of herding and social learning include Banerjee (1992) and
Bikhchandani et al. (1992). Becker (1991) studies markets in which a consumer’s demand for a product depends
on the aggregate demand for the product. Social inﬂuence has also been analyzed under assumptions of bounded
rationality, as in DeMarzo et al. (2003) and Guarino and Jehiel (forthcoming). Moscarini et al. (1998) study social
learning when the state of the world is changing. Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2010) examine peer pressure as a
form of social inﬂuence. Empirical work on peer eﬀects has studied a wide range of contexts: the impact of classmates
or friends on education, compensation, and other outcomes (Sacerdote, 2001; Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010; de Giorgi
et al., 2010; Duﬂo et al., 2011; Card and Giuliano, 2011; Shue, 2012); the impact of one’s peers and community on
social indicators and consumption (Bertrand et al., 2000; Kling et al., 2007; Bobonis and Finan, 2009; Dahl et al.,
2012; Grinblatt et al., 2008; Kuhn et al., 2011); and, the impact of coworkers on workplace performance (Guryan et
al., 2009; Mas and Moretti, 2009; Bandiera et al., 2010). Herding behavior and informational cascades (Celen and
Kariv, 2004) and the impact of cultural primes on behavior (Benjamin et al., 2010) have been studied in the lab.
Durlauf (2004) surveys the literature on neighborhood eﬀects. Within the social psychology literature, Asch (1951)
studied individuals’ conformity to group norms; Festinger (1954) posited that one resolves uncertainty by learning
from others; Burnkrant and Cousineau (1975) distinguished between “informational” and “normative” reasons for
conformity.
    2
      Preferences over relative consumption can arise from the (exogenous) presence of other individuals’ consumption
decisions in one’s utility function, (e.g. Abel, 1990, Gali, 1994, Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) or can arise endoge-
nously when one consumes scarce consumption goods, the prices of which depend on the incomes (and consumption
and investment decisions) of other individuals (DeMarzo et al., 2004, DeMarzo et al., 2008). For an overview, see
Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003).


                                                         1
according to their preferences and characteristics, and this might generate correlated choices; peers

share common environments (and changes in those environments), and this, too, might generate

correlated choices. Equally diﬃcult is identifying why one’s consumption or investment choices

have a social component. Broadly, there are two reasons why a peer’s act of purchasing an asset

(or product, more generally) would aﬀect one’s own choice:


  (i) One infers that assets (or products) purchased by others are of higher quality; we refer to

         this as social learning.

 (ii) One’s utility from possessing an asset (or product) depends directly on the possession of that

         asset (or product) by another individual; we call this social utility.


       Suppose an investor i considers purchasing a ﬁnancial asset under uncertainty. In canonical

models of herding based on social learning (e.g., Banerjee, 1992 and Bikhchandani et al., 1992),

information that a peer, investor j, purchased the asset will provide favorable information about

the asset to investor i: investor j (acting in isolation) would only have purchased the asset if

he observed a relatively good signal of the asset’s return. The favorable information conveyed by

investor j’s revealed preference increases the probability that investor i purchases the asset, relative

to making a purchase decision without observing his peer’s decision.3

       In our study, we focus on social learning arising only from the information one acquires from

the fact that one’s peer purchased a ﬁnancial product. We abstract away from the additional

information one might acquire after a peer’s purchase (e.g., by talking to the peer and learning

about the quality of a product) and from any change in behavior due to increased salience of a

product when consumed by one’s peers.4 The impact of learning from a peer’s purchase decision

is the social learning channel.

       Typically, investor j’s decision to purchase the asset will also imply that investor j possesses

the asset. If investor j’s possession of the asset directly aﬀects investor i’s utility of owning the
   3
     Avery and Zemsky (1998) present a model in which information based herds do not occur, due to price adjust-
ments; however, in our setting there is no asset price adjustment (see also Chari and Kehoe, 2004).
   4
     The asset sold in our ﬁeld experiment was designed to make this abstraction possible. This is discussed in detail
in Section 2.1.



                                                          2
same asset, then observing investor j purchasing the asset (implying investor j’s possession of the

asset) can increase the likelihood that investor i purchases the asset for reasons other than social

learning.

    A direct eﬀect of investor j’s possession of a ﬁnancial asset on investor i’s utility might arise for

a variety of reasons widely discussed in the ﬁnance literature. First, investors may be concerned

with their incomes or consumption levels, relative to their peers’ (“keeping up with the Joneses”,

as in Abel, 1990, Gali, 1994, and Campbell and Cochrane, 1999).5 Investors will thus want to

purchase assets possessed by their peers in order to avoid falling behind if the assets’ prices rise.

Another potential source of a direct eﬀect of investor j’s possession of a ﬁnancial asset on investor

i’s utility is “joint consumption” of the asset: peers can follow and discuss ﬁnancial news together,

track returns together, etc.6 The impact of a peer’s possession of an asset on an individual’s utility

derived from owning the same asset (for multiple reasons) is the social utility channel.7

    A comparison of investor i’s investment when no peer eﬀect is present to the case in which

he observes investor j purchasing an asset will generally identify the combined social learning and

social utility channels. To disentangle social learning from social utility, one needs to identify, or

create, a context in which investor j’s decision to purchase an asset is decoupled from investor j’s

possession of the asset (in Appendix A – note that all appendices are online – we present a model of

peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial decisions that features both the social learning and social utility channels,

and formalizes the discussion above).

    Our experimental design (discussed in detail in Section 2) represents an attempt to surmount

both the challenge of identifying a causal peer eﬀect, and the challenge of separately identifying
   5
     Evidence consistent with individuals caring about relative outcomes has been presented by Luttmer (2005),
Fliessbach et al. (2007), and Card et al. (2010), among others.
   6
     A recent Reuters article (Taylor, 2011) states, “Not that long ago, it seemed like everyone belonged to an
investment club. People would gather at a friend’s house, share a few bottles of merlot and toast their soaring
investments in Cisco and JDS Uniphase.” The article notes that the number of investment clubs peaked at 60,000
before the burst of the tech bubble.
   7
     Note that even in the absence of truly “social” preferences, one might observe greater demand for an asset
simply because a peer holds it: for example, this might arise as a result of competition over scarce consumption
goods. Because we do not wish to abuse the term, “social preferences,” we prefer the broader term, “social utility,”
which will include social preferences, as well as general equilibrium-induced diﬀerences in demand. Note also that
in principle, social utility might lead to negative correlations between peers’ choices (see Clark and Oswald, 1998).
For example one might observe a demand for joint insurance (see, for instance, Angelucci et al., 2012). We focus
here on the case of positive social utility eﬀects, as these are predominant in the literature on peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial
decisions.


                                                           3
the eﬀects of social learning and social utility. Working closely with us, a large ﬁnancial brokerage

in Brazil oﬀered a new ﬁnancial asset, designed exclusively for our experiment, to pairs of clients

who share a social relationship (either friends or family members). The stakes were high: minimum

investments were R$2,000 (over $1,000 U.S. dollars at the time of the study), around 50% of the

median investor’s monthly income in our sample; furthermore, investors were not allowed to convert

existing investments with the brokerage to purchase the asset and thus were required to allocate

new resources in order to purchase the asset.

       To identify any sort of peer eﬀect on investment decisions, we randomly informed one member

of the peer pair, investor 2, of the investment made by the other member of the pair, investor

1 (assignment to the roles of investor 1 and investor 2 was random). To disentangle the eﬀect of

investor 1’s possession from the eﬀect of the information conveyed by investor 1’s revealed preference

(his decision to purchase the asset), we exploit a novel aspect of our experimental design. The

ﬁnancial brokerage with which we worked implemented a lottery to determine whether individuals

who chose to purchase the asset would actually be allowed to make the investment (see Figure 1

for a graphical depiction of the experimental design). Thus, half of the investor 1’s who chose to

purchase the asset revealed a preference for the ﬁnancial asset, but did not possess it.

       Among investor 1’s who chose to purchase the asset, we implemented a second, independent

randomization to determine the information received by the associated investor 2’s: we randomly

assigned investor 2 to receive either no information about investor 1’s investment decision, or to

receive information about both the investment decision and the outcome of the lottery determining

possession. Thus, among investor 1’s who chose to purchase the asset, the associated investor 2’s

were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: (1) no information about investor 1’s decision8 ;

(2) information that investor 1 made a decision to purchase the asset, but was not able to con-

summate the purchase (so learning occurred without possession); or, (3) information that investor

1 made a decision to purchase the asset, and was able to consummate the purchase (so learning

occurred, along with possession). A comparison of choices made by investor 2 in conditions (1) and
   8
     We attempted to ensure that no information spread independently of the brokers’ phone calls by requiring that
calls be made to both investors on the same day. Our results are robust to dropping the 4% of investor 2’s who had
communicated with their associated investor 1’s about the asset prior to the phone call from the brokerage.



                                                        4
(2) reveals the eﬀect of social learning; a comparison of (2) and (3) reveals the impact of investor

1’s possession of the asset over and above the information conveyed by his purchase; a comparison

of (1) and (3) reveals the total eﬀect of these two channels. This design allows us to separately

identify contributions of social learning and social utility in generating the overall peer eﬀects we

observe.9

    Our experimental evidence suggests that both channels through which peer eﬀects work are

important. Among investor 2’s whose peer chose to purchase the asset we ﬁnd the following:

among individuals in the no information control condition, 42% chose to purchase the asset; among

those informed that investor 1 wanted the asset, but was unable to purchase it, the take-up rate

increased to 71%; ﬁnally, among those informed that investor 1 wanted the asset, and was able

to purchase it, the rate increased to 93%. There are large, statistically signiﬁcant peer eﬀects; in

addition, we ﬁnd that each channel – social utility and social learning – is individually economically

and statistically signiﬁcant. We ﬁnd that individuals learn from their peers, but also that there is

an eﬀect of possession beyond learning. This is true not only for the purchase decision, but also

for the decision of whether to invest more than the minimum investment amount, and how much

to invest in the asset.10

    To better understand investors’ decision making in the diﬀerent conditions, we partnered with

the brokerage to conduct a follow-up survey of the investors in the study (see Section 2.5 for

details). We ﬁrst use the evidence from that survey to further analyze the social learning channel.

If investors diﬀer in their level of ﬁnancial sophistication, a natural extension of our analysis of social

learning is to explore heterogeneity along that dimension.11 One would expect that an investor
    9
      In Section 3.3.3, we discuss alternative interpretations of the treatment eﬀects that we observe. Note that it is
diﬃcult to quantitatively estimate the eﬀect of possession above learning, because the purchase rate in condition (3)
is very close to 100%. Because the purchase rate is bounded above, we estimate what may roughly be thought of as
a lower bound of the eﬀect of possession beyond learning.
   10
      Our design also allows us to examine the role played by selection into a socially-related pair in generating
correlated choices among peers. In particular, when investor 1 chose not to purchase the asset, his associated investor
2 was assigned to a “negative selection” condition, in which no information was received about about the peer (the
brokerage did not want to include experimental conditions in which individuals learned that their peer did not want
the asset). These investor 2’s receive information identical to that received by investor 2’s in the control condition
(1); however, the investor 2’s in the “negative selection” condition are those whose peers speciﬁcally chose not to
purchase the asset. Interestingly, we do not ﬁnd large selection eﬀects: the take-up rate in the “negative selection”
group was 39%, not very diﬀerent from the take-up rate in condition (1).
   11
      It is important to note that heterogeneity in treatment eﬀects across investors with diﬀering ﬁnancial sophistica-
tion must be interpreted with caution, as sophistication was not randomly assigned across investors in our study.


                                                           5
with a low (respectively, high) degree of ﬁnancial sophistication would be more (less) likely to

follow the revealed preference decisions of other investors, because he will rely less (more) on his

own assessment of the quality of an asset. One would also expect the revealed preference decisions

made by more (respectively, less) ﬁnancially sophisticated investors to generate larger (smaller)

social learning eﬀects, because the purchasing decision reﬂects a more (less) precise signal of the

asset’s quality.

   To measure investors’ ﬁnancial sophistication, in the follow-up survey, the brokerage asked

investors to assess their own ﬁnancial knowledge and also asked them several objective questions (see

Sections 2.5 and 3.3 for further discussion). Consistent with our predictions, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant

eﬀect of social learning among ﬁnancially sophisticated investor 2’s, and a large, signiﬁcant social

learning eﬀect among unsophisticated investor 2’s; the diﬀerence in social learning eﬀects between

these groups is statistically signiﬁcant as well. We also ﬁnd that the purchase decisions of ﬁnancially

sophisticated investor 1’s were associated with much larger social learning eﬀects than those of

unsophisticated investor 1’s.

   The follow-up survey provides suggestive evidence on the mechanisms behind the increased

take-up rates in conditions (2) and (3). We ﬁnd that 67% of investor 2’s in conditions (2) and

(3) reported positively updating their beliefs about the quality of the asset after learning that

their peer chose to purchase it, consistent with an eﬀect of social learning. Moreover, investor 2’s

reported positively updating their beliefs about the asset diﬀerentially depending on their ﬁnancial

sophistication, and on that of their associated investor 1: unsophisticated investor 2’s were more

likely to report positive updating of their beliefs about the asset as a result of learning about their

peer’s purchase decision; and, decisions to purchase by sophisticated investor 1’s were associated

with a higher rate of positive updating by investor 2’s.

   Among investors who chose to purchase the asset in condition (3), we ﬁnd interesting evidence

suggestive of social utility eﬀects: over 40% reported a desire to discuss the asset with their peer

following purchase; 60% reported wanting to earn the same return as their peer; and, 80% reported

thinking about what their peer could do with the returns from the asset.

   The evidence from the follow-up survey additionally helps us rule out several alternative inter-


                                                  6
pretations of the treatment eﬀects we observe, as well as confounding factors (discussed further in

Section 3.3.3). We consider – and present evidence against – the following: diﬀerential updating of

beliefs about the quality of the asset between conditions (2) and (3); a desire to “get ahead of the

Joneses” (or, conversely, a feeling of guilt) in condition (2); investor 2’s in condition (2) purchasing

the asset for their peer ; and, investor 2’s in condition (2) purchasing the asset to match their peer’s

inferred portfolio. We also combine evidence from the follow-up survey with results from a pilot of

our study that did not include a lottery to authorize investments to suggest that the lottery did not

signiﬁcantly aﬀect the behavior of investors or interact with the information provided in conditions

(2) and (3). Evidence from the follow-up survey also indicates that investor 2’s in conditions (2)

and (3) were not concerned about their decisions being revealed to other clients – a potential issue

since in condition (1) investors did not receive information about their peers.12

      It is important to qualify our ﬁndings. First, we focus on the social learning described in

classic models, such as Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992): learning that occurs upon

observing a peer’s revealed preference purchasing decision. Of course, there are other types of

social learning in ﬁnancial decisions, such as learning about the existence of an asset, or learning

that occurs after a peer’s purchase (e.g., about when to sell an asset). We purposefully shut down

these channels in our study, but they are likely important, and deserve further study. Second, our

treatment eﬀects are estimated from the behavior of a particular sample of investors. In Section

3.3.4, we show that the investor 1’s in our study who chose to purchase the asset are similar to those

who chose not to make the purchase – this is important because our treatment eﬀects of interest

are conditional on investor 1’s wanting to purchase the asset. We also show that the characteristics

of our sample of investors – selected because they shared a social connection with another client

– are roughly similar to those of the full set of clients of the main oﬃce of the brokerage with

which we worked. This evidence suggests that our sample is of interest, though it is surely not

representative of all investors. Third, in our study, information about peers was transmitted by a

third party (brokers) during a high-stakes sales call. Importantly, sales calls similar to those used

in the study are commonly made by the brokerage with which we worked, and account for a large
 12
      In Section 3.3.3 we also discuss the role of the supply side (i.e., broker behavior) in generating our results.



                                                             7
fraction of its sales.13 Indeed, the brokerage required that the design of the sales call, as well as the

follow-up survey, be completely natural. Thus, these calls are a prevalent method of selling assets,

and the decisions made by the investors in our study were natural; still, it is possible that direct

information transmission among peers has diﬀerent eﬀects from those observed here.

    Our work contributes most directly to the empirical literature on peer eﬀects in investment

decisions. Much of the evidence of peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial markets has been correlational (e.g.,

Hong et al., 2004, Hong et al., 2005, Ivkovic and Weisbenner, 2007, and Li, 2009); important

exceptions are Duﬂo and Saez (2003) and Beshears et al. (2011), who use ﬁeld experiments to

identify more plausibly causal peer eﬀects in retirement plan choices among co-workers.14

    We also exploit experimental variation in the ﬁeld to identify causal peer eﬀects, in another

important setting. However, our paper goes beyond the existing literature by using experimental

variation to separately identify the causal roles of diﬀerent channels of peer eﬀects.15 Disentan-

gling these channels is of more than academic interest: it can provide important, policy-relevant

evidence on the sources of herding behavior in ﬁnancial markets. Our ﬁndings of signiﬁcant social

learning and social utility eﬀects suggest that greater information provision might mitigate – but

not eliminate – herding behavior.

    Our paper also contributes to the broader literature on social learning and peer eﬀects. As in

our work, several recent papers use information shocks to identify causal peer eﬀects: for example,

Frey and Meier (2004) and Chen et al. (2010) study contributions to public goods; Ayres et al.

(2009), Costa and Kahn (2010), and Allcott (2011) study energy usage. However, the information

shocks they exploit do not allow for the separate identiﬁcation of the channels through which peer

eﬀects work.
  13
     While brokers generally do not provide information about speciﬁc clients’ purchases, discussions with the broker-
age indicate that brokers regularly discuss the behavior of other investors in their sales calls. It is also worth noting
that in the U.S., investors commonly turn to brokers for ﬁnancial advice and to undertake transactions. Hung et al.
(2008) ﬁnd that nearly half of a broad sample of Americans used a ﬁnancial services provider; of these, three-quarters
used them for advice or to undertake transactions.
  14
     Duﬂo and Saez (2003) ﬁnd large, positive peer eﬀects in decisions to enroll in retirement plans eﬀects, while
Beshears et al. (2011) ﬁnd no positive peer eﬀects in contributions to retirement accounts. One possible interpretation
of the diﬀerence in these results is that peers in the former paper are members of a relatively small work unit, while
in the latter they are simply employees (of similar ages) in the same, large corporation. Brown et al. (2008) use an
instrumental variables strategy to identify a causal peer eﬀect on stock ownership.
  15
     Banerjee et al. (2011) study the diﬀusion of microﬁnance through social networks, and structurally estimate the
importance of diﬀerent potential channels linking peers’ decisions.


                                                           8
    Identifying the eﬀect of social learning alone is the focus of Cai et al. (2009) and Moretti (2011);

they try to rule out the existence of peer eﬀects through other channels (e.g., joint consumption)

in the contexts they study (food orders in a restaurant and box oﬃce sales, respectively), but they

do not experimentally manipulate the social utility channel. Cai et al. (2012) study the purchase

of insurance in China, and use experimental variation in the ﬁeld to identify the eﬀects of diﬀerent

types of social learning in networks; Maertens (2012) uses non-experimental methods to study

diﬀerent channels of social inﬂuence in the decision to adopt a new crop; Cooper and Rege (2011)

attempt to distinguish among peer eﬀect channels in the lab. Our work is the ﬁrst we know of that

uses experimental variation in the ﬁeld to isolate the eﬀect of social learning and the separate eﬀect

of social utility. Our results corroborate models such as Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al.

(1992), but indicate that peers’ purchasing decisions have eﬀects beyond social learning as well.

    Finally, our experimental design, which allows us to separately identify the channels through

which peer eﬀects work, represents a methodological contribution. As we discuss in the conclusion,

our design could be applied toward the understanding of social inﬂuence in areas such as education,

advertising, health-promoting behavior, and technology adoption.

    The paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we describe in detail our experimental design,

which attempts to separately identify the channels through which peer eﬀects work; in Section 3,

we present our empirical speciﬁcation and the results of our experiment, and discuss our ﬁndings;

ﬁnally, in Section 4, we oﬀer concluding thoughts.



2    Experimental Design

The primary goal of our design was to decouple a peer’s decision to purchase the asset from his

possession of the asset. We generated experimental conditions in which individuals would make

decisions: 1) uninformed about any choices made by their peer; 2) informed of their peer’s revealed

preference to purchase an asset, but the (randomly determined) inability of the peer to make the

investment; and, 3) informed of their peer’s revealed preference to purchase an asset, and the peer’s

(randomly determined) successful investment. We now describe the design in detail; in particular,



                                                   9
the structuring of a ﬁnancial asset that possessed particular characteristics, and the implementation

of multiple stages of randomization in the process of selling the asset.


2.1   Designing the Asset

The asset being oﬀered needed to satisfy several requirements. Most fundamentally, there needed to

be a possibility of learning from one’s peers’ decisions. In addition, because many of our comparisons

of interest are among investor 2’s whose associated investor 1’s chose to purchase the asset, the

asset needed to be suﬃciently desirable that enough investor 1’s would choose to purchase it. To

satisfy these requirements, the brokerage created a new, risky asset speciﬁcally for this study. The

asset is a combination of an actively-managed, open-ended long/short mutual fund and a real estate

note (Letra de Crédito Imobiliário, or LCI) for a term of one year. The long/short fund seeks to

outperform the interbank deposit rate (CDI, Certiﬁcado de Depósito Interbancário) by allocating

investment funds to ﬁxed-income assets, equity securities, and derivatives. The LCI is a low-risk

asset that is attractive to personal investors because it is exempt from personal income tax; it can

be thought of as an appealing, high-yield CD.

   The LCI oﬀered in this particular combination had somewhat better terms than the real estate

notes that were usually oﬀered to clients of the brokerage, thus generating suﬃcient demand to

meet the experiment’s needs. First, the return of the LCI oﬀered in the experiment was 98% of

the CDI, while the best LCI oﬀered to clients outside of the experiment had a return of 97% of the

CDI. In addition, the brokerage ﬁrm usually required a minimum investment of R$10,000 to invest

in an LCI, while the oﬀer in the experiment reduced the minimum investment threshold to R$1,000

(the long/short fund also required a minimum investment of R$1,000). The brokerage piloted the

sale of the asset (without using a lottery to determine possession), to clients other than those in

the current study, in order to ensure a purchase rate of around 50%.

   Another requirement was that there be no secondary market for the asset, for several reasons.

First, we hoped to identify the impact of learning from peers’ decisions to purchase the asset, rather

than learning from peers based on their experience possessing the asset. Investor 2 may have chosen

not to purchase the asset immediately, in order to talk with investor 1, then purchase the asset from


                                                 10
another investor. We wished to rule out this possibility. In addition, we did not want peer pairs to

jointly make decisions about selling the asset. Finally, we did not want investor 2 to purchase the

asset in hopes of selling it to investor 1 when investor 1’s investment choice was not implemented

by the lottery. In response to these concerns, the brokerage oﬀered the asset only at the time of

their initial phone call to the client – there was a single opportunity to invest – and structured the

asset as having a ﬁxed term with no resale – once the investment decision was made, the investor

would simply wait until the asset matured and then collect his returns.

    A ﬁnal requirement, given our desire to decouple the purchase decision from possession, was that

there must be limited entry into the fund to justify the lottery to implement purchase decisions. The

brokerage was willing to implement the lottery design required, justiﬁed by the supply constraint

for the asset they created for the study. At the individual level, the maximum investment in the

LCI component was set at R$10,000.


2.2    Selling the Asset

To implement the study, we designed (in consultation with the ﬁnancial brokerage) a script for sales

calls that incorporated the randomization necessary for our experimental design (the translated

script is available in Appendix C).16 The sales calls made by brokers possessed several important

characteristics. First, the brokerage required that calls be as natural as possible. Sales calls

had frequently been made by the brokerage in the past – accounting for approximately 70% of

sales – and our script was made as similar as possible to these more typical calls.17 Second, the

experimental calls were made by the individual brokers who were accustomed to working with the

clients they called as part of the study; and, the calls only deviated from brokers’ typical sales calls

as required to implement the experimental design. Thus, we (and the brokerage) expected that

clients would trust the broker’s claims about their peer’s choices, and to believe that the lottery

would be implemented as promised (evidence from the follow-up survey, discussed in Section 3.3,
  16
     We created the script using Qualtrics, a web-based platform that brokers would access and use to structure their
call. Occasionally, Qualtrics was abandoned when the website was not accessible, and the brokers used Excel to
generate the randomization needed to execute the experimental design. The treatment eﬀects are very similar if we
restrict ourselves to the Qualtrics calls (results available upon request).
  17
     The brokerage reported that no client suspected that the calls were being made as part of an academic experiment,
meaning our study falls into the category “natural ﬁeld experiment” (Harrison and List, 2004).


                                                         11
conﬁrms this expectation). Third, because brokers were compensated based on the assets they

sold, they were simply incentivized to sell the asset in each condition (rather than to conﬁrm any

particular hypothesis).18

    Between January 26, and April 3, 2012, brokers called 150 pairs of clients whom the brokerage

had previously identiﬁed as having a social connection (48% are members of the same family, and

52% are friends; see Table 1).19 It is important to note that, although the investors in this sample

are not a random sample of the brokerage’s clients, we ﬁnd that their observable characteristics are

roughly similar to the full set of clients of the brokerage’s main oﬃce (compare Table 1, columns 1

and 8).

    Information on these clients’ social relationships was available for reasons independent of the

experiment: the ﬁrm had made note of referrals made by clients in the past. In the context of our

experiment, this is particularly important because clients’ social relationships would not have been

salient to those whose sales call did not include any mention of their peer. We thus believe that

without any mention of the oﬀer being made to the other member of the peer pair, there will be

no peer eﬀect, though of course this may not be exactly true in reality.20

    One member of the pair was randomly assigned to the role of “investor 1,” while the second

member was assigned to the role of “investor 2.”21 Investor 1 was called by the brokerage and given
   18
      Thus, brokers would have used the available information in each experimental treatment as eﬀectively as possible.
Any treatment eﬀects measured can be thought of as the eﬀects of information about a peer’s choice (or choice plus
possession) when that information is “optimally” used by a salesperson (we discuss the supply side in more detail
in Section 3.3.3). Of course, in reality, information about peers’ choices may be received from the peer (rather than
from a salesperson), or may not be observed at all; the magnitudes of our eﬀects should be interpreted with this in
mind.
   19
      In Table 1, we generally present means of the various investor characteristics. The exception is the earnings
variable, the median of which is shown in order to mitigate the inﬂuence of outliers: while the median monthly
income in our sample is R$4,500, one investor had monthly earnings of R$200,000. In addition to the brokerage’s
record of a pair’s social relationship, investor 2 was directly asked about the nature of his relationship with investor
1, after investor 2 had decided whether to purchase the asset (investor 1 was not asked about investor 2 at all). Note
that one of the authors (Bursztyn) was present for some of the phone calls. In addition, for those and many of the
other calls, we had a research assistant present; see the image included in Appendix C. Finally, it is worth noting
that the sample size was limited by the number of previously-identiﬁed socially-related pairs of clients, as well the
brokerage’s willingness to commit time to the experiment. The brokerage agreed (in advance of the calls) to reach
300 clients.
   20
      We also asked the brokerage if any investor spontaneously mentioned their peer in the sales call, and the brokerage
indicated that this never occurred. If an individual in condition (1) had thought about his peer’s potential oﬀer and
purchase of the same asset, our measured peer eﬀects would be attenuated.
   21
      A comparison of the characteristics of investor 1’s and investor 2’s can be seen in Appendix B, Table A.1, columns
1 and 2. The randomization resulted in a reasonable degree of balance across groups: 4 of 5 tests of equality of mean
characteristics across groups have p-values above 0.10. One characteristic, gender, is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent across


                                                           12
the opportunity to invest in the asset without any mention of their peer. The calls proceeded as

follows. The asset was ﬁrst described in detail to investor 1. After describing the investment strategy

underlying the asset, the investor was told that the asset was in limited supply; in order to be fair

to the brokerage’s clients, any purchase decision would be conﬁrmed or rejected by computerized

lottery. If the investor chose to purchase the asset, he was asked to specify a purchase amount.

Then, a computer would generate a random number from 1 to 100 (during the phone call), and if

the number was greater than 50, the investment would be authorized; the investor was informed of

the details of the lottery before making his purchase decision.22

    Following the call to investor 1, the brokerage called the associated investor 2. The brokers

were told that, for each pair, both investors had to be contacted on the same day to avoid any

communication about the asset that might contaminate the experimental design. Only 6 out of

150 investor 2’s had communicated with their associated investor 1’s about the asset prior to the

phone call from the brokerage (dropping these 6 observations does not aﬀect any of our results). If

the broker did not succeed in reaching investor 2 on the same day as the associated investor 1, the

broker would not attempt to contact him again; this outcome occurred for 12 investor 1’s, who are

not included in our empirical analysis.23

    When the broker reached investor 2, he began the script just as he did for investor 1: describing

the asset, including the lottery to determine whether a purchase decision would be implemented.

Next, the broker implemented the experimental randomization and attempted to sell the asset

under the experimentally-prescribed conditions (described next). If investor 2 chose to purchase

the asset, a random number was generated to determine whether the purchase decision would be

implemented, just as was the case for investor 1.
groups.
  22
     One might naturally be concerned that knowledge of the lottery would aﬀect the decision to invest. This would,
of course, be of greatest concern to us if any eﬀect of the lottery interacted with treatment status (we discuss this in
Section 3.3). It is reassuring to know, however, that in the brokerage’s initial calls to calibrate the asset’s purchase
rate (our pilot study), which did not mention the lottery, the purchase rate was 12 of 25, or 48% – very similar to what
we observe among investors in our study receiving no information about their peers. Among investor 1’s who wanted
to purchase the asset, a comparison of the characteristics of investor 1’s whose purchase decision was authorized and
investor 1’s whose purchase decision was not authorized can be seen in Appendix B, Table A.1. The randomization
resulted in a reasonable degree of balance across groups: 5 of 6 tests of equality of mean characteristics across groups
have p-values above 0.10. One characteristic, gender, is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent across groups.
  23
     Thus, to be clear, brokers called 162 investor 1’s in order to attain our sample size of 150 pairs successfully
reached.


                                                          13
2.3    Randomization into Experimental Conditions

The experimental conditions were determined as follows. Among the group of investor 1’s who chose

to purchase the asset, their associated investor 2’s were randomly assigned to receive information

about investor 1’s choice and the lottery outcome, or to receive no information. There was thus

a “double randomization” – ﬁrst, the lottery determining whether investor 1 was able to make

the investment, and second, the randomization determining whether investor 2 would be informed

about investor 1’s investment choice and the outcome of the ﬁrst lottery.

    This process assigns investor 2’s whose associated investor 1’s chose to purchase the asset into

one of three conditions (Figure 1 presents a graphical depiction of the randomization); investor

characteristics across the three experimental conditions can be seen in Table 2. One-third were

assigned to the “no information,” control condition, condition (1). Half of these come from the

pool of investor 2’s paired with investor 1’s who wanted the asset but were not authorized to make

the investment, and half from those paired with investor 1’s who wanted to make the investment

and were authorized to make it. Investor 2’s in condition (1) were oﬀered the asset just as was

investor 1, with no mention of an oﬀer made to their peer.24

    Two-thirds received information about their peer’s decision to purchase the asset (but not the

magnitude of the desired investment), as well as the outcome of the lottery that determined whether

the peer was allowed to invest in the asset. The randomization resulted in approximately one-third

of investor 2’s in condition (2), in which they were told that their peer purchased the asset, but had

that choice rejected by the lottery. The ﬁnal third of investor 2’s were in condition (3), in which

they were told that their peer purchased the asset, and had that choice implemented by the lottery.

    The three conditions of investor 2’s whose associated investor 1’s wanted to purchase the asset

are the focus of our analysis. Given the double randomization in our experimental design, investor

2’s in conditions (1), (2), and (3) should have similar observable characteristics, and should diﬀer

only in the information they received. As a check of the randomization, we present in Table 2

the individual investors’ characteristics for each of the three groups, as well as tests of equality of
  24
     We can think of these investor 2’s as “positively selected” relative to the set of investor 1’s, as the latter were a
random sample of investors, while the former are speciﬁcally those whose peer chose to purchase the asset.




                                                           14
the characteristics across groups. As expected from the random assignment into each group, the

sample is well balanced across the baseline variables.

   Along with the three conditions of interest, in some analyses we will consider those investor 2’s

whose associated investor 1 chose not to invest in the asset (the characteristics of these investor 2’s

can be seen in Table 1, column 7). We assign these investor 2’s to their own “negative selection”

condition, in which they receive no information about their peer. We did not reveal their peers’

choices because the brokerage did not want to include experimental conditions in which individuals

learned that their peer did not want the asset. These individuals were oﬀered the asset in exactly

the same manner as were investor 1’s and investor 2’s in condition (1). We refer to these investor

2’s as those in the “negative selection” condition, because the information they receive is identical

to that received by investor 2’s in condition (1); however, the investor 2’s in the “negative selection”

condition are those whose peers speciﬁcally chose not to purchase the asset.


2.4   Treatment Eﬀects of Interest

Our experimental design allows us to make several interesting comparisons across groups of in-

vestors. First, we can estimate overall peer eﬀects, working through both social learning and social

utility channels. Consider the set of investor 2’s whose peers had chosen to purchase the asset

(whether the investment was implemented or not). Among these investor 2’s, a comparison of

those in conditions (1) and (3) reveals the standard peer eﬀect: in condition (1), there is no peer

eﬀect active, as no mention was made of any oﬀer being made to the other member of the peer

pair; in condition (3), the investor 2 is told that investor 1 successfully invested in the asset (so

both social utility and social learning channels are active).

   Second, we can disentangle the channels through which peers’ purchases aﬀect investment de-

cisions. Comparing investor 2’s (again those whose peer chose to purchase the asset) in conditions

(1) and (2) will allow us to estimate the impact of social learning resulting from a peer’s decision

but without possession. Comparing investor 2’s purchase decisions in conditions (2) and (3) will

then allow us to estimate the impact of a peer’s possession alone, over and above learning from




                                                  15
a peer’s decision, on the decision to invest.25 In addition to identifying these peer eﬀects, we will

examine the role of “selection”, by comparing investor 2’s in condition (1) to those in the “negative

selection” condition.


2.5      Follow-up Survey

Between November 26, and December 7, 2012, the brokerage conducted a follow-up survey with

a subset of the clients from the main study; investors were told (truthfully) that the brokerage

wished to learn about its clients in order to provide them with more individualized services and

information. The follow-up survey was conducted with two primary goals for the purposes of our

work: ﬁrst, to measure investors’ ﬁnancial sophistication; and second, to collect information that

could be used to better understand the decision making processes behind the choices of investor

2’s (for the English language survey questionnaires, see Appendix C).

       In our analysis below, we examine heterogeneity in social learning eﬀects among investor 2’s in

conditions (1) and (2), depending on whether investor 2 (or the associated investor 1) is ﬁnancially

sophisticated; this analysis not only tests a natural extension of a simple social learning model,

but also helps rule out alternative explanations for the treatment eﬀects we observe. To measure

the relevant set of investors’ ﬁnancial sophistication, the brokerage contacted the investor 2’s in

conditions (1) and (2), as well as their associated investor 1’s, and asked them to assess their

own ﬁnancial knowledge; in addition, the brokerage asked these investors a series of objective

questions measuring ﬁnancial literacy.26 For summary statistics on the ﬁnancial sophistication

survey questions, see Appendix B, Table A.2, Panel A.

       We also collected survey evidence that can help us understand the decision making of investor
  25
      It is important to emphasize that our estimated eﬀect of possession is conditional on investor 2 having learned
about the asset from the revealed preference of investor 1 to purchase the asset. One might imagine that the eﬀect
of possession of the asset by investor 1 without any revealed preference to purchase the asset could be diﬀerent. It
is also important to point out that the estimated eﬀect of “possession” is diﬃcult to interpret quantitatively: the
measured eﬀect is bounded above by 1 minus the take-up in condition (2), working against ﬁnding any statistically
signiﬁcant peer eﬀects beyond social learning.
   26
      The speciﬁc questions come from the National Financial Capability Survey (translated into Portuguese), and
have been used in studies both in the US and in other countries (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a,b). Investor 2’s other
than those in conditions (1) and (2), and investor 1’s other than those associated with investor 2’s in conditions (1)
and (2), were not asked these ﬁnancial sophistication questions to reduce the brokerage’s time commitment to the
follow-up survey.



                                                         16
2’s across experimental conditions (1), (2), and (3). In particular, we wished to understand: (i)

how investors viewed the lottery that determined whether purchase decisions were implemented

(relevant to conditions (1), (2), and (3)); (ii) how investors responded to information about their

peer’s purchase decision (relevant to conditions (2) and (3)); (iii) how investors responded to infor-

mation about the outcome of the lottery determining whether their peer’s decision was implemented

(relevant to conditions (2) and (3), though with diﬀerent questions reﬂecting the diﬀerent lottery

outcomes); and, (iv) how investors responded to information about their peer’s possession of the

asset (relevant to condition (3)). For summary statistics on the decision making survey questions,

see Appendix B, Table A.2, Panel B.

    The brokerage conducted the follow-up survey over the phone, calling investor 2’s in conditions

(1), (2), and (3), and investor 1’s associated with investor 2’s in conditions (1) and (2), up to three

times each; the brokerage was able to reach 90.4% of the investors called.



3     Empirical Analysis

Before more formally estimating the eﬀects of the experimental treatments, we present the take-up

rates in the raw data across categories of investor 2’s (see Figure 2). Among those investor 2’s

in the “no information” condition (1), the take-up rate was 42%; in the “social learning alone”

condition (2), the take-up rate was 71%; in the “social learning plus social utility” condition (3),

the take-up rate was 93%. These diﬀerences represent economically and statistically signiﬁcant

peer eﬀects: the diﬀerence of around 50 percentage points in take-up rates between conditions (1)

and (3) is large and statistically signiﬁcant, indicating the relevance of peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial

decisions; moreover, we observe sizable and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of learning alone, and of

possession above learning as well.27 Interestingly, we do not see a big “selection” eﬀect: there was

a 42% take-up rate in condition (1) and 39% in the “negative selection” group (the diﬀerence is

not statistically signiﬁcant). In Appendix B, Figure A.1, we present the raw data on alternative

outcomes of interest: the amount investors chose to invest in the asset (which was determined prior
  27
     The p-value from a test of equality between take-up rates in conditions (1) and (3) – the overall peer eﬀect – is
0.000. The p-value from a test that (2) equals (1) – social learning alone – is 0.043. The p-value from a test that (3)
equals (2) – possession’s eﬀect above social learning – is 0.044.


                                                          17
to the lottery authorizing investment), and the fraction of clients who chose to invest more than

the minimum, across conditions. The patterns across conditions are very similar to those seen in

Figure 2.

       A natural question about our ﬁndings in Figure 2 (and Figure A.1) is whether our statisti-

cal inferences are sound, given the relatively small number of observations in each experimental

condition. Thus, as an alternative to standard t-tests to determine statistical signiﬁcance, we ran

permutation tests with 10,000 repetitions for pairwise comparisons of the raw outcomes – take-up

rates, investment amounts, and investing more than the minimum – across the three conditions of

interest (as well as a comparison between condition (1) and the “negative selection” condition).28

We ﬁnd that our inferences are practically unchanged using permutation tests (see Appendix B,

Table A.3, Panel A).


3.1      Regression Speciﬁcation

To identify the eﬀects of our experimental treatments, we will estimate regression models of the

following form:


                                                   
                                        Yi = α +        βc Ic,i + γ  Xi + i .                                  (1)
                                                    c

       Yi is an investment decision made by investor i: in much of our analysis it will be a dummy

variable indicating whether investor i wanted to purchase the asset, but we will also consider

the quantity invested, as well as an indicator that the investment amount was greater than the

minimum required. The variables Ic,i are indicators for investor i being in category c, where c

indicates the experimental condition to which investor i was assigned. In all of our regressions, the

omitted category of investors to which the others are compared will be investor 2’s in condition

(1); that is, those investor 2’s associated with a peer who wanted to purchase the asset, but who

received no information about their peer. In much of our analysis, we will focus on investor 2’s, so
  28
    To run the permutation test, we randomly assign “treatment” status to investors in the groups of interest, 10,000
times, and calculate a distribution of “treatment eﬀects” based on the random assignment. We then compare the size
of the treatment eﬀects we ﬁnd (using the actual treatment assignment) to the distribution of “treatment eﬀects”
when treatment is randomly assigned.



                                                         18
c ∈ {condition (2), condition (3), “negative selection”}. In some cases, we will also include investor

1’s in our analysis, and they will be assigned their own category c. Finally, in some speciﬁcations

we will include control variables: Xi is a vector that includes broker ﬁxed eﬀects and investors’

baseline characteristics.


3.2    Empirical Estimates of Social Utility and Social Learning

We ﬁrst present the estimated treatment eﬀects of interest using an indicator of the investor’s

purchase decision as the outcome variable, and various speciﬁcations estimated using OLS, in

Table 3.29 We begin by estimating a model using only investor 2’s and not including any controls,

in Table 3, column 1. These results match the raw data presented in Figure 2: treatment eﬀects

are estimated relative to the omitted category, investor 2’s in condition (1), who had a take-up rate

of 42%. As can be seen in the table, the overall peer eﬀect – the coeﬃcient on the indicator for

condition (3) – is over 50 percentage points, and is highly signiﬁcant.

    In addition, social learning and social utility are individually signiﬁcant. Investor 2’s in condition

(2) purchased the asset at a rate nearly 29 percentage points higher than those in condition (1), and

the diﬀerence is signiﬁcant. This indicates that learning without possession aﬀects the investment

decision. The diﬀerence between the coeﬃcient on condition (3) and the coeﬃcient on condition

(2) indicates the importance of possession beyond social learning. Indeed, as can be seen in Table

3, the 22 percentage point diﬀerence between these conditions is statistically signiﬁcant.

    Finally, the coeﬃcient on the “negative selection” variable, in column 1 of Table 3, gives us the

diﬀerence in take-up rates between investor 2’s whose peers did not want to purchase the asset and

investor 2’s whose peers wanted to purchase the asset, with neither group receiving information

about their peers. As suggested by Figure 2, the estimated selection eﬀect is economically small,

and it is not statistically signiﬁcant.

    We next present regression results including broker ﬁxed eﬀects (Table 3, column 2) and in-

cluding both broker ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline covariates (Table 3, column 3); then, we estimate a

regression including these controls and using the combined sample of investor 1’s and investor 2’s in
  29
     We also estimate the speciﬁcations from Table 3, but using probit and logit models, in Appendix B, Tables A.4
and A.5; results are very similar.


                                                       19
order to have more precision (Table 3, column 4). The overall peer eﬀect, as well as the individual

social learning and social utility channels, estimated using these alternative regression models are

very similar across speciﬁcations (consistent with successful randomization across conditions).

    We also consider two alternative outcome variables: the amount investors chose to invest in the

asset, and a dummy variable indicating whether the chosen investment amount was greater than

the minimum required. In Table 4, we replicate the speciﬁcations presented in columns 1 and 4 in

Table 3, but use each of the alternative outcome variables. As can be seen in Table 4, the results

using these alternative outcomes closely parallel those using take-up rates. We observe signiﬁcant

peer eﬀects, signiﬁcant social learning, and signiﬁcant eﬀects of possession beyond learning.30


3.3    Discussion

The results across speciﬁcations in Tables 3 and 4 indicate sizable peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial decision

making. Moreover, they suggest that both channels through which peer eﬀects work are important.

It is worth noting that the very large magnitudes of the peer eﬀects we ﬁnd may to some extent

reﬂect the context of the experiment: the peers we study are very close – often friends or family –

in contrast to other work in this area (e.g., Beshears et al., 2011).31 Thus, both a desire to keep

up with peers’ earnings, and utility from joint consumption, might be especially pronounced in our

setting. In addition, characteristics of the process of information transfer (e.g., the broker’s ability

to use information about one’s peer in the sales call) may contribute to the relatively large eﬀects

we ﬁnd.

    We now delve more deeply into our data, and analyze investors’ responses to the follow-up

survey, in order to better understand the treatment eﬀects we observe. We ﬁrst present additional

evidence on each of the two channels of social inﬂuence we study. Then, we discuss potential
   30
      The only diﬀerence worth noting is that we observe marginally signiﬁcant diﬀerences between investor 1’s and
investor 2’s in condition (1) using these two outcomes. This diﬀerence might be the result of noise in the data, of
selection into condition (2), or of the somewhat earlier calls made to investor 1’s. Although there are diﬀerences in
the selection of investor 1’s and investor 2’s in condition (1), it is reassuring to note that our results are robust to
treating investor 1’s as part of the control group, or as the control group itself. Finally, it is important to note that
diﬀerences between investor 1’s and investor 2’s in condition (2) do not threaten the study’s internal validity.
   31
      It is also worth noting that the peers we study formed their associations naturally (and endogenously), which
is not always true in academic studies. Carrell et al. (2011) ﬁnd that naturally-occurring peer groups exhibit very
diﬀerent inﬂuence patterns from artiﬁcially-created peer groups.



                                                           20
concerns with our experimental design and the interpretation of our results: alternative hypotheses

(or confounding factors) that might contaminate our experimental treatments; whether supply-side

(broker) behavior played an important role in generating the observed treatment eﬀects; and, the

external validity of our ﬁndings.


3.3.1      Understanding the Social Learning Treatment Eﬀects

Heterogeneity of social learning eﬀects by Financial Sophistication. When observing a

peer’s purchase of an asset, an investor with greater ﬁnancial sophistication (and therefore a more

precise signal of asset quality) should put less weight on information derived from their peer’s

revealed preference, relative his own signal of the quality of the asset. Similarly, the information

conveyed by the revealed preference of one’s peer should be more inﬂuential if this peer is more

ﬁnancially sophisticated, and is thus likely to have received a more precise signal of the asset’s

quality (see Appendix A for a formal treatment of these arguments). We thus expect that the

social learning channel should be less important for more ﬁnancially sophisticated investor 2’s, and

that the social learning channel should be more pronounced when investor 1’s were more ﬁnancially

sophisticated.

       Testing for heterogeneous social learning eﬀects faces challenges: most importantly, ﬁnancial

sophistication is not randomly assigned in our study, so it might be correlated with some other,

unobserved characteristic; in addition, testing for heterogeneous treatment eﬀects divides our sam-

ple into small cells; thus, any evidence of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects should be interpreted

cautiously.32 Still, exploring heterogeneous treatment eﬀects is both interesting from a theoretical

standpoint – since it is a natural extension of a social learning framework – and it can also provide

suggestive evidence that our measured social learning treatment eﬀects are not driven by other

factors (as we discuss below).

       We construct two measures of investors’ ﬁnancial sophistication using responses to several ques-

tions included in our follow-up survey (for the English version of the questionnaire used in the
  32
    One consequence of the small cell sizes is that we are unable to combine into a single analysis the study of social
learning by sophisticated and unsophisticated investors with the study of social learning from sophisticated and unso-
phisticated investors. One might expect that the greatest eﬀect of social learning would occur when unsophisticated
investors learn from sophisticated ones; however, our sample size prevents us from running this sort of test.


                                                          21
survey, see Appendix C; for summary statistics on the ﬁnancial sophistication survey questions, see

Appendix B, Table A.2, Panel A). Our ﬁrst measure captures investors’ self-assessments of their

ﬁnancial sophistication. The ﬁnancial literacy survey directly asked investors: “On a scale from 1

to 7, where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you assess your overall ﬁnancial

knowledge?”. Using the self-assessed measure, we deﬁne “ﬁnancially sophisticated” investors as

those who reported a number greater than or equal to 4, producing the most even split of our

sample.

      Our second measure captures investors’ objective ﬁnancial knowledge. The follow-up survey

asked four questions testing respondents’ understanding of important concepts for investing: one

on compounding; one on inﬂation; one on diversiﬁcation; and, one on the relationship between

bond prices and interest rates. Using the objective measure, we deﬁne “ﬁnancially sophisticated”

investors as those who correctly answered 3 or more of the questions, again producing the most even

split of our sample. Our two survey-based measures of ﬁnancial sophistication have a correlation

of around 0.4 within-investor: they are statistically signiﬁcantly related, but far from perfectly so.

Across peers in each pair, there is a surprisingly small correlation in ﬁnancial sophistication: 0.06

for the self-assessed measure, and -0.11 for the objective measure.

      In testing hypotheses regarding heterogeneity in social learning according to investor 2’s ﬁnan-

cial sophistication, we believe that the self-assessed measure is most appropriate – investor 2’s who

view themselves as less knowledgeable are those who should respond more to information about

their peer’s revealed preference. In testing hypotheses regarding heterogeneity in social learning ac-

cording to investor 1’s ﬁnancial sophistication, one might like to use a measure of investor 2’s beliefs

about investor 1’s knowledge. Not having that available to us, we believe the objective measure of

investor 1’s sophistication may be appropriate here (as may the self-assessed measure, if this were

broadcast to the peer, and believed). For brevity, in the text we will present tests of heterogeneity

in social learning across both investor 1’s and investor 2’s levels of ﬁnancial sophistication using

only the self-assessed measure (in Appendix B, Table A.6, we present the same speciﬁcations shown

in the text, but using the objective measure, and our results are very similar).33
 33
      In previous versions of this paper, we used an investor’s occupation as a proxy for his ﬁnancial sophistication



                                                          22
    We present regression estimates of social learning eﬀects for diﬀerent categories of investor

2’s, using diﬀerent speciﬁcations, in Table 5. Panel A presents social learning treatment eﬀects

estimated from regressions without controls (i.e., comparisons of means).34 In columns 1–2, we

estimate separate social learning eﬀects for ﬁnancially sophisticated and ﬁnancially unsophisti-

cated investor 2’s, respectively. We do so by regressing the investment decision dummy variable

on a “ﬁnancially sophisticated” indicator; an interaction between a condition (2) indicator and the

ﬁnancially sophisticated indicator; and, an interaction between a condition (2) indicator and a “ﬁ-

nancially unsophisticated” indicator. In columns 4–5, we estimate separate social learning eﬀects

for investor 2’s associated with ﬁnancially sophisticated and ﬁnancially unsophisticated investor

1’s, respectively. We do so by regressing the investment decision dummy variable on a “ﬁnancially

sophisticated investor 1” indicator; an interaction between a condition (2) indicator and the ﬁ-

nancially sophisticated investor 1 indicator; and, an interaction between a condition (2) indicator

and a “ﬁnancially unsophisticated investor 1” indicator. Panel B presents estimated social learning

eﬀects from models similar to those in Panel A, but also including baseline covariate controls and

broker ﬁxed eﬀects.

    The results in Table 5 match what one would predict if social learning were the driving force

behind the treatment eﬀects when comparing conditions (1) and (2). First, consider heterogeneity

according to the ﬁnancial sophistication of investor 2 (“learning by ﬁnancially sophisticated”), in

columns 1–2: in speciﬁcations with and without controls, we observe a small and, statistically

insigniﬁcant eﬀect of the social learning treatment on ﬁnancially sophisticated investor 2’s, and a

large and signiﬁcant eﬀect on unsophisticated investor 2’s. Column 3 shows that the diﬀerence

between the treatment eﬀects for sophisticated and unsophisticated investor 2’s is also signiﬁcant.

Next, consider heterogeneity according to the ﬁnancial sophistication of investor 1 (“learning from

ﬁnancially sophisticated”) in columns 4–5: we ﬁnd large and signiﬁcant social learning eﬀects

among investor 2’s associated with ﬁnancially sophisticated investor 1’s, and small, statistically
(occupations were coded as “ﬁnancially sophisticated” either by the authors or, independently, by graduate students).
Our results are very similar using this alternative measure of investors’ ﬁnancial sophistication as well.
  34
     Note that in Table 5, our sample consists of only investor 2’s in conditions (1) and (2). Also note that the
outcome variable considered here is the take-up rate for the asset, but our results are very similar using alternative
outcomes (amount invested or an indicator of an investment larger than the minimum); see Appendix B, Tables A.7
and A.8.


                                                         23
insigniﬁcant eﬀects among investor 2’s associated with ﬁnancially unsophisticated investor 1’s (take-

up rates across sub-groups are presented in Appendix B, Figures A.2.1 and A.2.2).

   We consider a range of robustness tests. Using the objective measure of ﬁnancial knowledge does

not aﬀect our results (see Appendix B, Table A.6). In previous drafts, we used investors’ occupations

as a proxy for their ﬁnancial sophistication, and we found similar results; we have also coded our

self-assessed ﬁnancial sophistication indicator using a score of 5 as the cut-oﬀ, and considered a

speciﬁcation with a continuous measure of ﬁnancial sophistication; our results are qualitatively

similar across speciﬁcations (available upon request). Finally, one might be worried about our

statistical inferences, since we are dividing our small treatment groups into even smaller cells. To

address this concern, we ran permutation tests with 10,000 repetitions for each subgroup’s social

learning eﬀect, and ﬁnd that our statistical inferences from the regression models are unaﬀected

(for the permutation test p-values, see Appendix B, Table A.3, Panel B).

   Evidence of updated beliefs. We believe that investor 2’s higher take-up rate in condition

(2), and a component of their higher take-up rate in condition (3), resulted from positively updating

their beliefs about the asset after hearing that their associated investor 1 chose to purchase it. While

brokers did not elicit prior or posterior beliefs during the initial sales call, in the follow-up survey,

investors in conditions (2) and (3) were directly asked whether the fact that their associated investor

1 wanted to purchase the asset aﬀected their beliefs about the quality of the asset. We ﬁnd that

67% of investor 2’s in conditions (2) and (3) reported positively updating their beliefs about the

quality of the asset after learning that their peer chose to purchase it, consistent with a social

learning eﬀect.

   Our hypotheses regarding heterogeneous social learning eﬀects according to investor 1’s and

investor 2’s ﬁnancial sophistication suggest that investor 2’s should have updated their beliefs

about the asset diﬀerentially depending on their ﬁnancial sophistication, and that of their associated

investor 1. Unsophisticated investor 2’s should have been more likely to positively update their

beliefs; and, purchase decisions by sophisticated investor 1’s should have led to more positive

belief updating. Indeed, we ﬁnd precisely these patterns in the follow-up survey data. Among

unsophisticated investor 2’s in condition (2), 92% reported positively updating their beliefs about


                                                   24
the quality of the asset; among sophisticated ones, only 11% did (the p-value of this diﬀerence is

less than 0.01).35 Among investor 2’s in condition (2) associated with sophisticated investor 1’s,

we ﬁnd that 69% positively updated their beliefs; among those associated with unsophisticated

investor 1’s, only 33% updated positively (the p-value of this diﬀerence is 0.16).


3.3.2      Understanding the Social Utility Treatment Eﬀects

The ﬁnance literature has pointed to diﬀerent reasons why one’s peer’s possession of an asset might

directly aﬀect one’s utility from possessing the same asset. In the follow-up survey, the investor

2’s in condition (3) who chose to purchase the asset were asked about two particular mechanisms.

First, they were asked about the importance of relative income or consumption concerns: whether

earning the same return as their peer was important to their decision; whether fear of missing out

on a return their peer might earn was important; and, whether they thought about what their peer

might do with the returns from the asset. Second, they were asked one question relating to the

importance of the “joint consumption” value of the ﬁnancial asset: whether anticipated discussions

of the asset with their peer were important to their decision.

      The results indicate that both mechanisms were important. First, regarding “keeping up with

the Joneses” motives: 60% of respondents reported that wanting to earn the same ﬁnancial return

as their peer was a signiﬁcant factor in their decision; 80% of them reported that they thought

about what their peer could do with the return from the asset; 32% reported that the fear of not

having a return that their peer could have was a signiﬁcant factor in their decision. We also ﬁnd

evidence of a “joint consumption” channel: 44% reported that a signiﬁcant factor in their purchase

decision was that they could talk with their peer about the asset.

      Although we cannot cleanly identify the relative importance of these diﬀerent mechanisms, the

evidence from the follow-up survey suggests that relative income and consumption concerns and a

desire for “joint consumption” both played a role in generating the social utility eﬀects we observe.

While investors did not need to select any of these social utility factors as playing a signiﬁcant role

in their decisions, only 4% of respondents did not point to any of them as a relevant element in
 35
      One sophisticated investor 2 reported negatively updating his beliefs – the only such response in the survey.



                                                          25
their decision making process.


3.3.3   Alternative Hypotheses and Confounding Factors

In an ideal experiment, our condition (2) would have diﬀered from condition (1) only because of

social learning; and, condition (3) would have diﬀered from condition (2) only in the added eﬀect of

social utility. Of course, in reality, there may have been other diﬀerences across conditions, and here

we discuss whether they were likely to have played an important role in generating the treatment

eﬀects we observe. First, we consider the possibility that factors other than learning from investor

1’s revealed preference aﬀected outcomes in the social learning condition (2).

   Consequences of learning about the peer’s lost lottery. Investor 2’s in condition (2)

not only learned about their peer’s revealed preference, they also learned that the lottery rejected

that revealed preference. This might have aﬀected their behavior in several ways. First, it might

have increased the salience of the new asset’s scarcity, making the asset appear more appealing,

and increasing take-up rates. To examine this possibility, in the follow-up survey, we asked investor

2’s in condition (2) whether their views of the asset’s quality were aﬀected by their peer’s lottery

outcome; 98% them said that they were not.

   Information about the lottery outcome might also have aﬀected take-up if investor 2’s incorrectly

updated their beliefs about their own likelihood of winning the lottery based on news of their

peer’s outcome. A reduced subjective probability of winning might have reduced take-up relative

to condition (3), for example. Responses in the follow-up survey suggest that incorrect updating

of beliefs about the lottery was likely unimportant: when asked if the information about their

peer’s lottery outcome aﬀected their beliefs about their own lottery outcome, 100% of investor 2’s

in condition (2) reported that it did not.

   Guilt or “getting ahead of the Joneses.” We implicitly assume that investor 1’s loss of the

lottery only aﬀected investor 2’s by making social utility gains from asset possession unavailable.

However, one might believe that investor 2’s would feel guilt possessing an asset that their peer was

prevented from acquiring; or, that investor 2’s might especially desire an asset their peer explicitly

could not acquire – perhaps out of a desire to “get ahead of the Joneses.” Our follow-up survey


                                                  26
can help us address these potential concerns. We asked the investor 2’s in condition (2) who chose

to make the investment whether the fact that their peer could not have the asset was a signiﬁcant

factor in their decision to purchase the asset, and all respondents replied “no.” Analogously, we

asked the investor 2’s in condition (2) who chose not to make the investment whether the fact that

their peer could not have the asset was a signiﬁcant factor in their decision not to purchase the

asset, and again all respondents replied “no.”

   One might worry that investors would be embarrassed to reveal a desire to get ahead of their

peer. In evaluating the importance of a desire to get ahead of the Joneses, we are reassured by our

results (in Table 5) showing heterogeneous eﬀects of social learning depending on investor 1’s and

investor 2’s ﬁnancial sophistication. It is diﬃcult to tell a story in which the desire to get ahead of

one’s peer is concentrated among the ﬁnancially unsophisticated, and in particular among investor

2’s whose associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially sophisticated. Learning, rather than a desire to get

ahead, is much more plausible given the heterogeneous treatment eﬀects we ﬁnd.

   Side payments. Another potential concern with the social learning condition relates to side

payments. Since investor 1’s wanted, but could not get, the asset, some investor 2’s may have felt

tempted to make the investment and pass it along, or sell it, to their peer. Our design reduces the

impact of this type of concern for several reasons. First, investor 1’s who lost the lottery did not

know that investor 2’s would receive the oﬀer, so investor 1’s would likely not have initiated this

strategy following their sales call. Second, even had they suspected that their friend would receive

the oﬀer, there was limited time between calls to investor 1’s and investor 2’s – indeed, only 6 out

of 150 investor 2’s reported that they heard about the asset from their associated investor 1 (our

results are robust to dropping these 6 investor 2’s). Finally, once investor 2 received the oﬀer, he

was unable to communicate with investor 1 prior to making his investment decision in order to

facilitate coordination.

   We can also address this concern to some extent with our experimental data. One might

expect side payments, if present and important, to be most prominent among peers who are family

members, as family members would have an easier time coordinating such payments than would

mere friends or coworkers. This would tend to drive up the estimated social learning eﬀect for pairs


                                                  27
who are family members. In column 1 of Table 6, we consider the full speciﬁcation from column 4

of Table 3, but also including interactions of each of our condition dummy variables with a dummy

variable equal to one if investor 1 and investor 2 are family members (and the main eﬀect of the

family member indicator). The results suggest that the treatment eﬀects from social learning are

not stronger among family members – the point estimate of the interaction is almost exactly zero.36

       Desire to match peer’s inferred portfolio. One might also think that knowing that a peer

desired to purchase an asset (even if he was unable to make the purchase) provides an indication of

that peer’s portfolio, or future asset purchases outside of the study. As a result, the social learning

condition could potentially also contain some (anticipated or approximate) possession eﬀect. We

believe this eﬀect is likely to have been small for several reasons. First, the speciﬁc asset sold in

the study was not otherwise available; and, even if an investor wished to approximately reconstruct

the asset, this would have been diﬃcult. The real estate note (LCI ) that we oﬀered as a part of

the asset is usually not available to this set of clients – they typically have access only to another

real estate note at worse terms. In addition, the minimum investment in a real estate note is

usually R$10,000 (instead of R$1,000 in our study), making entry into this sort of asset diﬃcult.

All this information was known to the investors in our sample, and as a result, they might infer

that their peer would ﬁnd it diﬃcult to purchase similar assets outside of the study. Finally, there

is no reason to expect possession eﬀects based on inferences about investor 1’s portfolio to drive

investment decisions so disproportionately among unsophisticated investor 2’s, and predominantly

in response to choices made by sophisticated investor 1’s.



       There are also some concerns that could aﬀect one’s interpretation of both condition (2) and

condition (3).

       Sharing information with other clients. One concern with our design is that in condition

(1), there is no mention of another investor’s choice, while in conditions (2) and (3) there is. One

might worry that investor 2’s in condition (2) or (3) made their investment decisions while thinking

about the possibility of their choices being discovered by their peers. A ﬁrst concern is that their
  36
    In Table 6, we present the coeﬃcients on the interaction terms, but the full set of estimated coeﬃcients is available
from the authors upon request.


                                                           28
purchase decision would be communicated to their peers by the brokerage. Importantly, however,

the vast majority of our investors (all but 5) were known to have links with only one other client

(their associated investor 1). Thus, once the oﬀer was made to investor 1, investor 2 typically had

no other peer who was a client of the brokerage, and who might receive the oﬀer (and, in fact, no

information about investor 2 was ever shared). Our results are robust to dropping the 5 investor

2’s who were part of larger networks of clients (results available upon request). To further examine

this concern, in the follow-up survey, we asked investor 2’s in conditions (2) and (3) if they were

concerned about the possibility that their purchase decision would be revealed to other clients.

Only 11% of the respondents replied “yes,” and our results are robust to dropping these investors

(results available upon request).

       Finally, investor 2’s in conditions (2) and (3) might have felt a need to conform, anticipating their

peer asking them about their decision after the phone call (although investor 1 was never provided

with any information about their peer). However, the existence of the lottery to implement a

purchase decision provided investor 2’s with cover for a non-conforming choice, thus mitigating this

concern.37

       Eﬀects of the lottery to authorize investments. One might wonder if the presence of

the lottery signiﬁcantly distorted decisions by making the asset appear to be extremely scarce and

desirable. We do not believe this was the case. First, it is important to remember that the asset

used in the study could not be re-sold on the market following purchase, so the lottery did not send

a signal about external demand for the asset. Second, we can compare the take-up rates in our

experiment to those in a prior pilot study without a lottery to authorize investments: the purchase

rate in the pilot study was 12 of 25, or 48% – very similar to what we observe among investors in

our study receiving no information about their peers. Evidence from the follow-up survey is also

informative: we asked investor 2’s in conditions (1), (2), and (3) whether the presence of the lottery

was a signiﬁcant factor in their purchase decision. Only 4.3% of respondents reported that it was
  37
    Hearing about a peer might also simply increase the attention an investor pays to the broker’s sales pitch. While
we cannot rule out a change in attention playing a role in our results, we believe that our ﬁndings of heterogeneous
treatment eﬀects and survey evidence on updated beliefs are more suggestive of actual learning than simply paying
greater attention. For example, one’s ears are likely to perk up when hearing about any peer’s choice; but, one is
more likely to learn from the choice of a sophisticated friend, just as we ﬁnd.



                                                         29
(and our results are robust to dropping them from our analysis). Finally, it is worth noting that

the use of lotteries in the sale of ﬁnancial assets is not as unusual as it may appear at ﬁrst glance.

For example, Instefjord et al. (2007) describe the use of lotteries to allocate shares when IPO’s are

oversubscribed.

   Diﬀerential strength of revealed preference signal. Because our comparisons of interest

are all among conditions that included the lottery, it is unlikely that a “level eﬀect” of the lottery

could generate the peer eﬀects we observe. However, an especially important question is whether

the lottery interacted with the information provided in condition (2) or (3). For example, our

experimental design assumes that investor 1’s revealed preference for the asset sends the same signal

about asset quality regardless of whether the lottery awarded the asset to investor 1. However, one

might be concerned that in condition (3), learning that investor 1 possessed the asset might have

enhanced the revealed preference signal, relative to condition (2). If so, this would imply that part

of the treatment eﬀect we observe in condition (3) is a social learning eﬀect, rather than a social

utility eﬀect.

   One possibility is that investor 2’s in condition (2) believed that their associated investor 1’s

did not really want the asset, and the lottery result acted as a cover for this preference; in condition

(3), on the other hand, the lottery outcome might have served as a signal that investor 1’s really

did want the asset. In the follow-up survey, we asked investor 2’s in conditions (2) and (3) if they

believed the information provided by the broker that their peer chose to purchase the asset, and

97% replied “yes.” This suggests that doubt about investor 1’s purchase decision did not play an

important role in investor 2’s decisions. A related possibility is that investor 2’s in conditions (2)

and (3) viewed the lottery outcome as a signal of whether investor 1’s chose to follow through with

their purchase decision. In the follow-up survey, we asked investor 2’s in conditions (1), (2), and (3)

if, when making their decision, they thought they could change their choice after the realization of

the lottery; 94% of them answered “no.” Thus, it is unlikely that investor 2’s viewed the purchase

decision as non-binding, and the lottery as a signal of investor 1’s true preferences. Our results are

robust to dropping investors responding diﬀerently from the majority to either of these questions

(results available upon request).


                                                  30
   We also examine direct evidence on belief updating in conditions (2) and (3). In the raw

data from the follow-up survey, we ﬁnd some evidence of more frequent positive belief updating

in condition (3) than in condition (2): 57% of individuals in condition (2) reported positively

updating their beliefs, while 74% of individuals in condition (3) did (the p-value on the diﬀerence

is 0.23). While this gap is of some concern, we have reason to believe that it does not explain

the treatment eﬀect we observe in condition (3). First, we estimate the full speciﬁcation of our

empirical model, Table 3, column 4, using the the follow-up survey’s indicator of a positive belief

update as the outcome, for investor 2’s in conditions (2) and (3). We ﬁnd that the point estimate of

the coeﬃcient on condition (3) is just 0.06 (with a p-value of 0.74; results available upon request).

Thus, the evidence suggests that conditional on controls, the diﬀerential belief updating across

conditions was very small, and unlikely to have driven our treatment eﬀects.

   In addition, we examine whether there was diﬀerential take-up across experimental conditions

among investors who did not positively update their beliefs. If diﬀerential belief updating (rather

than deciding to invest due to social utility motives) drove the higher take-up rate in condition (3),

one would expect similar (relatively low) take-up rates among investors in conditions (2) and (3)

who did not positively update their beliefs. Although sample sizes are small, we ﬁnd qualitative

evidence supportive of social utility eﬀects. Among investor 2’s who did not positively update

their beliefs, the purchase rate was 56% in condition (2), and 71% in condition (3), suggesting that

investors in condition (3) were more likely to have additional motives for purchasing the asset.

   Changes in supply side behavior. Our study manipulates information received by agents

on the demand side of a ﬁnancial market. Of course, there is a supply side in this market as well,

and one might be concerned that supply-side factors interact with our experimental treatments.

For example, brokers could exert diﬀerential eﬀort toward selling the asset under diﬀerent exper-

imental conditions; more generally, the experiment was not double blind, which might aﬀect the

implementation of the design.

   Fortunately, we believe that the impact of the supply side on our measured treatment eﬀects

was likely limited. First, because brokers were compensated based on the assets they sold, they

were incentivized to sell the asset in all conditions, rather than to conﬁrm any particular hypothesis.


                                                  31
If broker eﬀort did vary across conditions, one might have expected brokers to learn how to use

the information in the various conditions more eﬀectively as they made more sales calls. Thus, if

broker behavior was important in generating our results, one would expect a signiﬁcant interaction

between a broker’s prior experience in the experiment and the experimental conditions. We estimate

the full speciﬁcation of Table 3, column 4, but including an interaction of each condition dummy

variable with a measure of broker experience in the study: for each date of the study, we calculate

the number of calls each broker had made before that date (we also include the main eﬀect of

broker experience). The estimates of these interactions, presented in Table 6, column 2 , show

that broker experience does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the estimated treatment eﬀects, suggesting that

brokers were not driving the treatment eﬀects we observe.38


3.3.4     External Validity

A ﬁnal important concern with our design regards the external validity of the ﬁndings. There are

several important qualiﬁcations to the generality of the treatment eﬀects we estimate. First, it is

important to note that the type of social learning on which we focus is that of classic models, such

as Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992): learning that occurs upon observation of the

revealed preference decision to purchase made by a peer. Of course, there are other types of social

learning that might occur in ﬁnance, such as learning about the existence of an asset, or learning

occurring after the purchase (when to sell the asset, when to buy more); these channels are shut

down in our study because of the design of the ﬁnancial asset. However, these other forms of social

learning are likely important as well.

    Second, our treatment eﬀects are estimated from the behavior of a particular sample of investors.

Our comparisons among investor 2’s in conditions (1), (2), and (3) are conditional on investor

1 choosing to purchase the asset. If this was an unusual sample of investor 1’s, perhaps the

associated investor 2’s were unusual as well, and thus generate peer eﬀects that cannot be viewed
   38
      In Table 6, we present the coeﬃcients on the interaction terms, but the full set of estimated coeﬃcients is available
from the authors upon request. We have also examined the eﬀects of broker experience within the experiment using a
less parametric speciﬁcation, plotting take-up rates by experimental condition, across quartiles of broker experience
in the study. We ﬁnd that social learning and social utility eﬀects are remarkably consistent across quartiles (results
available upon request).



                                                            32
as representative even within our experimental sample. In fact, when comparing investor 1’s who

chose to purchase the asset to those who chose not to purchase it, one sees that their observable

characteristics are very similar (see Table 1, columns 3 and 4). The investor 2’s associated with

investor 1’s who chose to purchase the asset are also similar to those associated with investor

1’s who chose not to purchase it (see Table 1, columns 6 and 7). We also ﬁnd that, among

investor 2’s receiving no information about their peers, investor 2’s associated with investor 1’s who

chose to purchase the asset (condition (1)) have a similar purchase rate to investor 2’s associated

with investor 1’s who chose not to purchase the asset (“negative selection”); see Table 3. This

suggests that conditioning on investor 1’s wanting to purchase the asset does not produce an

unusual subsample from which we estimate treatment eﬀects.

       Another concern is that our experimental sample of investors might be atypical: we study the

behavior of investors who had referred (or had been referred by) other clients to the brokerage

in the past. One might wonder how diﬀerent our sample of investors is from other clients of the

brokerage. In Table 1, column 8, we present characteristics of the full set of the brokerage’s clients

from the ﬁrm’s main oﬃce. Although the clients in our study’s sample are not a random sample of

the brokerage’s clients, we ﬁnd that their observable characteristics are roughly similar to the full

set of clients of the main oﬃce. This evidence suggests that our sample is of interest, though it is

surely not representative of all investors.

       Finally, one may question the representativeness of the form of communication studied in our

experiment. Certainly, peers often communicate among themselves, rather than being informed

about each other’s activity by a broker trying to make a sale.39 Our study focuses on third-party

communication generating peer eﬀects. Importantly, the sorts of calls we study are widely used: the

brokerage informed us that sales calls similar to those in the study account for approximately 70%

of its sales.40 Of course, in interpreting the magnitude of our eﬀects, one might wish to consider the
  39
     Duﬂo and Saez (2003) present evidence that information about investment opportunities does ﬂow naturally
among peers; our goal of disentangling separate channels of peers’ inﬂuence required control over information ﬂows.
  40
     While brokers generally do not provide information about speciﬁc clients’ purchases, discussions with the broker-
age indicate that brokers regularly discuss the behavior of other investors in their sales calls. It is also worth noting
that in the U.S., investors commonly turn to brokers for ﬁnancial advice and to undertake transactions. Hung et al.
(2008) ﬁnd that nearly half of a broad sample of Americans used a ﬁnancial services provider; of these, three-quarters
used them for advice or to undertake transactions.



                                                           33
likelihood of information transfer in the real world; our design estimates the impact of information

about one’s peers conditional on receiving information – the endogenous acquisition of information

is not studied here.



4    Conclusion

Peer eﬀects are an important, and often confounding, topic of study across the social sciences. In

many settings – particularly in ﬁnance – identifying why a person’s choices are aﬀected by his peers’

is extremely important, beyond identifying peer eﬀects overall. Our experimental design not only

allows us to identify peer eﬀects in investment decisions, it also decouples revealed preference from

possession, allowing us to provide evidence that learning from one’s peer’s purchase decision and

changing behavior due to a peer’s possession of an asset both aﬀect investment decisions.

    Our ﬁndings should be extended in several directions. Most fundamentally, it is important to

determine their external validity. We are limited to studying a single asset; a single mechanism

through which peers’ choices were communicated; and, pairs of socially-related individuals. One

might be interested in whether our ﬁndings extend to assets with diﬀerent expected returns or

diﬀerent exposures to risk; or, to investment decisions made from a larger choice set. One might

also wish to study whether information transmitted directly among peers has a diﬀerent eﬀect

from information transmitted through brokers. Of course, the selection of information transmitted

by brokers and by peers will be endogenous, and studying the process determining which infor-

mation gets transmitted, and to whom, would be of great interest. Finally, studying information

transmission through a broader network of socially-related individuals is important as well.

    To the extent that our results do shed light on ﬁnancial decision making beyond our experimental

context, it is important to understand what they imply for asset pricing and for policies that attempt

to limit ﬁnancial market instability. For example, herds based on social learning could be mitigated

if more, and better, information is made available to investors. On the other hand, information

provision will be less successful in limiting correlated choices among peers if those correlated choices

are driven by social utility. Our ﬁndings suggest that information provision could reduce market



                                                  34
instability, but only to a certain point, because a signiﬁcant component of the peer eﬀects we ﬁnd

was generated by social utility. Our results also point to an important interaction between ﬁnancial

literacy and herding behavior, which deserves further study.

    In addition to the context of ﬁnancial decision making, our experimental design could be used

in other settings to identify the channels through which peer eﬀects work. In marketing, various

social media rely on diﬀerent peer eﬀect channels: Facebook “likes”, Groupon sales, and product

give-aways all rely on some combination of the channels studied here. Future work can compare the

eﬀectiveness of these strategies, and their impact through diﬀerent channels, using designs similar

to ours. One could also apply our experimental design to the study of technology adoption: one

might wish to distinguish between learning from a peer’s purchase decision and the desire to adopt

technologies used by people nearby.41 Finally, health-promoting behavior often is aﬀected both by

learning from peers’ purchases and by peers’ actual use of health care technology (e.g., vaccination

or smoking cessation).42 In these settings and others, separately identifying the roles of social

learning and social utility might be of interest to policymakers.



References

Abel, Andrew B., “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses,”

  American Economic Review, 1990, 80 (2), 38–42.

Allcott, Hunt, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95,

  1082–1095.

Angelucci, Manuela, Giacomo de Giorgi, and Imran Rasul, “Resource Pooling Within

  Family Networks: Insurance and Investment,” March 2012. Stanford University Working Paper.
  41
     Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) and Conley and Udry (2010) identify the important role played by social learning
in technology adoption. Social utility might exist in this setting because using a technology might be easier or less
expensive when others nearby use it (network externalities); because one wishes not to fall behind those living nearby;
etc.
  42
     One can also learn about health care products from a peer’s experience of the product – a type of learning we
do not consider in this study. Kremer and Miguel (2007) study the transmission of knowledge about de-worming
medication through social networks. Sorensen (2006) studies social learning in employees’ choices of health plans.




                                                          35
Asch, Salomon E., “Eﬀects of Group Pressure on the Modiﬁcation and Distortion of Judgments,”

  in Harold Guetzkow, ed., Groups, Leadership and Men, Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press, 1951,

  pp. 177–190.

Avery, Christopher and Peter Zemsky, “Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior in

  Financial Markets,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (4), 724–748.

Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih, “Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments

  that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage,” 2009. NBER Working

  Paper 15386.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, “Social Incentives in the Workplace,”

  Review of Economic Studies, April 2010, 77 (2), 417–459.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  1992, 107 (3), 797–817.

  , Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duﬂo, and Matthew O. Jackson, “The Diﬀusion of

  Microﬁnance,” August 2011. MIT Department of Economics Working Paper.

Becker, Gary S., “A Note on Restaurant Pricing and Other Examples of Social Inﬂuences on

  Price,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1991, 99 (5), 1109–1116.

Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland, “Social Identity and

  Preferences,” American Economic Review, September 2010, 100 (4), 1913–1928.

Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Network Eﬀects

  and Welfare Cultures,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2000, 115 (3), 1019–1055.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Katherine L.

  Milkman, “The Eﬀect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions,” August

  2011. NBER Working Paper 17345.

Bikhchandani, Sushil and Sunil Sharma, “Herd Behavior in Financial Markets: A Review,”

  2000. IMF Working Paper No. 00/48.

                                              36
  , David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural

  Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (5), 992–1026.

Bobonis, Gustavo and Frederico Finan, “Neighborhood Peer Eﬀects in Secondary School

  Enrollment Decisions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 695–716.

Brown, Jeﬀrey R., Zoran Ivkovic, Paul A. Smith, and Scott Weisbenner, “Neighbors

  Matter: Causal Community Eﬀects and Stock Market Participation,” Journal of Finance, June

  2008, 63 (3), 1509–1531.

Burnkrant, Robert E. and Alain Cousineau, “Informational and Normative Social Inﬂuence

  in Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research, 1975, 2 (3), 206–215.

Cai, Hongbin, Yuyu Chen, and Hanming Fang, “Observational Learning: Evidence from a

  Randomized Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 864–882.

Cai, Jing, Alain De Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Social Networks and the Decision to

  Insure,” October 2012. University of Michigan Working Paper.

Calvo-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew O. Jackson, “Peer Pressure,” Journal of the European

  Economic Association, January 2010, 8 (1), 62–89.

Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based

  Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (2),

  205–251.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez, “Inequality at Work:

  The Eﬀect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction,” 2010. NBER Working Paper 16396.

  and Laura Giuliano, “Peer Eﬀects and Multiple Equilibria in the Risky Behavior of Friends,”

  May 2011. NBER Working Paper 17088.

Carrell, Scott E. and Mark L. Hoekstra, “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children

  Exposed to Domestic Violence Aﬀect Everyone’s Kids,” American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics, January 2010, 2 (1), 211–228.

                                              37
  , Bruce I. Sacerdote, and James E. West, “From Natural Variation to Optimal Policy?

  The Lucas Critique Meets Peer Eﬀects,” 2011. NBER Working Paper 16865.

Celen, Bogachan and Shachar Kariv, “Distinguishing Informational Cascades from Herd Be-

  havior in the Laboratory,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (3), 484–497.

Chari, Varadarajan V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Financial Crises as Herds: Overturning the

  Critiques,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2004, 119 (1), 128–150.

Chen, Yan, F. Maxwell Harper, Joseph Konstan, and Sherry Xin Li, “Social Compar-

  isons and Contributions to Online Communities: A Field Experiment on MovieLens,” American

  Economic Review, September 2010, 100 (4), 1358–1398.

Clark, Andrew E. and Andrew J. Oswald, “Comparison-concave Utility and Following Be-

  haviour in Social and Economic Settings,” Journal of Public Economics, 1998, 70 (1), 133–155.

Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry, “Learning about a New Technology: Pineap-

  ple in Ghana,” American Economic Review, March 2010, 100 (1), 35–69.

Cooper, David J. and Mari Rege, “Misery Loves Company: Social Regret and Social Interac-

  tion Eﬀects in Choices Under Risk and Uncertainty,” Games and Economic Behavior, September

  2011, 73 (1), 91–110.

Costa, Dora and Matthew E. Kahn, “Energy Conservation ”Nudges” and Environmentalist

  Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field Experiment,” 2010. NBER

  Working Paper 15939.

Dahl, Gordon B., Katrine V. Loken, and Magne Mogstad, “Peer Eﬀects in Program

  Participation,” June 2012. UC-San Diego Working Paper.

de Giorgi, Giacomo, Michele Pellizzari, and Silvia Redaelli, “Identiﬁcation of Social In-

  teractions through Partially Overlapping Peer Groups,” American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics, April 2010, 2 (2), 241–275.



                                              38
DeMarzo, Peter M., Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel, “Persuasion Bias, Social In-

  ﬂuence, and Unidimensional Opinions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2003, 118 (3),

  909–968.

  , Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, “Diversiﬁcation as a Public Good: Community Eﬀects in

  Portfolio Choice,” The Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (4), 1677–1716.

  ,    , and    , “Relative Wealth Concerns and Financial Bubbles,” Review of Financial Studies,

  2008, 21 (1), 19–50.

Duﬂo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Re-

  tirement Plans Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-

  nomics, 2003, 118 (3), 815–842.

  , Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer, “Peer Eﬀects, Teacher Incentives, and the Impact

  of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” American Economic Review,

  2011, 101 (5), 1739–1774.

Durlauf, Steven N., “Neighborhood Eﬀects,” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 2004,

  4.

Festinger, Leon, “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes,” Journal: Human Relations, 1954,

  7, 117–140.

Fliessbach, Klaus, Bernd Weber, Peter Trautner, Thomas J. Dohmen, Uwe Sunde,

  Christian E. Elger, and Armin Falk, “Social Comparison Aﬀects Reward-Related Brain

  Activity in the Human Ventral Striatum,” Science, 2007, 318 (5854), 1305–1308.

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:

  Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy, December

  1995, 103 (6), 1176–1209.




                                               39
Frey, Bruno S. and Stephen Meier, “Social Comparisons and Pro-social Behavior: Testing

  ”Conditional Cooperation” in a Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, December 2004,

  94 (5), 1717–1722.

Gali, Jordi, “Keeping Up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice, and

  Asset Prices,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1994, 26 (1), 1–8.

Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Seppo Ikaheimo, “Social Inﬂuence and Consump-

  tion: Evidence from the Automobile Purchases of Neighbors,” Review of Economics and Statis-

  tics, November 2008, 90 (4), 735–753.

Guarino, Antonio and Philippe Jehiel, “Social Learning with Coarse Inference,” American

  Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

Guryan, Jonathan, Kory Kroft, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Peer Eﬀects in the Work-

  place: Evidence from Random Groupings in Professional Golf Tournaments,” American Eco-

  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 34–68.

Harrison, Glenn W. and John A. List, “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature,

  December 2004, 42 (4), 1009–1055.

Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh, “Herd Behaviour and Cascading in Capital Markets:

  a Review and Synthesis,” European Financial Management, March 2003, 9 (1), 25–66.

Hong, Harrison, Jeﬀrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, “Social Interaction and Stock-market

  Participation,” Journal of Finance, February 2004, 59 (1), 137–163.

  , Jeﬀrey Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, “Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Eﬀects in

  the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers,” The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60, 2801–2824.

Hung, Angela A., Noreen Clancy, Jeﬀ Dominitz, Eric Talley, Claude Berrebi, and

  Farrukh Suvankulov, “Investor and Industry Perspectives on Investment Advisers and Broker-

  Dealers,” 2008. RAND Institute for Civil Justice Technical Report.



                                               40
Instefjord, Norvald, Jerry Coakley, and Zhe Shen, “The Winner’s Curse and Lottery-

  Allocated IPOs in China,” February 2007. University of Essex Working Paper.

Ivkovic, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, “Information Diﬀusion Eﬀects in Individual Investors’

  Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy Neighbors’ Investment Choices,” Review of Financial

  Studies, 2007, 20 (4), 1327–1357.

Kling, Jeﬀrey R., Jeﬀrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of

  Neighborhood Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75, 83–119.

Kremer, Michael and Edward Miguel, “The Illusion of Sustainability,” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics, August 2007, 122 (3), 1007–1065.

Kuhn, Peter, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn, “The Eﬀects of

  Lottery Prizes on Winners and Their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery,”

  American Economic Review, August 2011, 101 (5), 2226–2247.

Li, Geng, “Information Sharing and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from Extended Fami-

  lies,” 2009. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion

  Series, 2009-47.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, “Financial literacy and retirement planning in the

  United States,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, September 2011, 10 (4), 509–525.

  and      , “Financial literacy around the world: an overview,” Journal of Pension Economics and

  Finance, September 2011, 10 (4), 497–508.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P., “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,” Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (3), 963–1002.

Maertens, Annemie, “Who Cares What Others Think (or Do)? Social Learning, Social Pressures

  and Imitation in Cotton Farming in India,” February 2012. University of Pittsburgh Working

  Paper.



                                                41
Manski, Charles F., “Identiﬁcation of Endogenous Social Eﬀects: The Reﬂection Problem,”

  Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531–542.

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti, “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99

  (1), 112–145.

Moretti, Enrico, “Social Learning and Peer Eﬀects in Consumption: Evidence from Movie Sales,”

  Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (1), 356–393.

Moscarini, Giuseppe, Marco Ottaviani, and Lones Smith, “Social Learning in a Changing

  World,” Economic Theory, May 1998, 11 (3), 657–665.

Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer Eﬀects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates,”

  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2), 681–704.

Shue, Kelly, “Executive Networks and Firm Policies: Evidence from the Random Assignment of

  MBA Peers,” April 2012. University of Chicago, Booth School of Business.

Sorensen, Alan T., “Social Learning and Health Plan Choice,” RAND Journal of Economics,

  Winter 2006, 37 (4), 929–945.

Taylor, Chris, “Tight Budgets, Wild Markets Hurt Investment Clubs,” December 2011.




                                              42
Figures and Tables


                        Figure 1: Experimental design “roadmap”



                     ! ! "*' ! 
                                           % !0% !1


                                       % !0%!$!'
                                                     
                                !$  !&!$!'"
                                         $!% !1- ,



                              ,
                                  ,                  !,

                                                                   
                                                               
        !%! !,                                           %! !,
                     
                                                                                    
                     
                                                                                    
    
                                   
                                          
                                                                     
     % !1-       % !1- .& 
                                        !% !0-        % !1- 
    $!+% !                                   $!+% !
    0&!! !)$!&         &!! !/%
                                       "$!         0&!! !)& 
    $!$ !,                                         !$ !,
                                       % !0




                                                 43
                                       Figure 2: Investor 2’s take-up rates


                  1
                  .9
                  .8
                  .7
                  .6
                  .5




                                                                          93%
                  .4




                                                  71%
                  .3




                            42%
                  .2




                                                                                                39%
                  .1
                  0




                       Condition (1)          Condition (2)           Condition (3)      Negative selection
                                                              Group



Note: This ﬁgure presents the mean (and 95% conﬁdence interval) of the take-up rate for each group of investor 2’s. Investors
in conditions (1) to (3) have peers who wanted the asset. These investors were randomly allocated to one of these 3 groups.
Those in condition (1) had no information about their peers. Those in condition (2) had information that their peers wanted
to purchase the asset but had that choice rejected by the lottery. Those in condition (3) had information that their peers
wanted and received the asset. Investors in the negative selection group have peers who did not want to purchase the asset
(and received no information about their peer).




                                                              44
                      Table 1: Characteristics of the Experimental Sample
                                                  Experimental Sample
                                         Investor 1                           Investor 2                 Universe
                       Full      All      Wanted the asset?       All       Peer wanted the asset?
                     Sample                 Yes        No                     Yes          No
                       (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)              (8)
   Age                38.15     39.12      39.60     38.60       37.18       36.45       37.97            34.14
                      (0.80)    (1.14)    (1.60)     (1.62)      (1.12)     (1.50)       (1.68)           (0.16)

   Gender             0.680     0.747     0.769      0.722         0.613     0.641        0.583            0.729
   (=1 If male)      (0.027)   (0.036)   (0.048)    (0.053)       (0.040)   (0.055)      (0.059)          (0.006)

   Married            0.413     0.440     0.436      0.444         0.387     0.333        0.444            0.340
                     (0.028)   (0.041)   (0.057)    (0.059)       (0.040)   (0.054)      (0.059)          (0.006)

   Single             0.557     0.527     0.513      0.542         0.587     0.628        0.542            0.647
                     (0.029)   (0.041)   (0.057)    (0.059)       (0.040)   (0.055)      (0.059)          (0.006)

   Earnings           4,500     5,000     5,000      5,000         4,000     4,000        3,500            3,200
                      (256)     (499)     (501)      (775)         (507)     (504)        (650)            (126)

   Relationship        0.48      0.48      0.53       0.43         0.48      0.53         0.43               -
   with associated    (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.04)    (0.06)       (0.06)
   investor
   (=1 if family)

   N                    300        150        78         72          150        78           72             5506
Notes: Column 1 presents the characteristics of the experimental sample, combining investor 1’s and investor
2’s. Column 2 presents the sample characteristics of investor 1’s in the experimental sample, while columns 3
and 4 present the information for investor 1’s who wanted and who did not want the asset, respectively. Column
5 presents the characteristics of investors 2’s in the experimental sample, while columns 6 and 7 present the
information for investor 2’s whose peers wanted and did not want the asset, respectively. Column 8 presents the
characteristics of the universe of investors in the main oﬃce of the brokerage. Each line presents averages of the
corresponding variable. For earnings, we present the median value instead of the mean due to large outliers. The
sample size for the earnings variable is smaller due to missing values. The omitted value for “Relationship with
associated investor” is “friends”. This variable is not deﬁned for investors outside the experiment’s sample.




                                                         45
                                                   Table 2: Covariates balance
                                 Investor 2 conditional on investor 1 wanted to purchase the asset
                                 Control Learning         Learning                    p-value of test:                   N
                                              only      + possession (1)=(2)=(3)       (1)=(2)       (1)=(3)   (2)=(3)
                                  N=26       N=24          N=28
                                    (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)       (7)     (8)
      Age                         37.92      34.50          36.75         0.59           0.31          0.75     0.57     78
                                  (2.16)     (2.55)        (2.98)

      Gender (=1 If male)         0.654     0.667         0.607          0.90            0.93         0.73      0.66     78
                                 (0.095)   (0.098)       (0.094)

      Married                     0.385     0.250         0.357          0.56            0.31         0.84      0.41     78
                                 (0.097)   (0.090)       (0.092)

      Single                      0.538     0.708         0.643          0.47            0.22         0.44      0.62     78
                                 (0.100)   (0.095)       (0.092)




46
      Earnings                    4,000     4,000         4,500          0.81            0.79         0.68      0.52     67
                                  (782)     (534)        (1,941)

       Relationship with            0.46       0.67        0.46           0.24           0.15          0.98       0.14    78
       investor 1 (=1 if family) (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.10)
     Notes: The sample is conditioned on investor 2’s whose associated investor 1’s wanted to purchase the asset. Each line
     presents averages of the corresponding variable for each treatment group. Robust standard errors in parentheses. For
     each variable, the p-value of an F-test that the mean of the corresponding variable is the same for all treatment groups
     is presented in column 4. The p-values of F-tests on pairwise treatment group comparisons are presented in columns 5
     to 7. For earnings, we present the median and the p-value of a test that the median of this variable is the same for all
     treatment groups. The sample size for the earnings variable is smaller due to missing values.
Table 3: Peer Eﬀects, Social Learning, Social Utility, and Selection: Take-up Rates
  Dependent variable                               Wanted to purchase the asset
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)

  Learning alone                                   0.285**    0.298**      0.328**    0.278**
  (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                  (0.136)    (0.140)      (0.134)    (0.127)

  Learning and possession                          0.505***   0.540***    0.552***    0.500***
  (Condition (3) - Condition (1))                   (0.110)    (0.122)     (0.123)     (0.111)

  Negative selection                                -0.034     0.011        -0.005     0.042
                                                   (0.114)    (0.124)      (0.118)    (0.117)

  Investor 1                                                                           0.128
                                                                                      (0.106)

  Possession alone                                 0.220**    0.242**      0.224*     0.222**
  (Condition (3) - Condition (2))                  (0.106)    (0.109)      (0.124)    (0.108)

  Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)                          0.423
  (Condition (1))                                                     (0.099)

  Broker ﬁxed eﬀects                                 No         Yes             Yes     Yes

  Controls                                           No         No              Yes     Yes

   N                                                  150        150         150        300
   R2                                                0.186      0.228       0.283      0.219
 Notes: Column 1 presents the results of a regression of a dummy variable equal to one
 if the investor wanted to purchase the asset on a dummy for condition (3), a dummy for
 condition (2), and a dummy indicating whether the associated investor 1 did not want to
 purchase the asset (“Negative selection”). Investor 2’s in condition (1) is the omitted group.
 This regression uses only the sample of investor 2’s. The regression presented in column 2
 includes broker ﬁxed eﬀects. The regression presented in column 3 includes the covariates
 presented in Table 2. We did not include earnings as this would reduce our sample size
 (results including earnings are similar). The regression presented in column 4 combines the
 sample of investors 1 and 2, and includes an indicator variable for investor 1. Standard
 errors are clustered at the pair level. In all columns, “Possession alone” gives the diﬀerence
 between the coeﬃcient on “Learning and possession” and the coeﬃcient on “Learning alone.”
 * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.




                                              47
Table 4: Peer Eﬀects, Social Learning, Social Utility, and Selection: Alternative Out-
comes
 Dependent variable                          Amount invested        Invested more than minimum
                                             (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)

 Learning alone                                948.7***        715.2*      0.212**        0.173*
 (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                (357.7)        (394.5)     (0.097)        (0.095)

 Learning and possession                       2,633.2***    2,521.4***   0.497***       0.485***
 (Condition (3) - Condition (1))                 (702.9)       (611.9)     (0.103)        (0.101)

 Negative selection                              -106.8         123.9       -0.038         -0.016
                                                (239.0)        (308.6)     (0.038)        (0.049)

 Investor 1                                                    503.8*                     0.097*
                                                               (300.1)                    (0.053)


 Possession alone                              1,684.5**      1,806.1**   0.286**         0.311**
 (Condition (3) - Condition (2))                (731.4)        (727.0)    (0.131)         (0.128)

 Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)              884.6            0.038
 (Condition (1))                                         (210.0)          (0.038)


 Broker ﬁxed eﬀects                                 No             Yes       No             Yes

 Controls                                           No             Yes       No             Yes

 N                                                 150         300           150            300
 R2                                               0.251       0.264         0.338          0.295
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 replicate the regressions in columns 1 and 4 of Table 3 using the amount invested
in the asset instead of take-up rate as dependent variable. Columns 3 and 4 replicate the regressions in
columns 1 and 4 of Table 3 using a dummy variable equal to one if the investor invested more than the
minimum amount as dependent variable. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.




                                               48
       Table 5: Heterogeneity of Social Learning Eﬀects - Self-Assessed Measure of Financial Sophistication
                                                     Investor 2 is ﬁnancially     Associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially
                                                          sophisticated                     sophisticated
                                                                      p-value of                        p-value of
                                                 Yes         No      test (1)=(2)   Yes       No       test (4)=(5)
                                                  (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)           (6)
      Panel A: no controls
      Learning alone                            -0.017 0.583***          0.047    0.380** 0.127            0.422
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))          (0.227) (0.185)                    (0.171) (0.261)


      Panel B: full speciﬁcation
      Learning alone                                    0.059    0.687**        0.070         0.365**     0.068         0.527
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                  (0.363)   (0.323)                      (0.174)    (0.409)


       Mean (no information; peer chose the asset) 0.462          0.333        0.566           0.389    0.429           0.864




49
       (Condition (1))                                 (0.145) (0.165)                        (0.120) (0.195)
     Notes: Panel A presents social learning treatment eﬀects estimated from regressions without controls (i.e., comparisons
     of means) using investor 2’s in conditions (1) and (2). In columns 1–2, we estimate separate social learning eﬀects for
     ﬁnancially sophisticated and ﬁnancially unsophisticated investor 2’s, respectively. We regress the investment decision
     dummy variable on a “ﬁnancially sophisticated” indicator; an interaction between a condition (2) indicator and the
     ﬁnancially sophisticated indicator; and, an interaction between a condition (2) indicator and a “ﬁnancially unsophisticated”
     indicator. Take-up rates for investor 2’s in condition (1) who are sophisticated, and unsophisticated, are listed in the last
     row. Column 3 shows the p-value from a test of equal social learning eﬀects for sophisticated and unsophisticated investor
     2’s. In columns 4–5, we estimate regressions analogous to columns 1–2, but studying heterogeneous social learning eﬀects
     depending on the associated investor 1’s ﬁnancial sophistication, instead of investor 2’s ﬁnancial sophistication. Take-up
     rates for investor 2’s in condition (1) associated with sophisticated, and unsophisticated, investor 1’s are listed in the last
     row. Column 6 shows the p-value from a test of equal social learning eﬀects for investor 2’s associated with sophisticated
     and unsophisticated 1’s. Panel B presents estimated social learning eﬀects from models analogous to those in Panel A,
     but also including baseline covariate controls and broker ﬁxed eﬀects. The ﬁnancial sophistication variable is based on the
     self-assessment question conducted in the follow-up survey described in the text. Investors rated their ﬁnancial knowledge
     from 1 (very low) to 7 (very high). Investors who reported 4 or higher were classiﬁed as ﬁnancially sophisticated. We had
     to exclude 7 out of 50 investor 2’s in conditions (1) and (2) from the regressions reported in columns 1–2, because we do
     not have information on ﬁnancial sophistication for them. We had to exclude 3 out of 50 investor 2’s in conditions (1) and
     (2) from the regressions reported in columns 4–5, because we do not have information on ﬁnancial sophistication for their
     associated investor 1’s. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.
                          Table 6: Robustness Tests
 Interaction of the             Relationship with        Broker experience
 treatment eﬀects with:      investor 1 (=1 if family) within the experiment
                                        (1)                       (2)
 Learning alone                        0.077                    -0.001
                                      (0.305)                  (0.008)

 Learning and possession             0.417*                      -0.003
                                     (0.232)                    (0.008)


 Possession alone                      0.340                       -0.001
                                      (0.220)                     (0.007)
Notes: This table presents coeﬃcients on the interactions of the variables
at the column heading with the treatment eﬀects of interest. These re-
sults are based on the regressions used in the full speciﬁcation of column 4
from Table 3, including interactions of the group dummies (Ic,i , where c ∈
{condition (2), condition (3), “negative selection”, investor 1}) with the corre-
sponding variables. We also include the main eﬀect of the corresponding vari-
able. In column 1, we interact the treatment eﬀects with a dummy variable
equal to one if the investors 1 and 2 are family members. The omitted cate-
gory is “friends”. In column 2, we interact the treatment eﬀects with a variable
indicating the number of calls that the broker had made before the day of the
call. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.




                                       50
                                         ONLINE APPENDIX

                                   (NOT FOR PUBLICATION)


Appendix A: A Simple Model of Financial Decisions Under Social

Inﬂuence

Our model studies an investment decision made by an individual under several conditions. First,

we present the investment decision under uncertainty, but with no social inﬂuence. Second, we

present the investment decision with social learning present, using the ingredients of a canonical

social learning model: a peer makes an investment acting on a private signal, and this action can be

used by another investor to make an informational inference before taking his own action. Third,

we allow the ownership of an asset to aﬀect a socially-related investor’s utility of owning the asset,

aside from any learning – that is, we allow for a social utility eﬀect. A peer’s purchase decision

typically will produce both social learning and social utility eﬀects; we consider a case in which

both eﬀects are active (the full “peer eﬀect”) and a case in which the revealed preference purchase

decision is de-coupled from possession. This de-coupling allows one to observe each channel through

which peer eﬀects work, and motivates our experimental design.


Investment without Peer Eﬀects

Consider an investor i’s decision to invest in a risky asset.43 The asset’s return is given by x, with

probability density function f (x), and investor i’s utility is ui (x) = u(x) for all i. In our ﬁeld

experiment, investors received calls from brokers who oﬀered them a ﬁnancial asset for purchase.

The brokers attempted to convey the same information about the asset in every call using a pre-

speciﬁed script; thus, the information they provided can be thought of as a signal, si , coming from

a single distribution, with probability density function g(si ). Importantly, not every investor would

have received exactly the same information: calls evolve in diﬀerent ways, investors ask diﬀerent
  43
    Note that we implicitly assume that when investing in isolation, investor i does not take into consideration any
investor j (j = i) at all – he is “unaware.” In the context of our experiment, we believe that this assumption is
reasonable, as we discuss in the text.


                                                        51
questions about the asset, etc., meaning that each investor received a diﬀerent signal realization,

si , from the common distribution of signals.

    For expositional simplicity, assume that the conditional density f (x|si ) satisﬁes the monotone

likelihood ratio property (MLRP) such that, intuitively, higher values of si are indicative of higher

values of x. Under these conditions, investor i is willing to invest if and only if

                                              
                                                  u(x)f (x|si )dx ≥ ū,                                            (2)


where ū denotes the outside option of the investor. Given that f (x|si ) satisﬁes MLRP and given

mild monotonicity assumptions on the utility function u(·) of the investor, there exists a unique

threshold s̄1 such that for any si ≥ s̄1 investor i is willing to invest. Denote the decision to buy

the asset made by investor i by bi = {0, 1}. Hence, for an investor making a purchase decision in

isolation, we have

                                                  bi = 1 ⇔ si ≥ s̄1 .                                              (3)


Investment with Social Learning Alone

Suppose that instead of making his investment choice in isolation, before making his own decision,

investor i observes the investment decision of investor j which is given by bj . Assume that investor

j made his choice bj = 1 in isolation and hence his decision rule is given by (3).44 Thus, when

investor i observes bj = 1 he correctly infers that sj ≥ s̄1 and he is willing to invest if and only if

                                         
                                             u(x)f (x|si ; sj ≥ s̄1 )dx ≥ ū.                                      (4)


Furthermore, given that f (x|si ; sj ) satisﬁes MLRP we have

                                                                  
                                    u(x)f (x|si ; sj ≥ s̄1 )dx ≥       u(x)f (x|si )dx,                            (5)

  44
     We focus on the case of investor i observing that investor j chose to purchase the asset (rather than choosing not
to purchase it) because in the experimental design, we were not allowed to inform investors that their peer chose not
to purchase the asset.




                                                          52
for all si . It is straightforward to show by comparing (4) and (2) that the signal realization threshold

for investor i that is necessary to induce purchase of the asset is lower when bj = 1 is observed than

when investor i makes his choice in isolation. This is because in the former case, regardless of his

own private information summarized by si , investor i has additional favorable information about

the asset from observing the purchase of investor j. This is the pure social learning eﬀect.

    Denote the threshold for si when investor i observes bj = 1 by s̄2 and note that s̄2 ≤ s̄1 . In

particular, after observing a purchase decision made by investor j, the decision rule of investor i is

given by

                                                  bi = 1 ⇔ si ≥ s̄2 .                                                 (6)


Social Utility and Social Learning

We now consider the situation in which both social utility and social learning eﬀects are present.

Our focus (following much of the literature on peer eﬀects in ﬁnancial decisions) is on social utility

eﬀects that result in a positive eﬀect of a peer’s possession of an asset (denoted by pj = {0, 1})

on one’s own utility.45 In particular, when investor i considers purchasing the asset, we assume

that u(x|pj = 1) ≥ u(x|pj = 0) for all x. That is, investor i’s utility is higher for all asset return

realizations if the asset is also possessed by an investor j who is a peer of investor i. Using the

notation of our model, an investor j’s purchase of an asset, bj = 1, typically implies both that

investor i infers favorable information about the asset, sj ≥ s̄1 , and that investor j now possesses

the asset, pj = 1, which might aﬀect investor i’s utility of owning the asset (due to a taste for joint

consumption, “keeping-up-with-the-Joneses” preferences).

    When investor i observes that investor j expressed an intention to invest, bj = 1, and was

allowed to invest, pj = 1, both investor i’s utility u(x|pj = 1) and his information about the asset

f (x|si ; sj ≥ s̄1 ) are aﬀected, relative to his choice in isolation (that is, relative to u(x) = u(x|pj = 0)
  45
     One could also imagine a negative correlation, for example, out of a desire to insure one’s peers, or to diﬀerentiate
oneself. See Clark and Oswald (1998).




                                                           53
and f (x|si )).46 In this case, one observes the “full” peer eﬀect, and investor i invests if and only if

                                     
                                         u(x|pj = 1)f (x|si ; sj ≥ s̄1 )dx ≥ ū.                                    (7)


Denote the threshold for si above which investor i is willing to invest when exposed to both peer

eﬀects channels by s̄3 . Then, the decision rule for investor i is given by


                                                 bi = 1 ⇔ si ≥ s̄3 .                                                (8)


    To separate the eﬀects of social learning and social utility, we need to decouple willingness

to purchase (and the informative signal of the purchase decision) from possession. Consider the

situation where investor i observes that investor j expressed a revealed preference to invest, but was

not allowed to do so (perhaps due to capacity constraints). In this case, investor i infers that sj ≥ s̄1 ,

but also knows that investor j did not obtain the asset, so pj = 0. This condition is equivalent

to the “social learning alone” problem discussed above: there is no direct eﬀect of possession on

investor i’s utility from the asset, but there is social learning. Thus, investor i purchases the asset

if and only if (4) is satisﬁed (since u(x) = u(x|pj = 0)) and this leads to the same decision rule as

(6) with the threshold s̄2 .

    The following proposition summarizes investor i’s purchase decisions across conditions.

Proposition 1. The threshold for the signal si above which investor i is willing to purchase the

asset (and, the likelihood of a purchase of the asset by investor i) is highest (lowest) when the

investor makes his decision in isolation, lower (higher) when he observes that investor j intended

to purchase the asset but did not obtain it, and lowest (highest) when investor j intended to purchase

the asset, and obtained it: s̄1 ≥ s̄2 ≥ s̄3 (and Pr(si ≥ s̄3 ) ≥ Pr(si ≥ s̄2 ) ≥ Pr(si ≥ s̄1 )).

Proof. The relationship between s̄1 and s̄2 follows immediately from comparing the inequalities

(2) and (4) and the monotone likelihood ratio property of f (x|si ; sj ). Similarly, comparison of the

inequalities (4) and (7) and u(x) = u(x|pj = 0) ≤ u(x|pj = 1) establishes that s̄2 ≥ s̄3 . Finally,
  46
     We are assuming here that the utility function discussed above, u(x), is the same as u(x|pj = 0) here. In addition,
we are assuming that investor j made his decision in isolation.


                                                          54
Pr(si ≥ s̄3 ) ≥ Pr(si ≥ s̄2 ) ≥ Pr(si ≥ s̄1 ) follows from the ranking of the thresholds.           



    The diﬀerence between s¯2 and s¯3 is the result of a diﬀerence in investor j’s possession of the

asset.47 In one situation investor j received favorable information and expressed an intent to

purchase the asset, but was unable to execute the purchase due to supply restrictions. In the other

situation investor j received a favorable signal and was also able to obtain the asset. Thus, in

the two cases investor i infers the same information (via investor j’s choice) about the potential

returns of asset x. However, only in the latter case is investor i’s utility directly inﬂuenced by the

investment outcome (and not just the purchase intention) of investor j. This is the social utility

eﬀect that raises the expected utility of purchasing the asset for investor i over and above the social

learning eﬀect. In the inequalities in Proposition 1, the eﬀect of social learning is captured by the

diﬀerence between Pr(si ≥ s̄2 ) and Pr(si ≥ s̄1 ), and the eﬀect of social utility is the diﬀerence

between Pr(si ≥ s̄3 ) and Pr(si ≥ s̄2 ). The total peer eﬀect is the diﬀerence between Pr(si ≥ s̄3 )

and Pr(si ≥ s̄1 ).



    Our analysis readily extends to the case in which investor i’s investment choice is continuous

rather than limited to a binary decision. In particular, since f (x|si ; sj ) satisﬁes MLRP, the optimal

investment in the asset is increasing in si and sj and the expected equilibrium investment amounts

will follow exactly the prediction regarding purchase rates in Proposition 1. Suppose individual

i chooses an investment magnitude qi∗ , rather than making a binary investment decision. Since

f (x|si ; sj ) satisﬁes MLRP, the optimal investment in the asset is increasing in si and sj and we can

rank the expected equilibrium investment amounts.

Proposition 2. The expected equilibrium investment amount qi∗ of investor i is lowest when the

investor makes his decision in isolation, higher when he observes that investor j intended to purchase

the asset but did not obtain it, and highest when investor j intended to purchase, and obtained, the

asset.
  47
     Note that the diﬀerence between s¯2 and s¯3 measures the impact of possession conditional on the presence of
social learning. This is consistent with our experimental design, in which we are not able to measure the impact of
possession in the absence of social learning.


                                                        55
Proof. The inference problem of investor i is the same as in Proposition 1. Thus, for a given

signal si the described relationship holds for the actual equilibrium investment amount and follows

immediately from comparing the expression for the utilities on the left-hand side of the inequalities

(2), (4) and (7) and by noting that the optimal investment amount is increasing in si and sj .

Finally, taking expectations over the signal realizations si yields the ranking in expected investment

amounts.     


Heterogeneous Investors

In practice, some investors are more ﬁnancially sophisticated than others, and one would expect

that this variation will aﬀect the peer eﬀects we study here – especially the impact of social learning.

In particular, an unsophisticated investor may have much more to learn about an asset from the

purchase decision of their peer than does a sophisticated investor, as the sophisticated investor likely

has a very good sense of the asset’s quality from his signal alone. Diﬀering ﬁnancial sophistication

can be captured in our model by allowing the signals si and sj to be drawn from distributions with

diﬀering precision. For simplicity, we make the assumption that, in contrast to unsophisticated

investors, sophisticated investors receive perfectly informative signals. This assumption generates

the following prediction of heterogeneous eﬀects of social learning.

Proposition 3. The thresholds s̄1 and s̄2 for the signal si above which investor i is willing to pur-

chase the asset (and hence the likelihood of investor i purchasing the asset) are identical if investor

i is ﬁnancially sophisticated (i.e., signal si is perfectly informative). If investor j is sophisticated,

then investor i follows the choice of investor j when observing the decision of investor j.

Proof. If si is perfectly informative (i.e., investor i is sophisticated), then si is a suﬃcient statistic

for x. As a result, sj , and hence the purchase decision of investor j, has no informational value for

sophisticated investor i and does not inﬂuence the threshold s̄1 . Hence, s̄1 = s̄2 . If sj is perfectly

informative, then investor j knows the value of x and makes a perfectly informed investment

decision. As a result, investor i follows investor j’s choice.    




                                                   56
       Proposition 3 suggests that social learning will be limited (in fact, given the simplifying as-

sumptions made, will be nonexistent) for sophisticated investors. These investors are suﬃciently

well-informed that they are not inﬂuenced by the revealed preference of another investor. The

proposition further shows that social learning will have relatively strong eﬀects on investment

choices if the investor whose choice is observed is sophisticated.48

  48
    We have assumed that sophisticated investors receive perfectly informative signals. Our results can be extended
to the case in which sophisticated investors receive more informative, but still imperfectly informative, signals.
While results for general distributions of x, si and sj that satisfy MLRP do not exist, it is straightforward to show
that for binary signal structures, the impact of social learning will be relatively small when the observing investor is
sophisticated and relatively large when the observed investor is sophisticated. Finally, it is worth noting that, another
investor’s possession of the asset could still aﬀect ﬁnancially sophisticated investors’ choices; similarly a ﬁnancially
unsophisticated investor’s purchase decision – when accompanied by possession – could inﬂuence a peer’s choice.
Both of these eﬀects would work through the social utility channel. Thus, we emphasize that these predictions of
heterogeneous treatment eﬀects apply to social learning eﬀects alone, but not necessarily the overall peer eﬀect.




                                                           57
Appendix B: Appendix Figures and Tables


                             Figure A.1: Investor 2’s Alternative Outcomes

                                                Figure A.1.1: Amount invested

                                 4000
                                 3000
                                 2000




                                                                                  R$3518
                                 1000




                                                          R$1833

                                           R$885                                                     R$778
                                 0




                                        Condition (1)   Condition (2)           Condition (3)   Negative selection
                                                                        Group




                                Figure A.1.2: Invested more than the minimum
                                 1
                                 .9
                                 .8
                                 .7
                                 .6
                                 .5
                                 .4
                                 .3




                                                                                    54%
                                 .2




                                                            25%
                                 .1




                                           3.8%                                                        0%
                                 0




                                        Condition (1)   Condition (2)           Condition (3)   Negative selection
                                                                        Group




Note: Panel A.1.1 presents the mean (and 95% conﬁdence interval) of amount invested for each group of investor 2’s. Panel
A.1.2 presents the mean (and 95% conﬁdence interval) of a dummy variable equal to one if the investor invested more than
the minimum amount for each group of investor 2’s. Investors in conditions (1) to (3) have peers who wanted the asset. These
investors were randomly allocated to one of these 3 groups. Those in condition (1) had no information about their peers. Those
in condition (2) had information that their peers wanted to purchase the asset but had that choice rejected by the lottery.
Those in condition (3) had information that their peers wanted and received the asset. Investors in the negative selection group
have peers who did not want to purchase the asset (and received no information about their peer).




                                                                        58
Figure A.2: Heterogeneity of Social Learning Eﬀects - Self-Assessed Measure of Finan-
cial Literacy

                               Figure A.2.1: Investor 2 is ﬁnancially sophisticated
                                                       Yes                                           No




                                  1
                                  .9
                                  .8
                                  .7
                                  .6
                                  .5




                                                                                                              92%
                                  .4
                                  .3




                                           46%                   44%
                                  .2




                                                                                         33%
                                  .1
                                  0




                                       Condition (1)         Condition (2)           Condition (1)        Condition (2)
                                                                             Group




                       Figure A.2.2: Associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially sophisticated
                                                       Yes                                           No
                                  1
                                  .9
                                  .8
                                  .7
                                  .6
                                  .5
                                  .4




                                                                 77%
                                  .3




                                                                                                              56%
                                                                                         43%
                                  .2




                                           39%
                                  .1
                                  0




                                       Condition (1)         Condition (2)           Condition (1)        Condition (2)
                                                                             Group




Note: Figure A.2.1 presents the mean (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) of take-up rates for investor 2’s in conditions (1) and (2),
separately for those who are and who are not ﬁnancially sophisticated. Figure A.2.2 presents the take-up rates separately for
those whose associated investor 1’s are and who are not a ﬁnancially sophisticated. Investors in conditions (1) and (2) have peers
who wanted the asset. Those in condition (1) had no information about their peers. Those in condition (2) had information
that their peers wanted to purchase the asset but had that choice rejected by the lottery. The ﬁnancial sophistication variable is
based on a self-assessment question conducted in a follow-up survey, where investors were asked to rank their level of ﬁnancial
sophistication from 1 (very low) to 7 (very high). Investors who reported 4 or higher were classiﬁed as ﬁnancially sophisticated




                                                                             59
                     Table A.1: Covariates Balance - Other Randomizations
                           Assignment to investor 1 or investor 2        Lottery for investor 1’s who wanted the asset
                                                  p-value of                                 p-value of
                         Investor 1 Investor 2       test        N        Won        Lost        test          N
                                                   (1)=(2)                                     (5)=(6)
                             (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
 Age                       39.12       37.18         0.22      300        39.47     39.71        0.94         78
                           (1.14)      (1.12)                            (2.34)     (2.23)

 Gender (=1 If male)       0.747        0.613         0.01      300       0.861     0.690       0.07           78
                          (0.036)      (0.040)                           (0.058)   (0.072)

 Married                   0.440        0.387         0.35      300       0.472     0.405       0.56           78
                          (0.041)      (0.040)                           (0.084)   (0.077)

 Single                    0.527        0.587         0.30      300       0.528     0.500       0.81           78
                          (0.041)      (0.040)                           (0.084)   (0.078)

 Earnings                  5,000        4,000         0.22      270       5,000     5,000       0.59           74
                           (499)        (507)                             (925)     (754)

  Relationship with            -            -            -        -         0.44      0.60       0.19           78
  peer (=1 if family)                                                      (0.08)    (0.08)
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 present the averages of the corresponding variable, respectively, for investors assigned to be
in the role of investor 1 and for those assigned to be in the role of investor 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Relationship with peer is not considered in this comparison since this variable is equal for both groups by construction.
Column 3 presents the p-value of an F-test that the mean of the corresponding variable is the same for these two groups.
Column 5 presents the averages for investor 1’s who wanted the asset and won the lottery, while column 6 presents the
averages for investor 1’s who wanted the asset but did not win the lottery. Column 7 presents the p-value of an F-test
that the mean of the corresponding variable is the same for these two groups. For earnings, we present the median and
the p-value of a test that the median of this variable is the same for the corresponding groups. The sample size for the
earnings variable is smaller due to missing values.




                                                         60
                                                       Table A.2: Follow-up Survey
               Question                                      Universe                         Sample size       Results

                                                            Panel A: Financial Literacy Survey

               1. Self-assessed                              Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   90 (out of 100)   Mean: 3.8
               ﬁnancial literacy                             and (2), and their associated                      Standard deviation: 1.7
               (range: 1-7)                                  investor 1’s                                       Proportion ≥ 4: 58.89%

               2. Interest rate                              Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   90 (out of 100)   Correct: 85.56%
               compounding question                          and (2), and their associated
                                                             investor 1’s

               3. Inﬂation question                          Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   90 (out of 100)   Correct: 85.56%
                                                             and (2), and their associated
                                                             investor 1’s

               4. Diversiﬁcation question                    Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   90 (out of 100)   Correct: 67.78%
                                                             and (2), and their associated
                                                             investor 1’s

               5. Bond prices question                       Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   90 (out of 100)   Correct: 14.44%
                                                             and (2), and their associated
                                                             investor 1’s

               Questions (2)-(5)                                                                                0   correct   answers: 5.56%
                                                                                                                1   correct   answer: 5.56%
                                                                                                                2   correct   answers: 32.22%
                                                                                                                3   correct   answers: 43.33%
                                                                                                                4   correct   answers: 13.33%


                                                        Panel B: Questions Regarding the Sales Call

               1. Eﬀect of lottery                           Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   69 (out of 78)    No: 95.65%
               on purchase decision                          (2) and (3)

               2. Believed purchase decision                 Investor 2’s in conditions (1)   69 (out of 78)    No: 94.20%
               could have been changed                       (2) and (3)
               after lottery

               3. Peer’s lottery result                      Investor 2’s in conditions       47 (out of 52)    No: 100%
               aﬀected beliefs about                         (2) and (3)
               own lottery

               4. Peer’s lottery result                      Investor 2’s in conditions       47 (out of 52)    No: 97.87%
               aﬀected beliefs about                         (2) and (3)
               quality of the asset

               5. Was (not) wanting something                Investor 2’s in condition (2)    20 (out of 24)    No: 100%
               your peer could not have
               a signiﬁcant factor in decision?

               6. Eﬀect of peer decision on                  Investor 2’s in conditions       48 (out of 52)    Positive update: 66.67%
               beliefs about quality                         (2) and (3)                                        Negative update: 2.08%
               of the asset                                                                                     No update: 31.24%

               7. Was wanting to have the                    Investor 2’s in condition (3)    25 (out of 26)    Yes: 60%
               same ﬁnancial return as your                  who wanted the asset
               peer a signiﬁcant factor in decision?

               8. Was wanting to have the same               Investor 2’s in condition (3)    25 (out of 26)    Yes: 44%
               asset as your peer to talk about              who wanted the asset
               the asset a signiﬁcant factor in decision?

               9. Did you think about                        Investor 2’s in condition (3)    25 (out of 26)    Yes: 80%
               what your peer could do                       who wanted the asset
               with the return?

               10. Was the fear of not having                Investor 2’s in condition (3)    25 (out of 26)    Yes: 32%
               a return your peer could                      who wanted the asset
               have a signiﬁcant factor in decision?

               11. Did you believe the                       Investor 2’s in conditions       47 (out of 52)    Yes: 97.87%
               information provided                          (2) and (3)
               by the broker?

               12. Were you concerned about                  Investor 2’s in conditions       47 (out of 52)    Yes: 89.36%
               your decision being revealed                  (2) and (3)
               to other clients?

Notes: the follow-up survey was conducted between November 26, and December 7, 2012. From the universe of investor 2’s in conditions (1)-(3)

and investor 1’s associated with investor 2’s in conditions (1) or (2) (128 investors in total), we collected information on 117 investors. Not all of

those investors were asked all of the questions. This table reports, for each question, which investors answered it, the number of responses, and

the results.

                                                                            61
                    Table A.3: Permutation Tests (p-values)
 Dependent variable                Take-up rates Amount invested               Invested more
                                                                               than minimum
                                               (1)               (2)                 (3)

                                    Panel A: Main results

 Learning alone                             [0.052]*          [0.012]**           [0.047]**
 (Condition (2) - Condition (1))

 Learning and possession                   [0.000]***         [0.000]***         [0.000]***
 (Condition (3) - Condition (1))

 Possession alone                           [0.063]*          [0.011]**           [0.047]**
 (Condition (3) - Condition (2))

 Negative selection                          [0.812]            [0.646]            [0.270]
 (Negative selection - Condition (1))


                                   Panel B: Heterogeneity

 Learning by
 Sophisticated                               [0.922]            [0.675]            [0.324]

 Non-sophisticated                         [0.008]***         [0.004]***          [0.083]*

 Diﬀerence                                  [0.053]*           [0.071]*            [0.428]

 Learning from
 Sophisticated                              [0.038]**         [0.009]***          [0.028]**

 Non-sophisticated                           [0.801]            [0.816]            [1.000]

 Diﬀerence                                   [0.434]            [0.155]           [0.028]**

Notes: This table presents the results of two-sided permutation tests with 10,000 replica-
tions for the main results of the paper. Panel A reports p-values from permutation tests for
pairwise comparisons of the conditions of interest using three diﬀerent outcome variables:
take-up rates, amount invested, and a dummy variable indicating whether the investor in-
vested more than the minimum amount. Panel B reports p-values from permutation tests
for the heterogeneity results using the self-assessed measure of ﬁnancial literacy. * signiﬁcant
at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.


                                              62
Table A.4: Probit Average Marginal Eﬀects - Peer Eﬀects, Social Learning, Social
Utility, and Selection: Take-up Rates
    Dependent variable                          Wanted to purchase the asset
                                            (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)

   Learning alone                                   0.285**    0.301**     0.357***    0.282**
   (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                  (0.138)    (0.142)      (0.125)    (0.128)

   Learning and possession                          0.505***   0.536***    0.545***    0.525***
   (Condition (3) - Condition (1))                   (0.104)    (0.109)     (0.104)     (0.103)

   Negative selection                                -0.034     0.018        0.002      0.055
                                                    (0.106)    (0.129)      (0.108)    (0.115)

   Investor 1                                                                           0.133
                                                                                       (0.096)


   Possession alone                                 0.220**    0.234**      0.188*     0.243**
   (Condition (3) - Condition (2))                  (0.108)    (0.103)      (0.103)    (0.117)

   Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)                          0.423
   (Condition (1))                                                     (0.099)


   Broker ﬁxed eﬀects                                 No         Yes             Yes     Yes

   Controls                                           No         No              Yes     Yes

    N                                                 150        150        150         300
  Notes: This table replicates the results from Table 3 using Probit models instead of ordinary
  least squares regressions. The coeﬃcients presented are average marginal eﬀects. Standard
  errors are bootstrapped and clustered at the pair level in column 4. * signiﬁcant at 10%; **
  signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.




                                               63
Table A.5: Logit Average Marginal Eﬀects - Peer Eﬀects, Social Learning, Social Utility,
and Selection: Take-up Rates
    Dependent variable                             Wanted to purchase the asset
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)

    Learning alone                                  0.285**    0.295**     0.355***    0.275**
    (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                 (0.138)    (0.143)      (0.124)    (0.127)

    Learning and possession                         0.505***   0.542***    0.556***    0.527***
    (Condition (3) - Condition (1))                  (0.104)    (0.112)     (0.103)     (0.106)

    Negative selection                               -0.034     0.018        -0.006     0.052
                                                    (0.106)    (0.131)      (0.107)    (0.116)

    Investor 1                                                                          0.132
                                                                                       (0.096)


    Possession alone                                0.220**    0.247**      0.202*     0.252**
    (Condition (3) - Condition (2))                 (0.108)    (0.105)      (0.104)    (0.120)

    Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)                         0.423
    (Condition (1))                                                    (0.099)


    Broker ﬁxed eﬀects                                No         Yes             Yes     Yes

    Controls                                          No         No              Yes     Yes

    N                                                 150        150             150     300


    Broker ﬁxed eﬀects                                No         Yes             Yes     Yes

    Controls                                          No         No              Yes     Yes

     N                                                150         150        150        300
   Notes: This table replicates the results from Table 3 using Logit models instead of ordinary
   least squares regressions. The coeﬃcients presented are average marginal eﬀects. Standard
   errors are bootstrapped and clustered at the pair level in column 4. * signiﬁcant at 10%; **
   signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.




                                               64
        Table A.6: Heterogeneity of Social Learning Eﬀects - Objective Measure of Financial Sophistication
                                                   Investor 2 is ﬁnancially     Associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially
                                                        sophisticated                     sophisticated
                                                                    p-value of                        p-value of
                                                 Yes       No      test (1)=(2)   Yes       No       test (4)=(5)
                                                 (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)           (6)
      Panel A: no controls
      Learning alone                            0.196    0.394*        0.533    0.386** 0.100            0.349
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))          (0.227) (0.218)                  (0.175) (0.246)


      Panel B: full speciﬁcation
      Learning alone                                 0.031    0.892**      0.085        0.399*     -0.111       0.291
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))               (0.367)   (0.450)                   (0.210)   (0.408)


      Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)    0.429     0.375       0.816         0.400     0.400        1.000




65
      (Condition (1))                               (0.139)   (0.180)                   (0.132)   (0.162)

     Notes: This table replicates the results from Table 5 using an objective (instead of self-assessed) measure of ﬁnancial
     literacy, based on four ﬁnancial literacy questions conducted in a follow-up survey. Investors who answered 3 or more
     questions correctly were classiﬁed as ﬁnancially sophisticated. See Appendix C for an English version of the ﬁnancial
     literacy questions. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.
                          Table A.7: Heterogeneity of Social Learning Eﬀects - Amount Invested
                                                       Investor 2 is ﬁnancially      Associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially
                                                            sophisticated                      sophisticated
                                                                         p-value of                          p-value of
                                                   Yes         No       test (1)=(2)     Yes        No      test (4)=(5)
                                                   (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
      Panel A: no controls
      Learning alone                              222.2 1,750.0***          0.057    1,320.5*** 254.0           0.147
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))            (608.7)     (488.3)                   (498.3)    (522.4)


      Panel B: full speciﬁcation
      Learning alone                                  201.4    1,791.0**       0.069         1,152.1***    513.8       0.547
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))                (828.9)    (815.9)                        (417.1)    (912.1)


      Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)    1,000.0     666.7         0.478           833.3       857.1       0.960




66
      (Condition (1))                                (322.7)    (329.6)                       (262.2)     (390.0)

     Notes: This table replicates the results from Table 5 using the amount invested in the asset instead of take-up rate as
     dependent variable. The ﬁnancial sophistication variable is based on the self-assessment question conducted in the follow-up
     survey described in the text. Investors rated their ﬁnancial knowledge from 1 (very low) to 7 (very high). Investors who
     reported 4 or higher were classiﬁed as ﬁnancially sophisticated. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at
     1%.
                 Table A.8: Heterogeneity of Social Learning Eﬀects - Invested         More than Minimum
                                                    Investor 2 is ﬁnancially           Associated investor 1 is ﬁnancially
                                                         sophisticated                           sophisticated
                                                                     p-value of                              p-value of
                                                  Yes       No      test (1)=(2)        Yes        No       test (4)=(5)
                                                  (1)       (2)          (3)             (4)       (5)           (6)
      Panel A: no controls
      Learning alone                             0.145 0.333**          0.394           0.329**    0.000        0.036
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))           (0.165) (0.143)                         (0.152)   (0.000)


      Panel B: full speciﬁcation
      Learning alone                                 0.135     0.233       0.673        0.235*     0.213        0.928
      (Condition (2) - Condition (1))               (0.148)   (0.161)                   (0.135)   (0.172)


      Mean (no information; peer chose the asset)    0.077     0.000       0.333         0.056     0.000        0.334




67
      (Condition (1))                               (0.078)   (0.000)                   (0.056)   (0.000)

     Notes: This table replicates the results from Table 5 using a dummy variable equal to one if the investor invested
     more than the minimum amount instead of take-up rate as dependent variable. The ﬁnancial sophistication variable
     is based on the self-assessment question conducted in the follow-up survey described in the text. Investors rated their
     ﬁnancial knowledge from 1 (very low) to 7 (very high). Investors who reported 4 or higher were classiﬁed as ﬁnancially
     sophisticated. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%.
Appendix C: Experimental Documentation
We enclose here English versions of the Qualtrics scripts used by the brokers in the sales phone
calls, ﬁrst to investor 1’s and then to investor 2’s. Then we enclose English versions of the follow-up
survey questionnaires. After these documents, we enclose a picture of the implementation of the
experiment, displaying the brokers and the RA.




                                                  68
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                          6/24/12 5:15 PM



                   Client number


                       Name of broker making phone call




                       Client number




                   Introduction

                   Description of asset


                       Combination of two investments:
                       - Fundo Long-Short multi-mercado (read brochure)
                       - LCI de 98% do CDI (read brochure)

                       Minimum investment:
                       - R$1,000 in LCI and R$1,000 in Fundo Long-Short
                       Maximum investment:
                       -R$10,000 in LCI and no limits in Fundo Long-Short

                       Observations to be told to client:
                       1) Special LCI usually not avaliable to clients. LCI typically available to clients has return of 97% of CDI and
                       minimum investment of R$10,000

                       2) Emphasize that product can only be purchased during this call (take it or leave it): will not be sold on other
                       occasions

                       3) Remind that LCI is exempt from income tax

                       4) Explain that only new resources will be accepted (and not resources already invested with the brokerage)



                   Limited supply


                       This is a special asset, only available in limited supply, and only to special clients l ke you.

                       As so, unfortunately, some of the clients that want the asset will not be able to actually purchase it.




                       Since we are a company that always wants to be as fair as possible, we want to give a chance to all the special
                       clients we are calling and who are interested in the product. In addition to that, we would like to give the same
                       chance to everyone.

                       Because of that, we will use a lottery to determine which clients will actually be able to implement the purchase,
                       among those that chose to purchase the asset.

                       In this lottery half (50%) of the clients that choose to purchase the asset will have their choices authorized and
                       implemented.

                       The lottery consists in drawing a random integer number between 1 and 100. If the number is 50 or less, the lottery
                       will not authorize the investment. If the number is greater than 50, the lottery will authorize and make the investment.

                       It is important that you know that the decision you will make now if final. If you decide to purchase the asset, you will
                       be authorizing the purchase. Therefore, if the lottery authorizes the purchase, the investment will be made.

                       Take advantage of this great opportunity to buy this exclusive product!



                   Investment decision

                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                 6/24/12 5:15 PM




                       Ask the client what their decision is
                            Wants to invest

                            Does not want to invest




                       How much does he want to invest in the Fundo Long-Short multi-mercado?




                       How much does he want to invest in the LCI?




                   Investment authorization


                       A random number will now be drawn to determine whether or not you will be able to actually make the investment.
                       The random number is ${e://Field/random}



                       Due to the outcome of the lottery, your investment was not authorized.



                       Due to the outcome of the lottery, your investment was authorized.



                       Was the investment authorized?
                            Yes

                            No



                   End of Call and Summary


                       Finish the call



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID20/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did this client want to invest in the product? Yes

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: ${q://QID18/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Amount invested in the LCI: ${q://QID26/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Was this client authorized to make the investment? Yes



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID20/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did this client want to invest in the product? Yes

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: ${q://QID18/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Amount invested in the LCI: ${q://QID26/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                                                                                                                                               Page 2 of 3
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                 6/24/12 5:15 PM




                       Was this client authorized to make the investment? No



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID20/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did this client want to invest in the product? No

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: 0

                       Amount invested in the LCI: 0

                       Was this client authorized to make the investment? N/A




                                                                                                                                                       3
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                  6/24/12 5:16 PM



                   Client number


                       Name of broker making phone call




                       Client number




                       Number of client of the (first) friend of this investor




                   Previous Choice by FRIEND 1


                       Did the first friend of this investor want to invest in this asset?
                            Yes

                            No




                       Was the first friend of this investor authorized to make the investment?
                            Yes

                            No



                   Introduction

                   Description of Asset




                       Combination of two investments:
                       - Fundo Long-Short multi-mercado (read brochure)
                       - LCI de 98% do CDI (read brochure)

                       Minimum investment:
                       - R$1,000 in LCI and R$1,000 in Fundo Long-Short
                       Maximum investment:
                       -R$10,000 in LCI and no limits in Fundo Long-Short

                       Observations to be told to client:
                       1) Special LCI usually not avaliable to clients. LCI typically available to clients has return of 97% of CDI and
                       minimum
                       investment of R$10,000

                       2) Emphasize that product can only be purchased during this call (take it or leave it): will not be sold on other
                       occasions

                       3) Remind that LCI is exempt from income tax

                       4) Explain that only new resources will be accepted (and not resources already invested with the brokerage)




                   Limited Supply


                       This is a special asset, only available in limited supply, and only to special clients l ke you.

                                                                                                                                                Page 1 of 4
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                          6/24/12 5:16 PM




                       As so, unfortunately, some of the clients that want the asset will not be able to actually purchase it.



                       Since we are a company that always wants to be as fair as possible, we want to give a chance to all the special
                       clients we are calling and who are interested in the product. In addition to that, we would like to give the same
                       chance to everyone.

                       Because of that, we will use a lottery to determine which clients will actually be able to implement the purchase,
                       among those that chose to purchase the asset.

                       In this lottery half (50%) of the clients that choose to purchase the asset will have their choices authorized and
                       implemented.

                       The lottery consists in drawing a random integer number between 1 and 100. If the number is 50 or less, the lottery
                       will
                       not authorize the investment. If the number is greater than 50, the lottery will authorize and make the investment.

                       It is important that you know that the decision you will make now if final. If you decide to purchase the asset, you will
                       be authorizing the purchase. Therefore, if the lottery authorizes the purchase, the investment will be made.

                       Take advantage of this great opportunity to buy this exclusive product!


                   Only Learning Treatment


                       Before asking whether or not the client wants to purchase the asset, tell him the information associated with the
                       choice of the first friend and the outcome of the lottery for the first friend:


                       "We would like to inform you, before you make your decision, that [FIRST FRIEND'S NAME], your [RELATIONSHIP
                       TO THIS CLIENT], received the same offer today. He/she chose to purchase the product. However, the lottery did
                       not authorize him/her to make the purchase, so he/she will not make the investment."

                       SUMMARIZING: He/she wanted to make the investment but was not able to invest.



                   Possession and Learning Treatment



                       Before asking whether or not the client wants to purchase the asset, tell him the information associated with the
                       choice of the first friend and the outcome of the lottery for the first friend:

                       "We would like to inform you, before you make your decision, that [FIRST FRIEND'S NAME], your [RELATIONSHIP
                       TO THIS CLIENT], received the same offer today. He/she chose to purchase the product. The lottery authorized
                       him/her to make the purchase, so he/she will make the investment."

                       SUMMARIZING: He/she wanted to make the investment and was able to invest.


                   Investment Decision


                       Ask the client what their decision is
                            Wants to invest

                            Does not want to invest




                       How much does he want to invest in the Fundo Long-Short multi-mercado?




                       How much does he want to invest in the LCI?




                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 4
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                   6/24/12 5:16 PM




                   Investment Authorization


                       A random number will now be drawn to determine whether or not you will be able to actually make the investment.
                       The random number is ${e://Field/random}



                       Due to the outcome of the lottery, your investment was not authorized.



                       Due to the outcome of the lottery, your investment was authorized.



                       Was the investment authorized?
                            Yes

                            No



                   Relationship with First Investor, End of Call, and Summary


                       Had you previously heard about this offer/this product from [FIRST FRIEND'S NAME]?
                            Yes

                            No




                       What is your degree of relationship with [FIRST FRIEND'S NAME]? Examples: sibling, parent, friend, co-worker, etc.




                       Finish the phone call



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID27/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       First friend's client number: ${q://QID30/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did the first friend want to invest in the product? ${q://QID21/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}

                       Was the first friend authorized to make the investment? ${q://QID25/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}

                       Did this client (second friend) want to invest in the product? Yes

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: ${q://QID28/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Amount invested in the LCI: ${q://QID38/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Was this client authorized to make the investment? Yes



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID27/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       First friend's client number: ${q://QID30/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did the first friend want to invest in the product? ${q://QID21/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}



                                                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 4
Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                                                                 6/24/12 5:16 PM


                       Was the first friend authorized to make the investment? ${q://QID25/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}

                       Did this client (second friend) want to invest in the product? Yes

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: ${q://QID28/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Amount invested in the LCI: ${q://QID38/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Was this client authorized to make the investment?: No



                       This is the summary of the call. Please put the following information in your Excel spreadsheet of communication
                       with the clients:

                       Client number: ${q://QID27/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       First friend's client number: ${q://QID30/ChoiceTextEntryValue}

                       Did the first friend want to invest in the product? ${q://QID21/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}

                       Was the first friend authorized to make the investment? ${q://QID25/ChoiceGroup/SelectedChoices}

                       Did this client (second friend) want to invest in the product? No

                       Amount invested in the Fundo Long-Short: 0

                       Amount invested in the LCI: 0

                       Was this client authorized to make the investment?: N/A




                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 4
Follow-up Survey
Financial Literacy Survey
This survey was administered to investor 2’s in conditions 1 and 2, and to their associated investor
1’s.

(1) On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you assess
    your overall ﬁnancial knowledge?

    1. Very low
    2.
    3.
    4.
    5.
    6.
    7. Very high

(2) Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 8% per year. After 5
    years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money in the
    account to grow:

    a. More than $108
    b. Exactly $108
    c. Less than $108
    d. Do not know
    e. Refuse to answer

(3) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 5% per year and inﬂation was 7%
    per year. After 1 year, using the money that will be in the account, would you be able to buy:

    a. More than what you can buy today
    b. Exactly the same as what you can buy today
    c. Less than what you can buy today
    d. Do not know
    e. Refuse to answer

(4) Do you think that the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single company stock
    usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”

    a. True
    b. False


                                                76
    c. Do not know
    d. Refuse to answer

(5) If interest rates rise, what will typically happen to bond prices?

    a. They will rise
    b. They will fall
    c. They will stay the same
    d. There is no relationship between bond prices and the interest rates
    e. Do not know
    f. Refuse to answer

Questions Regarding the Sales Call
(1) For investor 2’s in conditions 1, 2, and 3
    When the asset was oﬀered to you in the beginning of the year, we had to use a lottery given
    that the asset was in limited supply. At that moment, you decided to purchase (not purchase)
    the asset. Was the presence of the lottery a signiﬁcant factor in your decision?

    a. Yes
    b. No

(2) For investor 2’s in conditions 1, 2, and 3
    Before the result of the lottery, you made a purchase decision. Did you believe you could have
    changed your decision after the lottery?

    a. Yes
    b. No

(3) For investor 2’s in conditions 2 and 3
    When the asset was oﬀered to you, you were informed that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED
    INVESTOR 1] wanted the asset, but that he/she lost the lottery (and he/she won the lottery).
    In the lottery, you had 50% chance of winning and 50% chance of losing, independently of
    the result for [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1]. When you were informed that
    [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] lost (won) the lottery, how did this aﬀect
    your beliefs about the likelihood of winning the lottery?

    a. It would be more likely to win the lottery
    b. It would be less likely to win the lottery
    c. The likelihood of winning the lottery would remain unchanged.




                                                    77
(4) For investor 2’s in conditions 2 and 3
    You were informed that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] lost (won) the lottery.
    How did this aﬀect your beliefs about the quality of the asset?

    a. This should be a better investment.
   b. This should be a worse investment.
    c. No eﬀect.

(5) For investor 2’s in condition 2
    Was wanting (not wanting) an asset that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1]
    could not have because he/she lost the lottery a signiﬁcant factor in your decision?

    a. Yes.
   b. No.

(6) For investor 2’s in conditions 2 and 3
    You were informed that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] wanted to purchase
    the asset. How did this aﬀect your beliefs about the quality of the asset?

    a. This should be a better investment.
   b. This should be a worse investment.
    c. No eﬀect.

(7) For investor 2’s in condition 3 who decided to purchase the asset
    Was wanting to earn the same ﬁnancial returns that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED IN-
    VESTOR 1] would earn a signiﬁcant factor in your decision?

    a. Yes.
   b. No.

(8) For investor 2’s in condition 3 who decided to purchase the asset
    Was wanting the same asset that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] had so that
    you could discuss the asset with him/her a signiﬁcant factor in your decision?

    a. Yes.
   b. No.

(9) For investor 2’s in condition 3 who decided to purchase the asset
    Did you think about what [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] could do with the
    return from the asset when you made your decision?

    a. Yes.
   b. No.

                                               78
(10) For investor 2’s in condition 3 who decided to purchase the asset
     You were informed that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] had the asset. Was
     the fear of not having a return he/she could have a signiﬁcant factor in your decision?

     a. Yes.
     b. No.

(11) For investor 2’s in conditions 2 and 3
     The broker informed you that [NAME OF THE ASSOCIATED INVESTOR 1] wanted to
     purchase the asset. Did you believe in this information?

     a. Yes.
     b. No.

(12) For investor 2’s in conditions 2 and 3
     Your choices were never revealed to other clients. Still, were you concerned about this possibility
     when you decided to purchase (not to purchase) the asset?

     a. Yes.
     b. No.




                                                   79
Figure A.3: Picture from the implementation




                    80
