NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET LIQUIDITY — THEORY AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Dimitri Vayanos
Jiang Wang
Working Paper 18251
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18251

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

Forthcoming in the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton
Harris, and Rene Stulz. We thank Bruno Biais, Joost Driessen, Denis Gromb, Terrence Hendershott
and Ronnie Sadka for very helpful comments. Financial support from the Paul Woolley Centre at the
LSE is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Dimitri Vayanos and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Market Liquidity — Theory and Empirical Evidence
Dimitri Vayanos and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 18251
July 2012
JEL No. D42,D53,D82,D83,G01,G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
In this paper we survey the theoretical and empirical literature on market liquidity. We organize both
literatures around three basic questions: (a) how to measure illiquidity, (b) how illiquidity relates to
underlying market imperfections and other asset characteristics, and (c) how illiquidity affects expected
asset returns. Using a unified model from Vayanos and Wang (2010), we survey theoretical work
on six main imperfections: participation costs, transaction costs, asymmetric information, imperfect
competition, funding constraints, and search---and for each imperfection we address the three basic
questions within that model. We review the empirical literature through the lens of the theory, using
the theory to both interpret existing results and suggest new tests and analysis.

Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Jiang Wang
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-614
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
wangj@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Financial markets deviate, to varying degrees, from the perfect-market ideal in which there are
no impediments to trade. Trade impediments reduce the liquidity that markets oﬀer. A large
and growing literature studies market liquidity and its properties. Theoretical papers trace
illiquidity, i.e., the lack of liquidity, to underlying market imperfections such as asymmetric
information, diﬀerent forms of trading costs, and funding constraints. They also study how
imperfections aﬀect expected asset returns. Empirical papers estimate measures of illiquidity,
some of which are derived from theoretical models, and relate them to asset characteristics and
asset returns.
In this paper we survey the theoretical and empirical literature on market liquidity. We
organize the survey around three basic questions: (a) how to measure illiquidity, (b) how
illiquidity relates to underlying market imperfections and other asset characteristics, and (c)
how illiquidity aﬀects expected asset returns. We use these three questions as a common
framework to organize both the theoretical and the empirical literature.
Theoretical papers study a variety of market imperfections, relying on diﬀerent modeling
assumptions. For example, papers on trading costs typically assume life-cycle or risk-sharing
motives to trade, while papers on asymmetric information often rely on noise traders. Some
papers on asymmetric information further assume risk-neutral market makers who can take unlimited positions, while papers on other imperfections typically assume risk aversion or position
limits. Instead of surveying this literature in a descriptive manner, we use a common, uniﬁed
model from Vayanos and Wang (2010) to study all the market imperfections that we consider,
and for each imperfection we address the three basic questions within that model. Our model
generates many of the key results shown in the literature, and serves as a point of reference
for surveying other results derived in diﬀerent or more complicated settings. Using a common
model to study all imperfections makes the presentation more streamlined and pedagogical.
It also helps better understand the eﬀects of the imperfections since these can be compared
holding constant other assumptions such as trading motives and risk attitudes.
Empirical papers often do not take a view as to the speciﬁc market imperfection that causes
illiquidity. Some of the measures of illiquidity that they compute are derived in theoretical
models, while other measures are more intuitive or heuristic. We survey the empirical literature
through the lens of the theory, using the theory to both interpret existing results and suggest
new tests and analysis. Our survey of the empirical literature is more limited in scope than of
the theoretical literature: we goal is not to be comprehensive but to link the main empirical
methodologies and ﬁndings with the theory.
1

We survey the theoretical literature in Section 2. Our model has three periods, t = 0, 1, 2.
In Periods 0 and 1, risk-averse agents can trade a riskless and a risky asset that pay oﬀ in
Period 2. In Period 0, agents are identical so no trade occurs. In Period 1, agents can be
one of two types. Liquidity demanders receive an endowment correlated with the risky asset’s
payoﬀ, and need to trade to share risk. They can trade with liquidity suppliers, who receive no
endowment. Agents learn whether or not they will receive the endowment in an interim period
t = 1/2. While we model heterogeneity through endowments, our analysis would be similar
for other types of heterogeneity, e.g., diﬀerent beliefs or investment opportunities. Market
imperfections concern trade in Period 1. We determine how the imperfections aﬀect measures
of illiquidity in Period 1. We also determine the eﬀect of the imperfections on ex-ante expected
returns as of Period 0: how does the expected return that agents require to buy the risky asset
in Period 0 depends on the imperfections that they anticipate to face in Period 1? We consider
six imperfections, studied extensively in the theoretical literature:

1. Participation costs: In the perfect-market benchmark, all agents are present in the
market in all periods. Thus, a seller, for example, can have immediate access to the entire
population of buyers. In practice, however, agents face costs of market participation, e.g.,
monitor market movements and be ready to trade. To model costly participation, we
assume that agents must incur a cost to trade in Period 1. Consistent with the notion
that participation is an ex-ante decision, we assume that agents must decide whether or
not to incur the cost in Period 1/2, i.e., after learning whether or not they will receive an
endowment but before observing the price in Period 1. A related imperfection is that of
entry costs, e.g., learning about an asset. The cost would then concern buying the asset
in Period 0.
2. Transaction costs: In addition to costs of market participation, agents typically pay
costs when executing transactions. Transaction costs drive a wedge between the buying
and selling price of an asset. They come in many types, e.g., brokerage commissions,
transaction taxes, and bid-ask spreads. Some types of transaction costs can be viewed
as a consequence of other market imperfections, while other types, such as transaction
taxes, can be viewed as more primitive. We assume that transaction costs concern trade
in Period 1. The diﬀerence with participation costs is that the decision whether or not to
incur the transaction costs is contingent on the price in Period 1.
3. Asymmetric information: In the perfect-market benchmark, all agents have the same
information about the payoﬀ of the risky asset. In practice, however, agents can have
diﬀerent information because they have access to diﬀerent sources of information or have
2

diﬀerent abilities to process information from the same source. To model asymmetric
information, we assume that some agents observe in Period 1 a private signal about the
asset payoﬀ. We assume that these agents are the liquidity demanders. This assumption,
which in our model is without loss of generality, allows us to determine how the supply of
liquidity is inﬂuenced by suppliers’ concern about trading against better-informed agents.
4. Imperfect competition: In the perfect-market benchmark, agents are competitive and
have no eﬀect on prices. In many markets, however, some agents are large relative to others
in the sense that they can inﬂuence prices, either because of their size or because of their
information advantage. We model imperfect competition by assuming that some agents
can exert market power in Period 1. We focus on the case where liquidity demanders
behave as a single monopolist, but also consider more brieﬂy monopolistic behavior by
liquidity suppliers. We consider both the case where liquidity demanders have no private
information on asset payoﬀs, and so information is symmetric, and the case where they
observe a private signal.
5. Funding constraints: Agents’ portfolios often involve leverage, i.e., borrow cash to
establish a long position in a risky asset, or borrow a risky asset to sell it short. In
the perfect-market benchmark, agents can borrow freely provided that they have enough
resources to repay the loan. But as the Corporate Finance literature emphasizes, various
frictions can limit agents’ ability to borrow and fund their positions. We derive a funding
constraint by assuming that agents cannot pledge some of their future income. Because
our focus is on how the funding constraint inﬂuences the supply of liquidity, we impose it
on liquidity suppliers only, i.e., assume that the lack of commitment concerns only them.
6. Search: In the perfect-market benchmark, the market is organized as a centralized exchange. Many markets, however, have a more decentralized form of organization. For
example, in over-the-counter markets, investors negotiate prices bilaterally with dealers.
Locating suitable counter-parties in these markets can take time and involve search. To
model decentralized markets, we assume that agents do not meet in a centralized exchange
in Period 1, but instead must search for counterparties. When a liquidity demander meets
a supplier, they bargain bilaterally over the terms of trade.

We consider two measures of illiquidity. The ﬁrst measure is lambda, deﬁned as the regression coeﬃcient of the return between Periods 0 and 1 on liquidity demanders’ signed volume in
Period 1. This measure characterizes the price impact of volume, which has a transitory and
a permanent component. The second measure is price reversal, deﬁned as minus the autocovariance of returns. This measure characterizes the importance of the transitory component in
3

price, which in our model is entirely driven by volume. Lambda and price reversal have been
derived in theoretical models focusing on speciﬁc market imperfections, and have been widely
used in empirical work ever since.
We determine how each imperfection aﬀects lambda, price reversal, and ex-ante expected
returns. Many of these eﬀects have been derived in the literature, albeit in a less systematic
and uniﬁed manner. We highlight the links with the literature, and use more generally our
model to organize and survey it. Many models in the literature can be viewed as enrichments
of our model in terms of, e.g., information structure, agent characteristics, and dynamics.
Deriving the eﬀects of the imperfections within a uniﬁed model delivers new insights. We
show, for example, that most imperfections raise lambda, but fewer raise price reversal. Thus,
lambda is a more accurate measure of the imperfections. Intuitively, lambda measures the price
impact per unit trade, while price reversal concerns the impact of the entire trade. Market imperfections generally raise the price impact per unit trade, but because they also reduce trade
size, the price impact of the entire trade can decrease. We show additionally that imperfections
do not always raise expected returns. The literature has shown this result for some imperfections; we examine its validity across all imperfections and identify those under which it is more
likely to hold.
We survey the empirical literature in Section 3. We begin by presenting various measures
of illiquidity. Some measures, such as lambda and price reversal, are motivated by theory, while
others, such as bid-ask spread, market depth, turnover and trade size, are more intuitive or
heuristic. We also discuss ways to measure the illiquidity of an aggregate asset class rather
than of a single asset. We next examine how the measures of illiquidity vary across assets and
over time, how they relate to asset characteristics such as supply and volatility, and how they
relate to each other. We ﬁnally examine the link between illiquidity measures and expected
asset returns. Some of the work in that area links the level of illiquidity to expected returns.
More recent work also allows for the possibility that illiquidity is a priced risk factor, which
aﬀects expected returns through its comovement with returns.
Throughout our survey of the empirical literature, we emphasize the links with the theory.
For example, how closely do empirical measures of illiquidity reﬂect the underlying market
imperfections? How can the theory account for the variation of the illiquidity measures across
assets and over time? How can it account for the relationships between the illiquidity measures
and asset characteristics or expected returns? As we hope to demonstrate, the theory can shed
new light on existing empirical results and suggest new tests and analysis. For example, the
theory implies that the eﬀectiveness of a particular measure of illiquidity, in terms of reﬂecting

4

the underlying market imperfection, depends on the imperfection. This could help explain why
some measures are more successful than others in capturing illiquidity and its relationship with
expected asset returns in some markets. Using those measures, and controlling for additional
factors suggested by theory, could yield sharper empirical tests.
Liquidity eﬀects can manifest themselves over diﬀerent time horizons. The market microstructure literature focuses on short horizons, from minutes or hours to days or weeks. At
the same time, recent work on the limits of arbitrage ﬁnds that ﬂows can aﬀect returns even
at the longer horizons used in asset-pricing analysis, e.g., months, quarters or years. We view
both horizons as relevant for the purposes of our survey—provided that the price movements
under consideration are temporary departures from fundamental value caused by ﬂows. Our
model can accommodate both horizons simply by changing the length of a “period.” The horizon that we mostly have in mind, and emphasize in the empirical part of this survey, is that of
days, weeks or months. We do not rule out longer horizons, although it can be more diﬃcult
to identify transitory price movements at such horizons. On the other hand, our model is not
well-suited for very short horizons of minutes or hours because we intentionally omit the level
of market detail that is required to study the corresponding eﬀects.
Our survey does not cover some important issues, either because they represent open questions on which research so far has been limited, or because covering them would detract from
our main focus. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize these issues, both to put our survey in perspective and to outline promising areas for future research. A ﬁrst issue, mentioned
above, is the horizon of liquidity eﬀects. In our model horizon is exogenous and corresponds to
the length of a period. It should be derived endogenously, however, through a more detailed
description of market imperfections and agents’ trading needs.
A second issue concerns the interactions between market imperfections. Most of the theoretical literature considers one imperfection at a time and thus does not allow for interactions.
Our model also does not cover interactions, except between imperfect competition and asymmetric information. Other interactions, such as between funding constraints and asymmetric
information, are interesting and have received some attention in the literature.
A related but more fundamental issue concerns the underlying economic causes of the
imperfections and the ways in which imperfections are linked. Following much of the literature,
we treat each imperfection as primitive. Yet, some imperfections could be the consequence of
other more fundamental ones. For example, some types of transaction costs can be viewed as
a consequence of other imperfections, such as participation costs or asymmetric information.
Moreover, if, for example, participation costs are costs to monitor market information, then

5

costly participation could be linked to asymmetric information. Asymmetric information could
also underlie the contracting frictions that give rise to funding constraints. Endogenizing some
market imperfections from more fundamental frictions could further streamline, clarify and
deepen the study of market liquidity. In particular, various forms of informational problems
could be the underlying economic cause for various forms of imperfections.
A fourth issue concerns the institutional context. A large fraction of trading activity in
ﬁnancial markets is generated by specialized ﬁnancial institutions, and these institutions can
be important suppliers or demanders of liquidity. Following much of the literature, we model
instead liquidity suppliers and demanders as individuals, thus ignoring contracting frictions
and other institutional complexities. (We only consider such frictions brieﬂy in the context of
funding constraints.) The liquidity shock in our model could result from institutional frictions,
but only in reduced form. The importance of ﬁnancial institutions in aﬀecting asset prices is
emphasized in a rapidly growing literature on the limits of arbitrage.
Related to the institutional context is the issue of market design. While we consider ways
in which markets deviate from the Walrasian ideal, we do not study market design in depth.
The market microstructure literature studies various dimensions of market design and shows
that they can aﬀect market performance. Such dimensions include whether liquidity is supplied
by dedicated market makers or an open limit-order book, whether limit orders are visible to all
traders, whether transactions are disclosed to all traders after they are executed, etc. While we
survey some of that work, we conduct our analysis at a more aggregate level with less market
detail, so that we can derive some key eﬀects within a tractable uniﬁed model. The downside
is that our model is not well suited for very short horizons such as seconds or minutes, e.g.,
to compute empirical measures of market depth and resiliency at such horizons. Our model is
also not well suited for addressing the beneﬁts of diﬀerent market designs.
Finally, we do not perform any analysis of welfare or policy (even though our model could
be used for that purpose as well). For example, we do not examine how imperfections aﬀect
the welfare of diﬀerent agents and what policy actions could mitigate these eﬀects. We survey,
however, some papers that consider welfare issues.
Our survey is related to both market microstructure and asset pricing. We emphasize
fundamental market imperfections covered in the market microstructure literature, but abstract
away from the level of market detail often adopted in that literature. At the same time,
we study how market imperfections aﬀect expected asset returns—an asset-pricing exercise.
Surveys with greater focus on market microstructure include the book by O’Hara (1995) for
the theory, the article by Hasbrouck (2007) for the empirics, and the articles by Madhavan
6

(2000), Biais, Glosten, and Spatt (2005), and Parlour and Seppi (2008) for both theory and
empirics. Amihud, Mendelson, and Pedersen (2005) survey theoretical and empirical work on
market liquidity and asset-pricing eﬀects. They mainly focus on transaction costs and not
on the other market imperfections that we consider. Gromb and Vayanos (2010a) survey the
theoretical literature on the limits of arbitrage.

2

Theory

We organize our discussion of the theoretical literature on market liquidity using the uniﬁed
model of Vayanos and Wang (2010, 2011). The model nests a variety of market imperfections
studied in the literature and shows how they relate to empirical measures of liquidity. It also
shows how market imperfections aﬀect ex-ante expected returns.
There are three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. The ﬁnancial market consists of a riskless and a risky
asset that pay oﬀ in Period 2. The riskless asset is in supply of B shares and pays oﬀ one unit
of a consumption good per share with certainty. The risky asset is in supply of θ̄ shares and
pays oﬀ D units per share, where D has mean D̄ and variance σ 2 . Using the riskless asset as
the numeraire, we denote by St the risky asset’s price in Period t, where S2 = D.
There is a measure one of agents, who derive utility from consumption in Period 2. Utility
is exponential,
− exp(−αC2 ),
where C2 is consumption in Period 2, and α > 0 is the coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion.
We denote agents’ wealth in Period t by Wt . Wealth in Period 2 is equal to consumption, i.e.,
W2 = C2 . Agents are identical in Period 0, but become heterogeneous and trade in Period 1.
Because all agents have the same exponential utility, there is no preference heterogeneity. We
instead introduce heterogeneity through agents’ endowments.
A fraction π of agents receive an endowment of the consumption good in Period 2, and
the remaining fraction 1 − π receive no endowment. The endowment is z(D − D̄) per receiving
agent, where z has mean zero and variance σz2 and is independent of D. Since the endowment is
correlated with D, it generates a hedging demand. When, for example, z > 0, the endowment
exposes agents to the risk that D will be low, and agents hedge against that risk by selling the
risky asset. Agents learn whether or not they will receive the endowment in an interim period
t = 1/2, and those who will receive the endowment observe z in Period 1. Thus, agents learn
whether or not they will need to trade before learning the exact size of their desired trade.
7

We assume that the endowment is perfectly correlated with D for simplicity; what matters for
our analysis is that the correlation is non-zero. For tractability, we assume that D and z are
normal. While we model heterogeneity through endowments, our analysis would be similar for
other types of heterogeneity, e.g., diﬀerent beliefs or investment opportunities.
In equilibrium, agents receiving an endowment initiate trades with others to share risk.
Because the agents initiating trades can be thought of as consuming market liquidity, we refer
to them as liquidity demanders and denote them by the subscript d. Moreover, we refer to z as
the liquidity shock. The agents who receive no endowment accommodate the trades of liquidity
demanders, and hence supply liquidity. We refer to them as liquidity suppliers and denote them
by the subscript s.
Because liquidity suppliers require compensation to absorb risk, the trades of liquidity
demanders aﬀect prices. Therefore, the price in Period 1 is inﬂuenced not only by the asset
payoﬀ, but also by the liquidity demanders’ trades. Our measures of liquidity, deﬁned in Section
2.1, are based on the price impact of these trades.
The assumptions introduced so far describe our model’s perfect-market benchmark, to
which we subsequently add market imperfections. We maintain the perfect-market assumption
in Period 0 when determining the ex-ante eﬀect of the imperfections, i.e., how the anticipation
of imperfections in Period 1 impacts the price in Period 0. Imperfections in Period 0 are, in
fact, not relevant in our model because agents are identical in that period and there is no trade.
We can give two interpretations to our model. Under the ﬁrst interpretation, the set of
agents is the entire set of households in an economy. The only liquidity shocks that can then
have non-trivial price impact are those large enough to be comparable to the size of the economy.
Under the second interpretation, the set of agents is the subset of households who participate
in a speciﬁc market. Liquidity shocks can then have non-trivial price impact even when they
are small relative to the size of the economy; all that is needed is that they are comparable
to the size of the set of agents participating in that market. That set can be smaller than
the entire set of households in the economy because of participation costs. While we consider
participation costs as a market imperfection (Section 2.2), they can be viewed as implicit in
the perfect-market benchmark under the second interpretation.1
1

An additional imperfection that is implicit in the perfect-market benchmark is that agents cannot write
contracts in Period 0 contingent on whether they are a liquidity demander or supplier in Period 1. Thus, the
market in Period 0 is incomplete in the Arrow-Debreu sense. If agents could write complete contracts in Period
0, they would not need to trade in Period 1, in which case liquidity would not matter. Complete contracts are
infeasible in our model because whether an agent is a liquidity demander or supplier is private information.

8

2.1

Perfect-Market Benchmark

In this section we describe the equilibrium in our model’s perfect-market benchmark. Detailed
derivations and proofs of the results in this and subsequent sections are in Vayanos and Wang
(2010, 2011). Agents’ demand functions for the risky asset in Period 1 are
θ1s =

D̄ − S1
,
ασ 2

(1a)

θ1d =

D̄ − S1
− z.
ασ 2

(1b)

Liquidity suppliers are willing to buy the risky asset as long as its price S1 in Period 1 is
below the expected payoﬀ D̄, and are willing to sell otherwise. Liquidity demanders have a
similar price-elastic demand function, but are inﬂuenced by the liquidity shock z. When z
is positive, for example, liquidity demanders are willing to sell because their endowment is
positively correlated with the asset.
Market clearing requires that the aggregate demand equals the asset supply θ̄:
(1 − π)θ1s + πθ1d = θ̄.

(2)

Substituting (1a) and (1b) into (2), we ﬁnd
(
)
S1 = D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ + πz .

(3)

The price S1 decreases in the liquidity shock z. When z is positive, for example, liquidity
demanders are willing to sell, and the price must drop so that the risk-averse liquidity suppliers
are willing to buy.
Agents choose holdings θ0 of the risky asset in Period 0 to maximize the ex-ante expected
utility
U ≡ (1 − π)U s + πU d ,
where U s denotes the interim utility of becoming a liquidity supplier in Period 1/2, and U d
that of becoming a liquidity demander. The solution to this maximization problem coincides
with the aggregate demand in Period 0, since all agents are identical in that period and are
in measure one. In equilibrium, aggregate demand has to equal the asset supply θ̄, and this
determines the price S0 in Period 0. The price is
S0 = D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ −

πM
∆1 θ̄,
1 − π + πM

(4)
9

where (M, ∆1 ) are positive constants. The ﬁrst term in (4) is the asset’s expected payoﬀ in
Period 2, the second term is a discount arising because the payoﬀ is risky, and the third term
is a discount due to illiquidity (i.e., low liquidity). The risk discount is independent of the
parameter σz2 that measures the size of liquidity shocks, and is non-zero even when there are
no shocks, i.e., σz2 = 0. The illiquidity discount is instead increasing in σz2 , and is zero when
σz2 = 0.
The illiquidity discount is the product of two terms. The ﬁrst term,

πM
1−π+πM ,

can be inter-

preted as the risk-neutral probability of being a liquidity demander: π is the true probability,
and M is the ratio of marginal utilities of wealth of demanders and suppliers, where utilities
are interim in Period 1/2. The second term, ∆1 θ̄, is the discount that an agent would require
conditional on being a demander. Since the illiquidity discount lowers the asset price in Period
0, it raises the expected return
E(R) = D̄ − S0
from buying the asset in Period 0 and holding it until it pays oﬀ in Period 2. From now on, we
refer to E(R) simply as the asset’s expected return.
Intuitively, the illiquidity discount arises because agents are concerned in Period 0 that the
endowment they might receive in Period 1 will increase their existing risk exposure. Therefore,
if they are less able to hedge in Period 1, they are less willing to take risk in Period 0, and they
require a larger discount to buy the asset. A discount arises even in the perfect-market benchmark because while risk sharing is optimal, hedging aﬀects the price. Market imperfections
aﬀect the discount because they aﬀect agents’ ability to hedge.
We construct two measures of illiquidity in Period 1, both based on the price impact of the
liquidity demanders’ trades. The ﬁrst measure, to which we refer as lambda or price impact,
is the coeﬃcient of a regression of the asset’s return, S1 − S0 , between Periods 0 and 1 on the
signed volume, π(θ1d − θ̄), of liquidity demanders in Period 1:
[
]
Cov S1 − S0 , π(θ1d − θ̄)
[
]
λ≡
.
Var π(θ1d − θ̄)

(5)

Intuitively, when λ is large, trades have large price impact and the market is illiquid. Eq. (3)
implies that the return between Periods 0 and 1 is
(
)
S1 − S0 = D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ + πz − S0 .

(6)

10

Eqs. (1b) and (3) imply that the signed volume of liquidity demanders is
π(θ1d − θ̄) = −π(1 − π)z.

(7)

Eqs. (5)-(7) imply that

λ=

ασ 2
.
1−π

(8)

Price impact λ is higher when agents are more risk-averse (α large), the asset is riskier (σ 2
large), or there are fewer liquidity suppliers (1 − π small).
Since the signed volume of liquidity demanders is minus that of liquidity suppliers, λ is
also minus the regression coeﬃcient of the return between Periods 0 and 1 on suppliers’ signed
volume in Period 1:
[
]
Cov S1 − S0 , (1 − π)(θ1s − θ̄)
[
]
λ=−
.
Var (1 − π)(θ1s − θ̄)

(9)

The supplier-based deﬁnition of λ can be easier to implement empirically than the equivalent
demander-based deﬁnition. This is because an important class of suppliers in some markets are
designated market makers, and information on their trades is often available.
The second measure of illiquidity is based on the autocovariance of returns. The liquidity
demanders’ trades in Period 1 cause the price to deviate from fundamental value, while the two
coincide in Period 2. Therefore, returns exhibit negative autocovariance, and more so when
trades have large price impact. We use minus autocovariance
γ ≡ −Cov (S2 − S1 , S1 − S0 ) ,

(10)

as a measure of illiquidity, and refer to it as price reversal. Eqs. (3), (6), (10) and S2 = D imply
that
[
(
)
(
)
]
γ = −Cov D − D̄ + ασ 2 θ̄ + πz , D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ + πz − S0 = α2 σ 4 σz2 π 2 .

(11)

Price reversal γ is higher when agents are more risk-averse, the asset is riskier, there are more
liquidity demanders (π large), or liquidity shocks are larger (σz2 large).
The measures λ and γ have been deﬁned in models focusing on speciﬁc market imperfections, and have been widely used in empirical work ever since. We emphasize their basic
properties below, leaving a more detailed discussion of the measures and their empirical estimation to Section 3.
11

Kyle (1985) deﬁnes λ in a model where an informed insider trades with uninformed market
makers and noise traders. In Kyle, market makers are risk neutral, and trades aﬀect prices
only because they contain information. Thus, the price impact, as measured by λ, reﬂects the
amount of information that trades convey, and is permanent because the risk-neutral market
makers set the price equal to their expectation of fundamental value. In general, as in our model,
λ has both a transitory and a permanent component. The transitory component, present even
in our perfect-market benchmark, arises because liquidity suppliers are risk averse and require
a price movement away from fundamental value to absorb a liquidity shock. The permanent
component arises only when information is asymmetric (Sections 2.4 and 2.5) for the same
reasons as in Kyle.
Roll (1984) links γ to the bid-ask spread, in a model where market orders cause the price
to bounce between the bid and the ask. Grossman and Miller (1988) link γ to the price impact
of liquidity shocks, in a model where risk-averse liquidity suppliers must incur a cost to participate in the market. In both models, price impact is purely transitory because information
is symmetric. In our model, price impact has both a transitory and a permanent component,
and γ isolates the eﬀects of the transitory component. Note that besides being a measure of
imperfections, γ provides a useful characterization of price dynamics: it measures the importance of the transitory component in price arising from temporary liquidity shocks, relative to
the random-walk component arising from fundamentals.

2.2

Participation Costs

In the perfect-market benchmark, all agents are present in the market in all periods. Thus, a
seller, for example, can have immediate access to the entire population of buyers. In practice,
however, agents face costs of market participation. Such costs include buying trading infrastructure or membership of a ﬁnancial exchange, having capital available on short notice, monitoring
market movements, etc. To model costly participation, we assume that agents must incur a cost
c to trade in Period 1. Consistent with the notion that participation is an ex-ante decision, we
assume that agents must decide whether or not to incur c in Period 1/2, after learning whether
or not they will receive an endowment but before observing the price in Period 1. (The price
depends on the liquidity shock, which is observed only in Period 1.) If the decision can be made
contingent on the price in Period 1, then c is a ﬁxed transaction cost rather than a participation
cost. We consider transaction costs as a separate market imperfection.
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium, then examine how participation costs aﬀect the illiquidity
measures and the expected return, and ﬁnally survey the literature on participation costs. We
12

look for an equilibrium where all liquidity demanders participate, but only a fraction µ > 0
of liquidity suppliers do. Such an equilibrium exists under two suﬃcient conditions, which we
assume from now on. First, the participation cost c is below a threshold ĉ, so that liquidity
suppliers are willing to participate. Second, the measure of demanders is less than that of
suppliers, i.e., π < 1/2. Intuitively, when demanders are the short side of the market, they
stand to gain more from participation, and can therefore cover the participation cost if suppliers
do.2 We focus on that case since we are interested in examining how participation costs can
aﬀect the supply of liquidity.
Market clearing requires that the aggregate demand of participating agents equals the asset
supply held by these agents. Since in equilibrium agents enter Period 1 holding θ̄ shares of the
risky asset, market clearing takes the form
(1 − π)µθ1s + πθ1d = [(1 − π)µ + π] θ̄.

(12)

Agents’ demand functions are as in Section 2.1. Substituting (1a) and (1b) into (12), we ﬁnd
that the price in Period 1 is
[
S1 = D̄ − ασ

2

]
π
z .
θ̄ +
(1 − π)µ + π

(13)

We derive the participation decision of liquidity suppliers by comparing the interim utility
U s of a participating supplier in Period 1/2 to the interim utility U sn of a non-participating
supplier. If the participation cost c is below a threshold c, then all suppliers participate (U s >
U sn and µ = 1). If c is above c and below a larger threshold c̄, then suppliers are indiﬀerent
between participating or not (U s = U sn ), and only some participate (0 < µ < 1). Increasing
c within that region reduces the fraction µ of participating suppliers, while maintaining the
indiﬀerence condition. This is because with fewer participating suppliers, competition becomes
less intense, enabling the remaining suppliers to cover their increased participation cost. Finally,
if c is above c̄, then no suppliers participate (U s < U sn and µ = 0). The price in Period 0 is
given by the same equation (4) as in the perfect-market benchmark, but for diﬀerent constants
(M, ∆1 ).
We next examine how participation costs impact the illiquidity measures and the expected
For c ≤ ĉ and π ≤ 1/2, only two equilibria exist: the one described above and the one where no agent
participates. The same is true for π larger but close to 1/2.
2

13

return. Proceeding as in Section 2.1, we can compute price impact λ and price reversal γ:
λ=

ασ 2
,
(1 − π)µ

(14)

γ=

α2 σ 4 σz2 π 2
.
[(1 − π)µ + π]2

(15)

Both measures are inversely related to the fraction µ of participating liquidity suppliers. We
can also show that the illiquidity discount is inversely related to µ.
We derive comparative statics with respect to c, and consider only the region c > c, where
the measure µ of participating suppliers is less than one. This is without loss of generality: in
the region c ≤ c, where all suppliers participate, prices are not aﬀected by the participation cost
and are as in the perfect-market benchmark. When c > c, an increase in the participation cost
lowers µ, and therefore raises price impact, price reversal and the illiquidity discount. Since the
illiquidity discount increases, so does the asset’s expected return.
Result 1 An increase in the participation cost c raises price impact λ, price reversal γ, and
the asset’s expected return E(R).

The idea that participation in ﬁnancial markets is costly and hence limited dates back to
Demsetz (1968). Demsetz (1968) studies the provision of immediacy, i.e., immediate execution
of trades. He argues that supplying immediacy is costly but there is a demand for it. Because
of the costs of supplying immediacy, only a subset of agents will choose to supply it, and
they will be compensated from the price concessions they will earn from the demanders of
immediacy. Demsetz (1968) identiﬁes the suppliers of immediacy with market makers, and
their compensation with the bid-ask spread.
A subsequent literature models price formation in the presence of market makers. In most
of that literature, market makers are assumed to be the only suppliers of immediacy and to
receive an exogenous ﬂow of orders from the demanders of immediacy. The literature determines
the bid-ask spreads chosen by market makers as a function of the process of order arrival, the
degree of competition between market makers, and the inventory and risk aversion of market
makers. Examples are Garman (1976), Stoll (1978b), Amihud and Mendelson (1980), Ho and
Stoll (1980, 1981, 1983), Cohen, Maier, Schwartz, and Whitcomb (1981) and Mildenstein and
Schleef (1983). Because of the focus on market makers’ inventory, that literature is often
referred to as the inventory literature.
Most of the inventory literature takes the market structure as exogenous, e.g., assumes
14

an exogenous number of market makers. One exception is Stoll (1978b), who endogenizes
the number of market makers in the spirit of Demsetz (1968), taking the costs of supplying
immediacy to be ﬁxed costs of processing orders. Grossman and Miller (1988) perform a similar
exercise, but emphasize more explicitly costs of market participation. Their setting is closely
related to ours: a number of liquidity suppliers choose whether or not to participate in a market,
and those choosing to participate pay a cost and can absorb an uncertain and exogenous order
by liquidity demanders. The analysis of Grossman and Miller (1988) is closely related to
the equilibrium in Periods 1/2 and 1 in our model. Grossman and Miller (1988) emphasize
additionally that the bid-ask spread has drawbacks as a measure of liquidity, and suggest the
use of price reversal instead. They show that price reversal increases in participation costs,
consistent with our Result 1.
Grossman and Miller (1988) do not derive the eﬀect of participation costs on ex-ante expected returns because they do not introduce our Period 0. They introduce, however, two
periods after our Period 1: a Period 2 in which an oﬀsetting liquidity shock arrives in the market, and a Period 3 in which the asset pays oﬀ. This captures the important idea that a liquidity
shock experienced by some agents is absorbed ﬁrst by a small set of market participants (the
liquidity suppliers in Period 1) and then by a larger set of agents who gradually arrive in the
market in response to the shock (the traders with the oﬀsetting liquidity shock in Period 2).
The idea that some agents arrive gradually into a market in response to proﬁtable opportunities has received attention recently in the search literature reviewed in Section 2.7. Duﬃe
(2010) and Suominen and Rinne (2011) model a similar eﬀect in a centralized market. They
assume that some agents arrive into a market infrequently with liquidity shocks. These shocks
are absorbed by market makers present in the market in all periods, and by other infrequent
traders arriving in future periods who can trade with market makers.
Huang and Wang (2009) study how participation costs aﬀect both the demand for immediacy, which Grossman and Miller (1988) treat as exogenous, and the supply. They assume
that liquidity shocks are opposite across agents and so do not aﬀect the price in the absence
of participation costs. Participation costs lower the price because sellers are more willing to
participate than buyers. The intuition is that sellers receive a larger risky endowment, and are
hence more concerned about the risk that an additional shock will leave them with a large risk
exposure. This eﬀect of participation costs on ex-ante expected returns is closely related to
the one that we derive in Period 0 of our model. Huang and Wang (2010) employ a similar
framework as in Huang and Wang (2009) to study welfare questions. They show, in particular,
that the market can provide less liquidity than the social optimum.

15

The costs of market participation in our model concern Period 1, which is after agents have
bought the asset. Costs to participate in the market in Period 0 and to buy the asset can be
interpreted as entry costs, e.g., learning about the asset. Goldsmith (1976), Mayshar (1979)
and Merton (1987) show that entry costs induce agents to under-invest and under-diversify,
and typically reduce asset prices. Entry costs would have a similar eﬀect in our model: they
would render agents less willing to buy the asset in Period 0, and hence would lower the Period
0 price. Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) conjecture that limited investor participation in the stock
market can render stocks cheaper relative to bonds, explaining the equity premium puzzle of
Mehra and Prescott (1985). Basak and Cuoco (1998) show that when some investors cannot
participate in the stock market, stocks’ expected excess returns relative to bonds increase, and
interest rates decrease.
Pagano (1989a) and Allen and Gale (1994) show that entry costs can result in multiple
equilibria: high-volatility ones, where few agents enter the market for an asset, causing volatility
to be high and entry to be undesirable, and low-volatility ones, where many agents enter. Key
for the multiplicity in Pagano (1989a) is the feedback from asset prices to equity issuance by
ﬁrms, and in Allen and Gale (1994) the heterogeneity between investors.3

2.3

Transaction Costs

In addition to costs of market participation, agents typically pay costs when executing transactions. Transaction costs drive a wedge between the buying and selling price of an asset. They
come in many types, e.g., brokerage commissions, exchange fees, transaction taxes, bid-ask
spreads, price impact. Some types of transaction costs can be viewed as a consequence of other
market imperfections: for example, Section 2.2 shows that costly participation can generate
price-impact costs. Other types of costs, such as transaction taxes, can be viewed as more
primitive. We assume that transaction costs concern trade in Period 1. The diﬀerence with the
participation costs of Section 2.2 is that the decision whether or not to incur the transaction
costs is contingent on the price in Period 1.
We focus on the case where transaction costs are proportional to transaction size, and for
simplicity assume that proportionality concerns the number of shares rather than the dollar
value. Denoting by κ the cost per unit of shares traded and by θt the number of shares that
an agent holds in Period t = 0, 1, proportional costs take the form κ |θ1 − θ0 |. We assume that
3
A diﬀerent type of multiplicity arises when agents can choose between market venues to trade an asset.
Agents prefer to trade in a venue where others are trading, and this causes concentration of trade in one venue
(Pagano (1989b)). A related multiplicity result arises in our model because there exists one equilibrium in which
there is market participation in Period 1 and one equilibrium in which no agent participates.

16

the liquidity shock z is drawn from a general distribution that is symmetric around zero with
density f (z); specializing to a normal distribution does not simplify the analysis.
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium, then examine how transaction costs aﬀect the illiquidity
measures and the expected return, and ﬁnally survey the literature on transaction costs. Transaction costs generate a bid-ask spread in Period 1. An agent buying one share pays the price
S1 plus the transaction cost κ, and so faces an eﬀective ask price S1 + κ. Conversely, an agent
selling one share receives S1 but pays κ, and so faces an eﬀective bid price S1 − κ. Because
of the bid-ask spread, trade occurs only if the liquidity shock z is suﬃciently large. Suppose,
for example, that z > 0, in which case liquidity demanders value the asset less than liquidity
suppliers. If liquidity suppliers buy, their demand function is as in Section 2.1 (Eq. (1a)), but
with S1 + κ taking the place of S1 , i.e.,
θ1s =

D̄ − S1 − κ
.
ασ 2

(16)

Conversely, if liquidity demanders sell, their demand function is as in Section 2.1 (Eq. (1b)),
but with S1 − κ taking the place of S1 , i.e.,
θ1d =

D̄ − S1 + κ
− z.
ασ 2

(17)

Since in equilibrium agents enter Period 1 holding θ̄ shares of the risky asset, trade occurs if
there exists a price S1 such that θ1s > θ̄ and θ1d < θ̄. Using (16) and (17), we can write these
conditions as
κ < D̄ − S1 − ασ 2 θ̄ < ασ 2 z − κ.
Therefore, trade occurs if z >

2κ
ασ 2

≡ κ̂, i.e., the liquidity shock z is large relative to the

transaction cost κ. The price S1 can be determined by substituting (16) and (17) into the
market-clearing equation (2). Repeating the analysis for z < 0, we ﬁnd that trade occurs in
Period 1 if |z| > κ̂, and in that case the price is
)
]
[
(
S1 = D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ + πz + κ̂ 12 − π sign(z) .

(18)

The eﬀect of transaction costs on the price depends on the relative measures of liquidity suppliers
and demanders. Suppose, for example, that z > 0. In the absence of transaction costs, liquidity
demanders sell and the price drops. Because transaction costs deter liquidity suppliers from
buying, they tend to depress the price, amplifying the eﬀect of z. At the same time, transaction
costs deter liquidity demanders from selling, and this tends to raise the price, dampening the
17

eﬀect of z. The overall eﬀect depends on agents’ relative measures. If π < 1/2 (more suppliers
than demanders), the impact on suppliers dominates, and transaction costs amplify the eﬀect
of z. The converse holds if π > 1/2. The price in Period 0 is given by the same equation (4) as
in the perfect-market benchmark, but for diﬀerent constants (M, ∆1 ).
We next examine how transaction costs impact the illiquidity measures and the expected
return. Because transaction costs deter liquidity suppliers from trading, they raise price impact
λ. Note that λ rises even when transaction costs dampen the eﬀect of the liquidity shock z
on the price. Indeed, dampening occurs not because of enhanced liquidity supply, but because
liquidity demanders scale back their trades.
Result 2 Price impact λ is higher than without transaction costs (κ = 0).
Deﬁning price reversal γ involves the complication that for small values of z there is no
trade in Period 1, and therefore the price S1 is not uniquely deﬁned. We deﬁne price reversal
conditional on trade in Period 1. The empirical counterpart of our deﬁnition is that no-trade
observations are dropped from the sample. Transaction costs aﬀect price reversal both because
they limit trade to large values of z, and because they impact the price conditional on trade
occuring. The ﬁrst eﬀect raises price reversal. The second eﬀect works in the same direction
when transaction costs amplify the eﬀect of z on the price, i.e., when π < 1/2.
Result 3 Price reversal γ is increasing in the transaction cost coeﬃcient κ if π ≤ 1/2.
Because transaction costs hinder trade in Period 1, a natural conjecture is that they raise
the illiquidity discount. When, however, π ≈ 1, transaction costs can lower the discount. The
intuition is that for π ≈ 1 liquidity suppliers are the short side of the market and stand to
gain the most from trade. Therefore, transaction costs hurt them the most, and reduce the
ratio M of marginal utilities of wealth of demanders and suppliers. This lowers the risk-neutral
probability

πM
1−π+πM

of being a demander, and can lower the discount. Transaction costs always

raise the discount, and hence the asset’s expected return, when π ≤ 1/2.
Result 4 The asset’s expected return E(R) is increasing in the transaction cost coeﬃcient κ
if π ≤ 1/2.
We can sharpen Results 3 and 4 by assuming speciﬁc distributions for the liquidity shock
z. When, in particular, z is normal, transaction costs raise γ for all values of π, and numerical
calculations suggest that they also raise the discount for all values of π.
18

Early papers on the eﬀects of transaction costs are Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and
Constantinides (1986). Constantinides (1986) derives the optimal investment policy of an inﬁnitely lived agent, who can trade a riskless and a risky asset. The return of the riskless asset is
constant over time, and that of the risky asset is i.i.d. The risky asset carries transaction costs,
which are proportional to the dollar value traded. Because the agent has CRRA preferences, the
optimal policy in the absence of transaction costs is to maintain a constant fraction of wealth
invested the risky asset, as in Merton (1971). In the presence of transaction costs, the agent
instead prevents this fraction from exiting an interval. When the fraction is strictly inside the
interval, the agent does not trade. The agent incurs a small utility loss from transaction costs,
even though he trades inﬁnitely often in their absence. Intuitively, the derivative of the utility
at the optimal policy is zero, and hence a deviation from that policy results in a second-order
loss.
The solution of Constantinides (1986) is approximate because consumption is assumed to be
an exogenous constant fraction of wealth. Davis and Norman (1990) provide an exact solution.
Fleming, Grossman, Vila, and Zariphopoulou (1990), Dumas and Luciano (1991) do the same
in the more tractable case where the agent consumes only at the end of his investment horizon.
To eliminate horizon eﬀects, they focus on the limit where the horizon converges to inﬁnity. Liu
and Loewenstein (2002) consider explicitly the ﬁnite-horizon case. Balduzzi and Lynch (1999),
Lynch and Balduzzi (2000), Liu (2004), Jang, Koo, Liu, and Loewenstein (2007) and Lynch
and Tan (2011) consider richer settings, involving multiple risky assets and predictable returns.
While Constantinides (1986) and the subsequent literature mainly emphasize portfolio optimization, they also explore implications for equilibrium asset prices. They do this by giving
the agent a choice between two economies: one in which the risky asset carries transaction costs,
and one in which it does not but its expected return is lower. They interpret the reduction in
expected return that would make the agent indiﬀerent between the two economies as an equilibrium eﬀect of transaction costs. Whether this eﬀect would arise in an explicit equilibrium
model, in which agents can trade both assets, is doubtful; for example, the eﬀect should depend
on the scarcity of the more liquid asset, but asset supply is not taken into consideration. This
exercise, however, provides an intuitive metric to express the utility loss from transaction costs.
Amihud and Mendelson (1986) build an equilibrium model, in which agents are risk neutral
and have diﬀerent investment horizons. Upon entering the economy, agents can invest in a set
of assets that diﬀer in transaction costs. Agents must sell their assets when they exit the
economy, and exit rates are independent of age but can diﬀer across agents. Assets with high
transaction costs trade at a lower price in equilibrium. Moreover, they are held by agents with

19

long investment horizons, i.e., low exit rates, who can amortize the costs over a longer period.
Each agent holds only one asset, the one maximizing expected return net of transaction costs
amortized over the agent’s horizon. The eﬀect of transaction costs on asset prices is concave.
Indeed, the price diﬀerential between one asset and its next closest in terms of transaction
costs is determined by the “marginal” investor who is indiﬀerent between the two assets. Since
the marginal investor in the case of assets with high transaction costs has a long horizon and
hence is less concerned about costs, the price diﬀerential between these assets is smaller than
for low-cost assets.
Aiyagari and Gertler (1991) and Vayanos and Vila (1999) allow for intertemporal consumption and risk aversion in a setting with two riskless assets, one of which carries transaction
costs. The latter paper shows that a decrease in the supply of the more liquid asset increases
the liquidity premium, i.e., the premium investors are willing to pay to hold that asset. This
is in the spirit of Amihud and Mendelson (1986): since the horizon of the marginal investor
becomes shorter, the investor is more concerned about transaction costs. Heaton and Lucas
(1996) assume that the asset carrying transaction costs is risky and agents trade to smooth
labor income shocks. A calibration of their model reveals that transaction costs have small
eﬀects on asset prices unless agents face borrowing constraints.
Vayanos (1998) re-examines the eﬀects of transaction costs in a setting with multiple risky
assets and risk averse agents. Agents hold a diversiﬁed portfolio at all times, but when they
need to reduce their risk exposure they sell disproportionately more of the assets with low
transaction costs. Moreover, because transaction costs make agents less willing not only to buy
but also to sell an asset, assets with high costs can trade at higher prices than assets with low
costs. This result, which also holds in Period 1 of our model, cannot arise when agents are
risk neutral or assets are riskless because of a “dominance” argument: since assets are perfect
substitutes except for transaction costs, agents would not buy assets with high costs if these
trade at higher prices than assets with low costs. Furthermore, the marginal-investor pricing
derived in Amihud and Mendelson (1986) does not hold since agents hold diversiﬁed portfolios
and hence are all marginal for an asset pair.
Huang (2003) assumes stochastic liquidation needs and two riskless assets, one of which
carries transaction costs. He shows that transaction costs can generate a strict preference for
diversiﬁcation even though the assets are riskless. This is because returns net of transaction
costs are risky: investing in the less liquid asset yields a low payoﬀ if an agent needs to sell
on short notice, and a high payoﬀ otherwise. Lo, Mamaysky, and Wang (2004) assume that
agents trade to share risk and have access to a riskless asset carrying no costs and a risky asset

20

carrying ﬁxed costs, i.e., independent of transaction size. They show that transaction costs
hinder risk sharing, as in Period 1 of our model, and this causes the price of the risky asset to
decrease, as in Period 0 of our model.
More recent work on transaction costs emphasizes the time variation in these costs and in
the liquidity premia per unit of the costs. Acharya and Pedersen (2005) assume that investors
have a one-period horizon and transaction costs are stochastic. They show that part of the
costs’ price eﬀect is through a risk premium. This is because transaction costs impact the
covariance between an asset’s return net of costs and the net return of the market portfolio.
For example, if an asset’s transaction costs increase when the costs of the market portfolio
increase or when the market portfolio’s dividends decrease, this adds to the asset’s risk and
causes the asset price to decrease. Beber, Driessen, and Tuijp (2012) examine the eﬀects of
stochastic transaction costs when investors diﬀer in their horizons.
Vayanos (2004) explores time variation in investor horizons, assuming constant transaction
costs. He assumes that investors are fund managers subject to withdrawals when their performance drops below a threshold, and that the volatility of asset dividends is time-varying.
During volatile times, fund managers’ horizons shorten because their performance is more likely
to drop below the threshold. This causes liquidity premia per unit of transaction costs to increase. It also causes the market betas of assets with high transaction costs to increase precisely
during the times when the market is the most risk averse.
Papers on time varying transaction costs and liquidity premia show that the traditional
CAPM should be augmented by pricing factors relating to aggregate liquidity. These factors
are aggregate transaction costs in Acharya and Pedersen (2005) and Beber, Driessen, and Tuijp
(2012), and volatility (which correlates with liquidity premia) in Vayanos (2004).
Buss and Dumas (2011) and Buss, Uppal, and Vilkov (2011) develop numerical algorithms
to solve dynamic general equilibrium models with transaction costs. Buss, Uppal, and Vilkov
(2011) assume multiple risky assets and labor income shocks, and show that transaction costs
have small price eﬀects. Buss and Dumas (2011) show that deterministic transactions costs
give rise to time-variation in measures of illiquidity, such as price impact and volume, and this
variation can be a priced factor.

2.4

Asymmetric Information

In the perfect-market benchmark, all agents have the same information about the payoﬀ of
the risky asset. In practice, however, agents can have diﬀerent information because they have
21

access to diﬀerent sources of information or have diﬀerent abilities to process information from
the same source. We model asymmetric information through a private signal s about the asset
payoﬀ D that some agents observe in Period 1. The signal is
s=D+ϵ

(19)

where ϵ is normal with mean zero and variance σϵ2 , and is independent of (D, z). We assume
that liquidity demanders, who observe the liquidity shock z in Period 1, are also the only ones
to observe s. Assuming instead that liquidity suppliers are the only ones to observe s would
get us back to symmetric information since each set of agents would infer the variable they do
not observe from the price. Note that because liquidity suppliers are uninformed, our model
determines how the supply of liquidity is inﬂuenced by suppliers’ concern about trading against
better-informed agents.
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium, then examine how asymmetric information aﬀects the
illiquidity measures and the expected return, and ﬁnally survey the literature on asymmetric
information. The price in Period 1 incorporates the signal of liquidity demanders, and therefore
reveals information to liquidity suppliers. To solve for equilibrium, we follow the standard rational expectations equilibrium (REE) procedure to conjecture a price function, i.e., a relationship
between the price and the signal, then determine how agents use their knowledge of the price
function to learn about the signal and formulate demand functions, and ﬁnally conﬁrm that
the conjectured price function clears the market. We conjecture a price function that is aﬃne
in the signal s and the liquidity shock z, i.e.,
S1 = a + b(s − D̄ − cz)

(20)

for constants (a, b, c). For expositional convenience, we set ξ ≡ s − D̄ − cz. Agents use the price
and their private information to form a posterior distribution about the asset payoﬀ D. For a
liquidity demander, the price conveys no additional information relative to observing the signal
s. For a liquidity supplier, the only information is the price, which is equivalent to observing ξ.
Agents’ demand functions in Period 1 are as in Section 2.1, with the conditional distributions
of D replacing the unconditional one, i.e.,
θ1s =

E[D|S1 ] − S1
,
ασ 2 [D|S1 ]

(21a)

θ1d =

E[D|s] − S1
− z.
ασ 2 [D|s]

(21b)

Substituting (21a) and (21b) into the market-clearing equation (2), we can write the latter as
an aﬃne equation in (s, z). Setting the coeﬃcients of (s, z) and of the constant term to zero
22

yields a system of three equations in the constants (a, b, c) that characterize the price in Period
1. The price in Period 0 is given by the same equation (4) as in the perfect-market benchmark,
but for diﬀerent constants (M, ∆1 ).
We next examine how asymmetric information impacts the illiquidity measures and the
expected return. When some agents observe a private signal, this not only generates dispersion
in information across agents, but also renders each agent more informed because the signal is
partially revealed through the price. The improvement in each agent’s information is not a
distinguishing feature of asymmetric information: information can also improve if all agents
observe a public signal. To focus on the dispersion in information, which is what distinguishes
asymmetric information, we compare with two symmetric-information benchmarks: the noinformation case, where information is symmetric because no agent observes the signal s, and
the full-information case, where all agents observe s.
Result 5 Price impact λ is higher under asymmetric information than under either of the
two symmetric-information benchmarks. It also increases when the private signal (19) becomes
more precise, i.e., when σϵ2 decreases.
The comparison between the asymmetric-, no- and full-information cases is driven by an
uncertainty and a learning eﬀect. Price impact increases in the uncertainty faced by liquidity
suppliers, measured by their conditional variance of the asset payoﬀ. Because of this uncertainty
eﬀect, price impact tends to be lowest under full information, since liquidity suppliers observe
the signal perfectly, next lowest under asymmetric information, since the signal is partially
revealed to liquidity suppliers through the price, and highest under no information.
An additional source of price impact, present only under asymmetric information, is that
liquidity suppliers seek to learn the signal from the price. Because, for example, liquidity
suppliers attribute selling pressure partly to a low signal, they require a larger price drop to
buy. This learning eﬀect works in the same direction as the uncertainty eﬀect when comparing
asymmetric to full information, but in the opposite direction when comparing asymmetric to
no information. Result 5 implies that in the latter comparison the learning eﬀect dominates.
While price impact is unambiguously higher under asymmetric information, the same is
not true for price reversal. Suppose for example, that π ≈ 1, i.e., almost all agents are liquidity
demanders (informed). Then the price processes under asymmetric and full information approximately coincide, and so do the price reversals. Since, in addition, liquidity suppliers face
more uncertainty under no information than under full information, price reversal is highest
under no information. If instead π ≈ 0, i.e., almost all agents are liquidity suppliers (unin23

formed), then price impact λ converges to inﬁnity (order 1/π) under asymmetric information.
This is because the trading volume of liquidity demanders converges to zero, but the volume’s
informational content remains unchanged. Because of the high price impact, price reversal is
highest under asymmetric information.
Result 6 Price reversal γ is higher under asymmetric information than under either of the
two symmetric-information benchmarks if π ≈ 0. If, however, π ≈ 1, then price reversal is
higher under no information than under asymmetric information.
The analysis of the illiquidity discount involves an eﬀect that goes in the direction opposite
to the uncertainty eﬀect. This is that information revealed about the asset payoﬀ in Period 1
reduces uncertainty and hence the scope for risk sharing. Less risk sharing, in turn, renders
agents less willing to buy the asset in Period 0 and raises the illiquidity discount. The negative
eﬀect of information on risksharing and welfare has been shown in Hirshleifer (1971). We derive
the implications of the Hirshleifer eﬀect for asset pricing: the reduced scope for risksharing in
Period 1 lowers the asset price in Period 0 and raises the illiquidity discount.
Because of the Hirshleifer eﬀect, the illiquidity discount under full information is higher
than under no information—a comparison which is exactly the reverse than for the measures
of illiquidity. The Hirshleifer eﬀect implies that the illiquidity discount under asymmetric information should be between that under no and under full information. The discount under
asymmetric information, however, is also inﬂuenced by the learning eﬀect, which raises price
impact, reduces the scope for risk sharing and hence raises the discount. The learning eﬀect
works in the same direction as the Hirshleifer eﬀect when comparing asymmetric to no information, but in the opposite direction when comparing asymmetric to full information. Result 7
implies that in the latter comparison the learning eﬀect dominates: the illiquidity discount, and
hence the asset’s expected return, is highest under asymmetric information than under either
of the two symmetric-information benchmarks.
Result 7 The asset’s expected return E(R) is higher under asymmetric information than under
either of the two symmetric-information benchmarks.
The analysis of REE with asymmetric information was pioneered by Grossman (1976).
Grossman (1976) assumes that agents observe private signals about the payoﬀ of a risky asset,
which are of equal quality and independent conditional on the payoﬀ. The equilibrium price
of the risky asset reveals the average of agents’ signals, which is a suﬃcient statistic for all the
signals because of normality. Hence, the price aggregates information perfectly.
24

Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) assume that some agents observe a common signal about
the payoﬀ of a risky asset and the remaining agents observe no signal. Following some of the
literature, we term this information structure “asymmetric information structure,” and that in
Grossman (1976) as “diﬀerential information structure.” Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) allow
additionally for the supply of the risky asset to be stochastic. With a deterministic supply, the
price reveals perfectly the signal of the informed agents, and hence the uninformed can achieve
the same utility as the informed. With a stochastic supply instead, the informed can achieve
higher utility. The analysis of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) is closely related to the equilibrium
in Period 1 of our model, except that we introduce noise in the price through endowments rather
than through the asset supply. Diamond and Verrecchia (1981) are ﬁrst to use this modeling
trick, and do so in a diﬀerential information model.
Grossman (1976) and Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) derive two basic paradoxes relating
to information aggregation. Since the price in Grossman (1976) aggregates perfectly agents’
private signals, agents should form their asset demand based only on the price and not on their
signals. The paradox then is how can the price aggregate the signals. A second paradox is that
if the price in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) reveals perfectly the signal of the informed agents,
then why would the informed be willing to commit resources to acquire their signal.
Both paradoxes can be resolved by introducing noise, e.g., through stochastic asset supply.
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) show that with stochastic supply, the informed can achieve higher
utility than the uninformed and hence can have an incentive to acquire costly information.
This has the important implication that markets cannot be fully eﬃcient when information
acquisition is costly because information will be acquired only when the price is not fully
revealing.4 Hellwig (1980) introduces stochastic supply in a diﬀerential information model,
which generalizes Grossman (1976) by allowing for heterogeneity in signal quality and agent
risk aversion. He shows that the price does not aggregate information perfectly, and hence
agents have an incentive to use both the price and their private signal when forming their asset
demand.
All papers mentioned so far assume that agents can trade one riskless and one risky asset
over one period. Admati (1985) extends the analysis to multiple risky assets, while also allowing
for a general correlation structure between asset payoﬀs, asset supplies, and agents’ private
signals. She shows that because signals about one asset are also informative about the payoﬀ
and supply of others, surprising phenomena can arise. For example, a high price of one asset,
holding other prices constant, can cause agents to lower their expectation of that asset’s payoﬀ.
4

This conclusion does not extend to settings with imperfect competition, as we point out in Section 2.5.

25

Grundy and McNichols (1989) and Brown and Jennings (1990) assume two trading periods
and one risky asset. They show that uninformed traders learn about the asset payoﬀ not only
from current prices but also from past ones because prices are noisy signals of asset payoﬀs.
The optimal strategy thus uses the entire price history, in a manner similar to strategies used by
technical traders. Wang (1993) studies a continuous-time setting with one risky asset. He shows
that uninformed agents behave as price chasers, buying following a price increase. He also shows
that return volatility and price reversal can be highest under asymmetric information than under
full or no information. The latter result is consistent with our Result 6. Wang (1994) employs a
similar model to study the behavior of trading volume and its relationship with price changes.
These papers assume an asymmetric information structure. He and Wang (1995) study the
joint behavior of trading volume and prices under a diﬀerential information structure. Vives
(1995) studies the speed at which prices aggregate information under a combined asymmetricdiﬀerential information structure, where some agents observe conditionally independent signals
about the payoﬀ of a risky asset and the remaining agents observe no signal.
Much of the literature on REE with asymmetric information focuses on the informativeness
of prices, rather than on market liquidity. Market liquidity is instead emphasized in a subsequent
literature which combines asymmetric information with strategic behavior or sequential arrival
of traders. This literature was pioneered by Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985),
and is surveyed in the next section. Yet, even REE models with asymmetric information have
implications for market liquidity. We derive such implications in the context of our model in
Results 5 and 6. Moreover, Cespa and Foucault (2011) show that asymmetric information can
generate liquidity spillovers: because asset payoﬀs are correlated, a drop in liquidity in one
asset reduces the information available on other assets, hence reducing the liquidity of those
assets.
A number of recent papers examine whether agents require higher expected returns to invest
in the presence of asymmetric information. O’Hara (2003) and Easley and O’Hara (2004) show
that prices and lower and expected returns higher when agents receive private signals than when
signals are public. This comparison concerns Period 1 of our model, and reverses when using
the alternative symmetric-information benchmark where no signals are observed. By contrast,
we show (Result 7) that the price in Period 0 is lower under asymmetric information than under
either symmetric-information benchmark. Comparing prices in Period 0 measures the ex-ante
eﬀect of the imperfection, i.e., what compensation do agents require to invest ex-ante knowing
that they will face asymmetric information ex-post? Qiu and Wang (2010) derive similar results
in an inﬁnite-horizon model. Garleanu and Pedersen (2004) show in a model with risk-neutral
agents and unit demands that asymmetric information can raise or lower prices, with the eﬀect
26

being zero when probability distributions are symmetric—as is the case under normality. Ellul
and Pagano (2006) show that asymmetric information lowers prices in a model of IPO trading.

2.5

Imperfect Competition

In the perfect-market benchmark, agents are competitive and have no eﬀect on prices. In many
markets, however, some agents are large relative to others in the sense that they can inﬂuence
prices, either because of their size or because of their information advantage. We model imperfect competition by assuming that some agents can exert market power in Period 1. We focus
on the case where liquidity demanders behave as a single monopolist, but also consider more
brieﬂy monopolistic behavior by liquidity suppliers. We emphasize the former case because it
has received more attention in the literature. When liquidity suppliers behave monopolistically,
imperfect competition obviously inﬂuences the supply of liquidity. More surprisingly, it can
also inﬂuence liquidity supply when liquidity demanders behave monopolistically and suppliers
do not.
We consider both the case where liquidity demanders have no private information on asset
payoﬀs, and so information is symmetric, and the case where they observe the private signal
(19), and so information is asymmetric. The second case nests the ﬁrst by setting the variance
σϵ2 of the signal noise to inﬁnity. Hence, we treat both cases simultaneously, and compare
imperfect competition to the competitive equilibrium with asymmetric information studied in
Section 2.4.
The trading mechanism in Period 1 is that liquidity suppliers submit a demand function and
liquidity demanders submit a market order, i.e., a price-inelastic demand function. Restricting
liquidity demanders to trade by market order is without loss of generality: they do not need to
condition their demand on price because they know all information available in Period 1.
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium when liquidity demanders behave monopolistically, and
examine how imperfect competition aﬀects the illiquidity measures and the expected return. We
next treat more brieﬂy the case where liquidity suppliers behave monopolistically, and ﬁnally
survey the literature on imperfect competition.
We conjecture that the price in Period 1 has the same aﬃne form (20) as in the competitive
case, with possibly diﬀerent constants (a, b, c). Given (20), the demand function of liquidity
suppliers is (21a) as in the competitive case. Substituting (21a) into the market-clearing equation (2), yields the price in Period 1 as a function S1 (θ1d ) of the liquidity demanders’ market

27

order θ1d . Liquidity demanders choose θ1d to maximize the expected utility
{
[
(
)
]}
−E exp −α W1 + θ1d D − S1 (θ1d ) + z(D − D̄) .

(22)

The diﬀerence with the competitive case is that liquidity demanders behave as a single monopolist and take into account the impact of their order θ1d on the price S1 . The optimal order of
liquidity demanders satisﬁes
θ1d =

where λ̂ ≡

E[D|s] − S1 (θ1d ) − ασ 2 [D|s]z + λ̂θ̄
ασ 2 [D|s] + λ̂
dS1 (θ1d )
.
dθ1d

,

(23)

Eq. (23) determines θ1d implicitly because it includes θ1d in both the left-

and the right-hand side. We write θ1d in the form (23) to facilitate the comparison with the
competitive case. Indeed, the competitive counterpart of (23) is (21b), and can be derived by
setting λ̂ to zero. The parameter λ̂ measures the price impact of liquidity demanders, and is
closely related to the price impact λ. Because in equilibrium λ̂ > 0, the denominator of (23)
is larger than that of (21b), and therefore θ1d is less sensitive to changes in E[D|s] − S1 and z
than in the competitive case. Intuitively, because liquidity demanders take price impact into
account, they trade less aggressively in response to their signal and their liquidity shock.
Substituting (21a) and (23) into the market-clearing equation (2), and proceeding as in
Section 2.4, we ﬁnd a system of three equations in the constants (a, b, c) that characterize the
price in Period 1. The price in Period 0 is given by the same equation (4) as in the perfectmarket benchmark, but for diﬀerent constants (M, ∆1 ).
We next examine how imperfect competition by liquidity demanders impacts the illiquidity
measures and the expected return.

Result 8 Price impact λ is the same as under perfect competition when information is symmetric, and higher when information is asymmetric.

When information is asymmetric, imperfect competition lowers liquidity, as measured by
price impact, even though liquidity suppliers are competitive. The intuition is that when
liquidity demanders take into account their eﬀect on price, they trade less aggressively in
response to their signal and their liquidity shock. This reduces the size of both informationand liquidity-generated trades (hence lowering b). The relative size of the two types of trades

28

(measured by c) remains the same, and so does price informativeness, measured by the signal-tonoise ratio. Monopoly trades thus have the same informational content as competitive trades,
but are smaller in size. As a result, the signal per unit trade is higher, and so is the price
impact λ of trades. Imperfect competition has no eﬀect on price impact when information is
symmetric because trades have no informational content.
An increase in information asymmetry, through a reduction in the variance σϵ2 of the signal
noise, generates an illiquidity spiral. Because illiquidity increases, liquidity demanders scale
back their trades. This raises the signal per unit trade, further increasing illiquidity. When
σϵ2 reaches a lower bound σ̂ϵ2 , illiquidity becomes inﬁnite and trade ceases, leading to a market
breakdown. For σϵ2 ≤ σ̂ϵ2 , a linear equilibrium fails to exist.
While imperfect competition raises price impact λ, it lowers price reversal γ. Intuitively,
price reversal arises because the liquidity demanders’ trades in Period 1 cause the price to
deviate from fundamental value. Under imperfect competition, these trades are smaller and so
is price reversal.

Result 9 Price reversal γ is lower than under perfect competition.

Imperfect competition can lower or raise the illiquidity discount. Indeed, since liquidity
demanders scale back their trades, they render the price less responsive to their liquidity shock.
Therefore, they can obtain better insurance against the shock, and become less averse to holding
the asset in Period 0. This eﬀect drives the illiquidity discount, and hence the asset’s expected
return, below the competitive value when information is symmetric. When information is
asymmetric, the comparison can reverse. This is because the scaling back of trades generates the
spiral of increasing illiquidity, and this reduces the insurance received by liquidity demanders.

Result 10 The asset’s expected return E(R) is lower than under perfect competition when
information is symmetric, but can be higher when information is asymmetric.

The case where liquidity suppliers behave monopolistically can be treated in a manner
similar to the case where demanders do, so we provide a brief sketch. Suppose that demanders
are competitive but suppliers behave as a single monopolist in Period 1. Since suppliers do
not know the liquidity shock z and signal s, their trading strategy is to submit a price-elastic
demand function (rather than a market order). Monopolistic behavior renders this demand
function less price-elastic than its competitive counterpart (21a). The lower elasticity manifests

29

itself through an additive positive term in the denominator of the competitive demand (21a),
exactly as is the case for liquidity demanders in (21b) and (23).
Because liquidity suppliers submit a less price-elastic demand function than in the competitive case, the trades of liquidity demanders have larger price impact. Hence, price impact
λ and price reversal γ are larger than in the competitive case. The illiquidity discount is also
larger because liquidity demanders receive worse insurance against the liquidity shock.
Two seminal papers on imperfect competition in ﬁnancial markets and its relationship with
asymmetric information are Kyle (1985,1989). Kyle (1989) assumes a combined asymmetricdiﬀerential information structure, where some agents observe conditionally independent signals
about the payoﬀ of a risky asset and the remaining agents observe no signals. Agents submit demand functions, as in competitive rational expectations equilibrium (REE), but the equilibrium
concept is instead Nash equilibrium in demand functions, as in Wilson (1979) and Klemperer
and Meyer (1989). Noise traders add a stochastic amount to the asset supply, preventing prices
from being fully revealing. Because informed agents take into account their eﬀect on price,
they trade less aggressively in response to their signal. Imperfect competition thus reduces the
size of information-based trades. Since it has no eﬀect on liquidity-generated trades, which are
initiated by the exogenous noise traders, it lowers price informativeness.
Kyle (1985) assumes a risk neutral insider who observes a private signal about the payoﬀ
of a risky asset and can trade with market makers and noise traders. The insider and the noise
traders submit market orders, which are batched together and absorbed by market makers.
Because the latter are risk neutral and competitive, they compete a la Bertrand and absorb all
orders at a price equal to their conditional expectation of the asset payoﬀ. Imperfect competition
reduces price informativeness, as in Kyle (1989). An advantage of Kyle (1985) is that it is highly
tractable and can be extended in many directions. One important extension, performed in Kyle
(1985), is to allow trading to take place dynamically, over more than one period. The insider
then reveals his information slowly over time, as revealing it quickly would subject him to a
higher price impact in the early periods. In the continuous-time limit, the insider reveals his
information in a way that exactly equates price impact across time.
The model of Kyle (1985) has been extended in many directions. A ﬁrst extension is
to introduce multiple insiders. Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) show that liquidity traders can
concentrate their trades in the same period, to reduce price impact, and this eﬀect can be
ampliﬁed when there are multiple insiders. Holden and Subrahmanyam (1992) assume multiple
insiders who receive a common signal about the payoﬀ of a risky asset, and show that they

30

reveal it almost immediately in the continuous-trading limit because each insider tries to exploit
his information before others do. Foster and Viswanathan (1996) assume multiple insiders who
receive imperfectly correlated signals, and show that information revelation slows down because
of a “waiting-game” eﬀect, whereby each insider attempts to learn the others’ signals. Back,
Cao, and Willard (2000) formulate this problem in continuous time and show that information
is not fully revealed in prices until the end of the trading session.
A second extension is to drop the noise traders and derive non-informational trading from
utility maximization. Glosten (1989) generates non-informational trading through a random
endowment received by the insider. We make the same assumption, and the equilibrium in
our Period 1 is closely related to the one that Glosten (1989) derives in the case where market
makers are competitive. Glosten (1989) assumes risk-neutral market makers; a paper even
closer to our model is Bhattacharya and Spiegel (1991), which assumes that liquidity suppliers
are risk averse.5 Both papers ﬁnd that the market breaks down when information asymmetry
is severe. The mechanism is the same as in our model, and the key assumptions are that some
liquidity demanders are informed and all are non-price-takers.6 The idea that adverse selection
can cause market breakdown dates back to Akerlof (1970).
Other extensions are to introduce risk aversion, non-normal probability distributions for the
asset payoﬀ, and a minimum trade size. Back (1992) shows that the result on the equalization
of price impact across time extends to general payoﬀ distributions. Holden and Subrahmanyam
(1994) and Baruch (2002) show that a risk averse insider reveals his information faster than
a risk neutral one because he is eager to reduce the uncertainty at which his trades will be
executed. Back and Baruch (2004) assume that noise traders execute discrete transactions
rather than trading continuously, in which case the insider must do the same so not to be
revealed. They show that the insider follows a mixed strategy, and can trade in a direction
opposite to his information in some cases.
A further extension is to change the information structure. Kyle (1985) assumes that
the insider receives all his information in an initial period, and the information is announced
publicly in a ﬁnal period. Chau and Vayanos (2008) and Caldentey and Stacchetti (2010) show
that when the insider receives a constant ﬂow of new information over time, he chooses to reveal
it inﬁnitely fast in the continuous-trading limit. This result is in sharp contrast to Kyle (1985),
where revelation is slow. Moreover, markets are arbitrarily close to eﬃciency and yet informed
5

Both papers assume one trading period and do not derive eﬀects on ex-ante expected returns, as we do.

6

For example, market breakdown does not occur in Kyle (1985) because noise traders submit price-inelastic
demands, which can be viewed as an extreme form of price taking.

31

traders earn abnormal proﬁts, in sharp contrast to Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). Eﬃcient
markets and insider proﬁts are not contradictory because continuous trading gives insiders the
ﬂexibility to earn proﬁts even though they reveal each piece of new information within a very
short interval.7 Other models exploring insider trading with a ﬂow of new information are Back
and Pedersen (1998) and Guo and Ou-Yang (2010).
A ﬁnal set of extensions examine issues relating to market design. For example, Chowhdry
and Nanda (1991) study the competition between market venues. Fishman and Hagerty (1992),
Leland (1992) and Repullo (1999) study whether insider trading is desirable or should be
banned. Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1991) study “sunshine trading,” whereby liquidity traders
pre-announce their intention to trade, so to distinguish themselves from insiders and reduce
their trading costs. Pagano and Roell (1996) and Naik, Neuberger, and Viswanathan (1999)
study the eﬀects of a transparency regulation requiring disclosure of all trades but of not traders’
identities. Huddart, Hughes, and Levine (2001) consider instead a regulation requiring disclosure of trades by insiders. They show that the regulation speeds up information revelation and
reduces insiders’ proﬁts. It also induces the insiders to trade less aggressively and follow a mixed
strategy, trading occasionally in a direction opposite to their information. Buﬀa (2011) shows
that because of the latter eﬀect, the regulation can instead slow down information revelation
when insiders are risk averse.
Kyle (1985) and much of the subsequent literature assume that the non-price-taking agents
are insiders who receive private information about asset payoﬀs. In many cases, however,
agents without such information aﬀect prices simply because of the size of their trades. For
example, trades by pension funds can exceed the average daily volume of many stocks, and are
often triggered by reasons other than information, e.g., regulatory constraints. Vayanos (1999)
assumes that large traders with no private information about asset payoﬀs receive random
endowments over time and need to share risk. He shows that these agents break their trades
into small pieces so to reduce price impact, and risk sharing is accomplished slowly even in the
continuous-trading limit. What deters them from trading faster is that this will signal to the
market that a larger trade is yet to come, and so price impact will be large. Vayanos (2001)
shows that the presence of noise traders in this setting can accelerate trading and hence improve
7
Jackson (1991) provides an alternative resolution of the Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) paradox within a static
setting. He assumes that agents can acquire private signals at a cost and submit demand functions as in Kyle
(1989). Unlike in Kyle (1989), there are no noise traders. The equilibrium price is fully revealing and yet agents
have an incentive to acquire information. This is because information helps them predict their price impact,
which the price does not reveal. Normal-linear models cannot generate this eﬀect because price impact is a
constant independent of information. For an analysis of information revelation without noise traders, normality
and linearity, see also Laﬀont and Maskin (1990).

32

risk sharing.8
Large traders who trade over time to share risk are similar to durable-good monopolists. According to the Coase conjecture, the monopolists should trade inﬁnitely fast in the continuoustrading limit. Trading occurs slowly in Vayanos (1999) because each trader is the only one to
observe his endowment and hence his eagerness to share risk; if instead endowments are publicly
observed, the Coase conjecture holds. DeMarzo and Urosevic (2006) consider a general setting
where a large trader needs to share risk but can also take actions to increase asset payoﬀs,
e.g., monitor the ﬁrm’s managers. The trader’s eagerness to share risk is public information.
DeMarzo and Urosevic (2006) conﬁrm the Coase conjecture in the case where asset payoﬀs are
independent of the trader’s actions. Rostek and Weretka (2011) study risk sharing in a dynamic
setting where agents’ endowments are public information. They decompose the price impact of
a trade into a permanent component, due to the risk aversion of agents taking the other side,
and a temporary one, due to their monopoly power.
When large traders aﬀect prices, information about their future trades is valuable to others.
This is so even when large traders themselves have no information about asset payoﬀs. Cao,
Evans, and Lyons (2006) label information about future large trades “inventory information.”
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) assume that a large trader needs to sell because of ﬁnancial
distress, and show that other traders exploit this information by selling at the same time as
him. Such “predatory” behavior beneﬁts these traders because they cause the distressed trader
to sell at low prices, at which they can buy. Pritsker (2005) studies predatory behavior in
a multi-asset setting. Attari, Mello, and Ruckes (2005), Fardeau (2011) and Venter (2011)
model the ﬁnancial constraints of distressed traders and examine how predatory behavior by
others can bring them closer to distress by moving asset prices against them. Carlin, Lobo, and
Viswanathan (2007) derive predatory behavior as a breakdown of collaboration in a repeated
game.
Most papers mentioned so far emphasize non-price-taking behavior by liquidity demanders;
liquidity suppliers, such as market makers, are assumed to behave competitively. Biais (1993)
studies how oligopolistic market makers bid for an order, depending on whether or not they
know the inventories of their competitors. He relates the quality of market makers’ information
to whether the market is centralized or fragmented. Earlier papers on oligopolistic market
makers include Ho and Stoll (1980) and Copeland and Galai (1983).
8
Bertsimas and Lo (1998), Almgren and Chriss (1999), Almgren (2003) and Huberman and Stanzl (2005) study
the optimal policy of large traders in partial-equilibrium settings, under exogenous price dynamics. Obizhaeva
and Wang (2006) derive the price dynamics faced by large traders from a model of the limit-order book, which
describes how new limit orders arrive after existing ones are consumed.

33

Glosten (1989) shows that when information is asymmetric, a market with a monopoly market maker can dominate one with competitive market makers. This is because the market can
break down with competitive market makers, but breakdown can be avoided with a monopoly
market maker. Glosten (1989) models perfect competition between market makers in terms
of a zero-proﬁt condition. Glosten (1994) derives this condition as the equilibrium of a game
in which market makers post price-quantity schedules. Bernhardt and Hughson (1997) study
this game in the case of two oligopolistic market makers. Biais, Martimort, and Rochet (2000)
study the game for a general number of market makers and provide a full characterization of
the equilibrium. For a ﬁnite number of market makers the equilibrium has a Cournot ﬂavor,
and it converges to the competitive case characterized by Glosten (1989) as the number goes
to inﬁnity. Back and Baruch (2011) provide an alternative characterization of the same game.
Models with non-price-taking behavior study the interaction between small numbers of
agents. In this sense, they are related to models of sequential order arrival, in which traders
arrive in the market one at a time and remain there for a short period. The latter models
assume implicitly participation costs since agents are not present in the market until when they
arrive. Early models in that spirit include Garman (1976), Amihud and Mendelson (1980) and
Ho and Stoll (1981), in which market makers receive an exogenous ﬂow of orders.
Glosten and Milgrom (1985) propose a highly tractable model of sequential order arrival
with asymmetric information. Some of the agents receive a private signal about the asset payoﬀ,
while others do not and trade for liquidity reasons. Upon arriving in the market, agents can
execute a buy or sell transaction of a ﬁxed size with market makers. As in Kyle (1989), market
makers are risk neutral and competitive. Therefore, they compete a la Bertrand and absorb
orders at a price equal to their conditional expectation of the asset payoﬀ. In equilibrium, the
bid price that market makers quote to buy from other agents is lower than the ask price that
they quote to sell to them. This is because when market makers buy, they suspect that other
agents might have sold to them because of negative information. Glosten and Milgrom (1985)
thus link the bid-ask spread to asymmetric information, building on earlier work by Bagehot
(1971) and Copeland and Galai (1983).
The models of Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985) give rise to diﬀerent measures
of illiquidity. Illiquidity in Glosten and Milgrom (1985) is measured by the bid-ask spread since
all transactions are assumed to be of a ﬁxed size. By contrast, in Kyle (1985) transactions can
be of any size since probability distributions are normal and trading strategies linear. Illiquidity
is measured by the sensitivity of price to quantity, which corresponds to λ in our model. While
the bid-ask spread and λ are derived within diﬀerent models, the share the basic property of
34

being increasing in the degree of asymmetric information. Easley and O’Hara (1987) consider a
hybrid model in which agents arrive in the market one at a time and can execute transactions
of variable size with market makers. The prices that market makers post depend on quantity,
in a spirit similar to Kyle (1985). Easley and O’Hara (1992) allow the time when private
information arrives to be stochastic. They show that the bid-ask spread increases following a
surge in trading activity because market makers infer that private information has arrived.
A recent literature studies sequential order arrival in limit-order markets, where there are
no designated market makers and liquidity is supplied by the arriving agents. Agents can
execute a buy or sell transaction of a ﬁxed size. Impatient agents execute this transaction
immediately upon arrival through a market order, and hence demand liquidity. Patient agents
submit instead a limit order, i.e., a price-elastic demand function, which is executed against
future market orders. Hence, they supply liquidity to future agents. Papers in that literature
include Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999), Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2005), Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2005) and Rosu (2009).9 These papers determine the bid-ask spread that
results from the submitted limit orders, the choice of agents between market and limit orders,
the expected time for limit orders to execute, etc. A positive bid-ask spread arises even in
the absence of asymmetric information, and is decreasing in the degree of competition between
limit-order suppliers. This parallels our result that λ is larger when liquidity suppliers behave
monopolistically than when they are competitive.

2.6

Funding Constraints

Agents’ portfolios often involve leverage, i.e., borrow cash to establish a long position in a
risky asset, or borrow a risky asset to sell it short. In the perfect-market benchmark, agents
can borrow freely provided that they have enough resources to repay the loan. But as the
Corporate Finance literature emphasizes, various frictions can limit agents’ ability to borrow
and fund their positions. These frictions can also inﬂuence the supply of liquidity in the market.
Since in our model consumption is allowed to be negative and unbounded from below,
agents can repay a loan of any size by reducing consumption. Negative consumption can be
interpreted as a costly activity that agents undertake in Period 2 to repay a loan. We derive a
funding constraint by assuming that agents cannot commit to reduce their consumption below
a level −A ≤ 0. This nests the case of full commitment assumed in the rest of this paper
9

These papers assume that agents have market power. Biais, Hombert, and Weill (2011) assume instead that
agents are competitive and observe their valuation for an asset only infrequently. They show that the optimal
orders that agents submit at the observation times can be price-contingent and concern future execution.

35

(A = ∞), and the case where agents can walk away from a loan rather than engaging in
negative consumption (A = 0). Because our focus is on how the funding constraint inﬂuences
the supply of liquidity, we impose it on liquidity suppliers only, i.e., assume that the lack of
commitment concerns only them.
For simplicity, we assume that loans must be fully collateralized in the sense that agents
must be able to commit enough resources to cover any losses in full. To ensure that full
collateralization is possible, we replace normal distributions by distributions with bounded
support. We denote the support of the asset payoﬀ D by [D̄ − bD , D̄ + bD ] and that of the
liquidity shock z by [−bz , bz ]. We assume that D and z are distributed symmetrically around
their respective means, D is positive (i.e., D̄ −bD ≥ 0), and agents receive a positive endowment
B of the riskless asset in Period 0.
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium, then examine how the funding constraint aﬀects the
illiquidity measures and the illiquidity discount, and ﬁnally survey the literature on funding
constraints. To derive the funding constraint, we note that losses from investing in the risky
asset can be covered by wealth W1 or negative consumption. Since liquidity suppliers must be
able to cover losses in full, and cannot commit to consume less than −A, losses cannot exceed
W1 + A, i.e.,
θ1s (S1 − D) ≤ W1 + A for all D.
This yields the constraint
m|θ1s | ≤ W1 + A,

(24)

where
m ≡ S1 − min D

if θ1s > 0,

(25a)

m ≡ max D − S1

if θ1s < 0.

(25b)

D

D

The constraint (24) requires that a position of θ1s shares is backed by capital m|θ1s |. This limits
the size of the position as a function of the capital W1 + A available to suppliers in Period 1.
Suppliers’ capital is the sum of the capital W1 that they physically own in Period 1, and the
capital A that they can access through their commitment to consume −A in Period 2. The
parameter m is the required capital per share, and can be interpreted as a margin or haircut.
The margin is equal to the maximum possible loss per share. For example, the margin (25a)
for a long position does not exceed the asset price S1 , and is strictly smaller if the asset payoﬀ
D has a positive lower bound (i.e., minD D = D̄ − bD > 0).
36

Intuitively, the constraint (24) can bind when there is a large discrepancy between the price
S1 and the expected payoﬀ D̄, since this is when liquidity suppliers want to hold large positions.
If (24) binds, then the demand function θ1s of a liquidity supplier in Period 1 is determined by
(24) together with the requirement that θ1s has the same sign as D̄ − S1 . If (24) does not bind,
then the demand function is
( )−1
θ1s = f ′
(D̄ − S1 ),

(26)

where
[
]
log E exp −αθ(D − D̄)
f (θ) ≡
.
α

(27)

Eq. (26) generalizes (1a) to the case where asset payoﬀs are not normal. The function f (θ)
can be interpreted as a cost of bearing risk, and is positive, convex, and equal to 21 αθ2 under
normality (which is ruled out by the bounded-support requirement). Note that since f (θ) is
convex, f ′ (θ) is increasing, and so the demand θ1s is a decreasing function of the price S1 . The
demand function of a liquidity demander for the risky asset in Period 1 is
( )−1
θ1d = f ′
(D̄ − S1 ) − z.

(28)

Combining (24)-(28) with the market clearing equation (2), we can characterize the equilibrium in terms of two regions: the abundant-capital region and the scarce-capital region. The
abundant-capital region is deﬁned by the condition that the endowment B of the riskless asset
that agents receive in Period 0, plus the quantity A that liquidity suppliers can access through
their commitment to consume −A in Period 2, exceeds a threshold K ∗ . If B + A > K ∗ ,
then liquidity suppliers are well-capitalized and their funding constraint never binds. If instead
B + A < K ∗ , then the constraint binds for large positive and possibly large negative values
of the liquidity shock z. For example, when z is large and positive, the price S1 is low and
liquidity suppliers are constrained because they want to hold large long positions. Note that
in both regions, the constraint does not bind for z = 0. Indeed, the unconstrained outcome for
z = 0 is that liquidity suppliers maintain their endowments θ̄ of the risky asset and B of the
riskless asset. Since this yields positive consumption, the constraint is met.
An increase in the liquidity shock z lowers the price S1 and raises the liquidity suppliers’
position θ1s . These results are the same as in the perfect-market benchmark of Section 2.1,
but the intuition is more complicated when the funding constraint binds. Suppose that capital
is scarce (i.e., B + A < K ∗ ), and z is large and positive, in which case suppliers hold long
37

positions and are constrained. The intuition why they can buy more, despite the constraint,
when z increases is as follows. Since the price S1 decreases, suppliers realize a capital loss on
the θ̄ shares of the risky asset that they carry from Period 0. This reduces their wealth in
Period 1 and tightens the constraint. At the same time, a decrease in S1 triggers an equal
decrease in the margin (25a) for long positions because the maximum possible loss on these
positions decreases. This eﬀect loosens the constraint. It also dominates the ﬁrst eﬀect since
it is equivalent to a capital gain on the θ1s shares that suppliers hold in Period 1, and suppliers
are net buyers for z > 0 (i.e., θ1s > θ̄). Hence, suppliers can buy more in response to an increase
in z. The price in Period 0 can be computed in closed form when the risk-aversion coeﬃcient
α is small. The form of the price is diﬀerent in the abundant and in the scarce capital region.
We next examine how the funding constraint impacts the illiquidity measures and the
illiquidity discount. We compute these variables in the abundant-capital region, and compare
with the scarce-capital region.

Result 11 Suppose that α is small or z is drawn from a two-point distribution. Price impact
λ is higher when capital is scarce than when it is abundant.

Result 12 Price reversal γ is higher when capital is scarce than when it is abundant.

The intuition is as follows. When the liquidity shock z is close to zero, the constraint does
not bind in both the abundant- and scarce-capital regions, and therefore price and volume are
identical in the two regions. For larger values of z, the constraint binds when capital is scarce,
impairing suppliers’ ability to accommodate an increase in z. As a result, an increase in z has a
larger eﬀect on price and a smaller eﬀect on volume. Since the eﬀect on price is larger, so is the
price reversal γ. Since the eﬀect on price per unit of volume is also larger, so is the price impact
λ. Note that λ measures an average price impact, i.e., the average slope of the relationship
between return and signed volume. This relationship exhibits an important non-linearity when
capital is scarce: the slope increases for large values of z, which is when the constraint binds.
The illiquidity discount, and hence the asset’s expected return, is higher when capital is
scarce. This is because the funding constraint binds asymmetrically: it is more likely to bind
when liquidity demanders sell (z > 0) than when they buy (z < 0). Indeed, the constraint
binds when the suppliers’ position is large in absolute value—and a large position is more likely
when suppliers buy in Period 1 because this adds to the long position θ̄ that they carry from
Period 0. Since price movements in Period 1 are exacerbated when the constraint binds, and
the constraint is more likely to bind when demanders sell, the average price in Period 1 is lower
38

when capital is scarce. This yields a lower price in Period 0.
Result 13 Suppose that α is small. The asset’s expected return E(R) is lower when capital is
scarce than when it is abundant.
The literature on funding constraints in ﬁnancial markets can be viewed as part of a broader
literature on the limits of arbitrage. Indeed, both literatures emphasize the idea that some
traders rely on external capital, which is costlier than internal capital, and this aﬀects liquidity
and asset prices. External capital can take the form of collateralized debt, as in our model,
or other forms such as equity. We ﬁrst survey work that derives funding constraints from
collateralized debt, and then survey more brieﬂy the broader theoretical literature on the limits
of arbitrage. An extensive survey of the latter literature is Gromb and Vayanos (2010a).
The eﬀects of funding constraints have been studied in macroeconomic settings, starting
with Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). In these papers, adverse
shocks to economic activity depress the collateral values of productive assets, and this reduces
lending and ampliﬁes the drop in activity. Similar ampliﬁcation eﬀects arise in ﬁnancial-market
settings, as we point out below.
A number of papers link the tightness of funding constraints to the volatility of the collateral. Hart and Moore (1994, 1995) show that uncertainty about assets’ liquidation values
impairs agents’ ability to borrow. Shleifer and Vishny (1992) endogenize liquidation values
and the ability to borrow in market equilibrium. Geanakoplos (1997, 2003) deﬁnes collateral
equilibrium, in which agents borrow to buy ﬁnancial assets and post the assets as collateral.
The amount of collateral is determined endogenously in equilibrium, and is increasing in asset
volatility. Moreover, if volatility increases following adverse shocks, funding constraints tighten,
and this causes agents to sell assets, amplifying the shocks. The link between volatility and
ability to borrow is also present in our model. Indeed, an increase in the parameter bD , which
measures the dispersion of the asset payoﬀ distribution, raises the margins in (25a) and (25b),
holding the price S1 constant. The funding constraint (24) in our model is derived along the
lines of Geanakoplos (2003), who also provides conditions under which full collateralization is
an equilibrium outcome.
Gromb and Vayanos (2002) link market liquidity to the capital of ﬁnancial intermediaries
and their funding constraints—a link that we also derive in Results 11 and 12. Investors
are subject to liquidity shocks and can realize gains from trade across segmented markets by
trading with intermediaries. Intermediaries exploit price discrepancies, and in doing so supply
liquidity to investors: they buy low in a market where investors are eager to sell, and sell
39

high in a market where investors are eager to buy, thus supplying liquidity to both sets of
investors. Intermediaries fund their position in each market using collateralized debt, and face
a funding constraint along the lines of (24). Shocks to asset prices that trigger capital losses by
intermediaries, tighten the intermediaries’ funding constraints and force them to reduce their
positions. This lowers market liquidity and ampliﬁes the shocks.
Ampliﬁcation eﬀects do not arise in our model because liquidity suppliers increase their
position θ1s in Period 1 following an increase in the liquidity shock z. Ampliﬁcation eﬀects
require instead that suppliers decrease their position, hence becoming demanders of liquidity.
Recall that suppliers in our model are able to increase their position following an increase in
z because while their wealth decreases, there is a stronger countervailing eﬀect caused by a
decrease in the margin. Ampliﬁcation eﬀects arise when the margin instead increases, as in
Geanakoplos (1997, 2003), or stays constant. They can arise even when the margin decreases
but there are multiple periods, as in Gromb and Vayanos (2002). Kondor (2009) shows that
ampliﬁcation eﬀects can arise even in the absence of shocks. Indeed, if a price discrepancy
between two assets were to remain constant or decrease over time, intermediaries would exploit
it and reduce it to a level from which it could increase. Gromb and Vayanos (2010b) determine
conditions under which arbitrageurs stabilize or destabilize prices in a simple static setting.
Liu and Longstaﬀ (2004) study how funding-constrained intermediaries exploit price discrepancies under an exogenous price process. They show that a funding constraint, along the
lines of (24), prevents drastically intermediaries from exploiting opportunities that appear to
be perfect arbitrages. Other papers on optimal portfolio policy under funding constraints are
Grossman and Vila (1992), Jurek and Yang (2007) and Milbradt (2011).
A number of papers study the eﬀects of funding constraints in the presence of multiple
risky assets. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) show in a static setting that funding constraints generate not only ampliﬁcation, but also contagion, whereby shocks to one asset are
transmitted to otherwise unrelated assets through changes in intermediaries’ positions. Moreover, a tightening of funding constraints has the largest impact on the prices of more volatile
assets because these require more collateral. Pavlova and Rigobon (2008) derive contagion
in a dynamic international-economy setting with portfolio constraints, of which funding constraints are a special case. Gromb and Vayanos (2011a, 2011b) derive the joint dynamics of
intermediary capital, asset volatility, correlations and liquidity. They show that ampliﬁcation
and contagion are stronger when intermediary capital is neither too high nor too low. Related
results are shown in Danielsson, Shin, and Zigrand (2011), who derive funding constraints from
value-at-risk requirements of banks.
40

Ampliﬁcation and contagion can also be derived in models without explicit funding constraints but where risk aversion depends on wealth. This is done in Kyle and Xiong (2001) and
Xiong (2001), who endow intermediaries with logarithmic utility, under which the coeﬃcient
of absolute risk aversion decreases in wealth. Following adverse shocks, intermediaries reduce
their positions because they become more risk averse and not because they hit funding constraints. The analysis has similarities to that with funding constraints, e.g., ampliﬁcation and
contagion are stronger when intermediary capital is neither too high nor too low. An important
diﬀerence is in the welfare and policy implications: funding constraints can create ineﬃciencies
and the scope for welfare-improving policies, while wealth eﬀects preserve the Pareto optimality
of equilibrium.
Early work on the limits of arbitrage does not consider funding constraints explicitly, but
argues that such constraints can shorten traders’ horizons, and this can aﬀect asset prices.
De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) show that short horizons can cause deviations from the law of one price. They assume an inﬁnite-horizon economy, two assets with
identical payoﬀs, and stochastic shocks to the demand for one of the assets. They show that
when traders have short horizons there exist two equilibria: one in which the assets trade at
the same price and one in which they trade at diﬀerent prices. The intuition for the latter
equilibrium is that agents do not trade aggressively against price discrepancies between the two
assets for fear that they might widen in the short run. As a consequence, demand shocks can
cause price discrepancies and render traders’ belief self-fulﬁlling.
Tuckman and Vila (1992, 1993) show that short horizons can arise endogenously because of
holding costs. Moreover, holding costs can render traders unwilling to exploit price discrepancies
between assets with similar payoﬀs for fear that they might widen in the short run. Dow and
Gorton (1994) assume short horizons and show that holding costs can generate large mispricings.
Casamatta and Pouget (2011) endogenize short horizons based on moral hazard between fund
managers and investors, and show that they cause prices to be less informative.
Shleifer and Vishny (1997) model the reliance of traders on external capital and its implications for traders’ horizons and asset pricing. They assume that traders can buy a underpriced
asset but run the risk that the mispricing might worsen in the short run. Traders can raise external funds to buy the asset, but the suppliers of the funds can request them back if the trade
performs poorly in the short run. This assumed performance-ﬂow relationship can generate
ampliﬁcation eﬀects: following demand shocks that cause the mispricing to worsen in the short
run, traders are deprived of funds and must sell the asset, causing the mispricing to worsen
further.

41

Shleifer and Vishny (1997) derive the funding constraint from equity ﬁnance: traders can
be interpreted as managers of an open-end fund raising equity from fund investors. Yet, the
ampliﬁcation eﬀects that they ﬁnd are similar to those in the papers that derive funding constraints from collateralized debt. Recent work on the limits of arbitrage seeks to derive funding
constraints from optimal contracts, instead of assuming an exogenous contract form. Examples
are Acharya and Viswanathan (2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2011), Hombert and Thesmar
(2011), and Biais, Heider, and Hoerova (2012). Endogenizing the constraints would help identify
whether the common results, such as ampliﬁcation, are driven by a single underlying friction,
or whether the constraints are fundamentally diﬀerent. Recent work on the limits of arbitrage
also seeks to develop tractable dynamic multi-asset models that can address empirical puzzles.
The survey by Gromb and Vayanos (2010a) provides more details and references.
Funding constraints can interact with other market imperfections. Yuan (2005) and Albagli
(2011) consider the interaction with asymmetric information, and impose funding constraints
on informed agents. Yuan (2005) shows that when prices drop, informed agents become constrained and hence prices become less informative. The resulting increase in uncertainty exacerbates the price drop, causing volatility to be asymmetric and higher on the downside.
Albagli (2011) derives multiple equilibria, through a mechanism that is reminiscent of De Long,
Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) but does not require an inﬁnite horizon. When future
demand shocks are expected to have a large eﬀect on prices, funding-constrained agents do not
trade aggressively on their information. This makes prices less informative, hence reducing the
willingness of future agents to absorb demand shocks.
Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) and Bai, Chang, and Wang (2006) study the interaction
between asymmetric information and short-sale constraints, which are related to funding constraints. Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) show that short-sale constraints prevent investors with
negative private signals from trading. But even though only investors with positive signals are
trading, the market adjusts for this, and short sales do not cause overpricing. Bai, Chang,
and Wang (2006) show that short-sale constraints can instead cause underpricing because they
generate uncertainty about the extent of negative private information.

2.7

Search

In the perfect-market benchmark, the market is organized as a centralized exchange. Many
markets, however, have a more decentralized form of organization. For example, in over-thecounter markets, investors negotiate prices bilaterally with dealers. Locating suitable counter-

42

parties in these markets can take time and involve search.
To model decentralized markets, we assume that agents do not meet in a centralized exchange in Period 1, but instead must search for counterparties. When a liquidity demander
meets a supplier, they bargain bilaterally over the terms of trade, i.e., the number of shares
traded and the share price. We assume that bargaining leads to an eﬃcient outcome, and
denote by ϕ ∈ [0, 1] the fraction of transaction surplus appropriated by suppliers. We denote
by N the measure of bilateral meetings between demanders and suppliers. This parameter
characterizes the eﬃciency of the search process, and is bounded by min{π, 1 − π} since there
cannot be more meetings than demanders or suppliers. Assuming that all meetings are equally
likely, the probability of a demander meeting a supplier is π d ≡ N/π, and of a supplier meeting
a demander is π s ≡ N/(1 − π).
We ﬁrst describe the equilibrium, then examine how the search friction aﬀects the search
illiquidity measures and the expected return, and ﬁnally survey the literature on search frictions.
Prices in Period 1 are determined through pairwise bargaining between liquidity demanders and
suppliers. Agents’ outside option is not to trade and retain their positions from Period 0, which
in equilibrium are equal to θ̄. The consumption in Period 2 of a liquidity supplier who does not
trade in Period 1 is C2sn = W0 + θ̄(D − S0 ). This generates a certainty equivalent
CEQsn = W0 + θ̄(D̄ − S0 ) − 12 ασ 2 θ̄2 ,

(29)

where the ﬁrst two terms are the expected consumption, and the third a cost of bearing risk that
is quadratic in position size. If the supplier buys x shares at price S1 , the certainty equivalent
becomes
CEQs = W0 + θ̄(D̄ − S0 ) + x(D̄ − S1 ) − 12 ασ 2 (θ̄ + x)2

(30)

because the position becomes θ̄ + x. Likewise, the certainty equivalent of a liquidity demander
who does not trade in Period 1 is
CEQdn = W0 + θ̄(D̄ − S0 ) − 21 ασ 2 (θ̄ + z)2 ,

(31)

and if the demander sells x shares at price S1 , the certainty equivalent becomes
CEQd = W0 + θ̄(D̄ − S0 ) − x(D̄ − S1 ) − 12 ασ 2 (θ̄ + z − x)2 .

(32)

Under eﬃcient bargaining, x maximizes the sum of certainty equivalents CEQs + CEQd . The
maximization yields x = z/2, i.e., the liquidity shock is shared equally between the two agents.

43

The price S1 is such that the supplier receives a fraction ϕ of the transaction surplus, i.e.,
(
)
CEQs − CEQsn = ϕ CEQs + CEQd − CEQsn − CEQdn .

(33)

Substituting (29)-(32) into (33), we ﬁnd that the price in Period 1 is
[
]
S1 = D̄ − ασ 2 θ̄ + 14 z(1 + 2ϕ) .

(34)

Eq. (34) implies that the impact of the liquidity shock z on the price in Period 1 increases in the
liquidity suppliers’ bargaining power ϕ. When, for example, z > 0, liquidity demanders need to
sell, and greater bargaining power by suppliers results in a lower price. Comparing (34) to its
centralized-market counterpart (3) reveals an important diﬀerence: price impact in the search
market depends on the distribution of bargaining power within a meeting, characterized by the
parameter ϕ, while price impact in the centralized market depends on aggregate demand-supply
conditions, characterized by the measures (π, 1 − π) of demanders and suppliers. The price in
the centralized market in Period 0 is given by the same equation (4) as in the perfect-market
benchmark, but for diﬀerent constants (M, ∆1 ).
We next examine how the search friction impacts the illiquidity measures and the expected
return. We perform two related but distinct exercises: compare the search market with the centralized market of Section 2.1, and vary the measure N of meetings between liquidity demanders
and suppliers.
When N decreases, the search process becomes less eﬃcient and trading volume decreases.
At the same time, the price in each meeting remains the same because it depends only on the
distribution of bargaining power within the meeting. Since λ measures the price impact of
volume, it increases. One would conjecture that λ in the search market is higher than in the
centralized market because only a fraction of suppliers are involved in bilateral meetings and
provide liquidity (N ≤ 1 − π). Result 14 conﬁrms this conjecture when bargaining power is
symmetric (ϕ = 1/2). The conjecture is also true when suppliers have more bargaining power
than demanders (ϕ > 1/2) because the liquidity shock has then larger price impact. Moreover,
the result extends to all values of ϕ when less than half of suppliers are involved in meetings
(N ≤ (1 − π)/2).

Result 14 Price impact λ is

λ=

ασ 2 (1 + 2ϕ)
,
2N

(35)

44

and increases when the measure N of meetings decreases. It is higher than in the centralized
market if ϕ + 1/2 ≥ N/(1 − π).

Because the price in the search market is independent of N , so is the price reversal γ.
Moreover, γ in the search market is higher than in the centralized market if ϕ is large relative
to π.
Result 15 Price reversal γ is

γ=

α2 σ 4 σz2 (1 + 2ϕ)2
,
16

(36)

and is independent of the measure N of meetings. It is higher than in the centralized market if
ϕ + 1/2 ≥ 2π.

When the measure N of meetings decreases, agents are less likely to trade in Period 1, and a
natural conjecture is that the illiquidity discount increases. Result 16 conﬁrms this conjecture
under the suﬃcient condition ϕ ≤ 1/2. Intuitively, if ϕ ≈ 1, a decrease in the measure of
meetings does not aﬀect liquidity demanders because they extract no surplus from a meeting.
Since, however, liquidity suppliers become worse oﬀ, the risk-neutral probability of being a
demander decreases, and the price can increase.10
Result 16 A decrease in the measure N of meetings lowers the price in Period 0 if ϕ ≤ 1/2.

Early work modeling search frictions in asset markets and their implications for equilibrium
prices includes Burdett and O’Hara (1987), Pagano (1989b) and Keim and Madhavan (1996).
These papers focus on the market for large blocks of shares (known as the “upstairs” market
in the New York Stock Exchange).
Duﬃe, Garleanu and Pedersen (2002, 2005, 2008) model price formation in asset markets
building on the search framework of Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982) and Pissarides (1985),
in which a continuum of agents negotiate prices in bilateral meetings over an inﬁnite horizon
and continuous time. Duﬃe, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2002) focus on the repo market, where
traders can borrow or lend assets. In a centralized market with no frictions, lenders of positivesupply assets would compete their rent down to zero. Indeed, equilibrium requires that some
10
The illiquidity discount in the search market is higher than in the centralized market if ϕ is large relative to
π. This property is the same as for λ and γ, but the calculations are more complicated.

45

agents hold the assets, and hence would be willing to lend them as long as they earn any nonzero rent. With search frictions, however, lenders can earn a rent because they can extract
some of the borrowers’ surplus when bargaining in bilateral meetings. The rent is an additional
payoﬀ from holding the assets and raises their price in the spot market.
Duﬃe, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2008) focus on the spot market and assume that the
valuation of agents for a risky asset switches over time between high and low. Agents with
high valuation who do not own the asset seek to buy it. Conversely, agents with low valuation
who own the asset seek to sell it. The equilibrium prices that emerge in the bilateral meetings
depend not only on the measures of buyers and sellers, as in a centralized market, but also
on their relative bargaining power. Our model yields an extreme version of this result: the
price in Period 1 depends only on the bargaining power parameter ϕ and not on the measures
(π, 1 − π) of liquidity demanders and suppliers. An implication of this result is that an increase
in search frictions can raise or lower the asset price, with the price decreasing when there are
more buyers than sellers. Indeed, with larger frictions, the price responds less to the aggregate
demand/supply conditions, and hence decreases when these conditions are favorable to the
sellers. Finally, following a positive shock to the measure of sellers, which moves the market
away from steady state, prices drop and recover gradually with the drop being larger when
frictions increase.
Duﬃe, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005) introduce market makers who intermediate trade.
Market makers diﬀer from other agents, who we term investors, because they can be contacted
more easily. If investors are better able to contact each other, then market makers face more
competition and post lower bid-ask spreads. Moreover, if investors are heterogeneous in their
ability to contact market makers, then market makers post lower spreads for investors with
higher such ability. Weill (2007) studies the dynamics of an intermediated search market away
from steady state. He shows that following a positive shock to the measure of sellers, market
makers build up inventories, which they gradually unload to buyers. Market makers acquire
the asset despite having lower valuation for it than other agents because they are more eﬃcient
in passing it to the buyers.
Vayanos and Wang (2007) and Weill (2008) extend the analysis to multiple assets, and
show that search frictions can generate price discrepancies between assets with identical payoﬀs.
Buyers choose one of two assets to search for, and then can only meet sellers of that asset. In
equilibrium, they can locate one asset more easily, and are hence willing to pay a higher price
for it. The asset that is easier to locate has a higher number of sellers either because it attracts
endogenously high-turnover agents in Vayanos and Wang (2007), or because it is in larger supply

46

in Weill (2008). Note that one-asset models, such as Duﬃe, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2008),
yield the opposite prediction that assets in larger supply trade at lower prices.
Vayanos and Weill (2008) show that deviations from the law of one price can arise even
under simultaneous search, i.e., buyers can meet sellers of all assets. Key to this result is the
presence of short sellers, who borrow an asset in the repo market, then sell it in the spot market,
and then buy it back again to unwind the short sale. In equilibrium, short sellers endogenously
concentrate in one asset, making it more liquid. That asset trades at a higher price because its
superior liquidity is priced by the longs, i.e., the buyers who seek to establish long positions.
Moreover, the higher concentration of short-sellers in one asset makes it proﬁtable for longs
to lend the asset in the repo market, and further raises its price as in Duﬃe, Garleanu, and
Pedersen (2002).
A number of papers relax the assumption that agents can hold zero or one unit of an asset.
Garleanu (2009) and Lagos and Rocheteau (2009) show that an increase in search frictions
makes agents less willing to change their positions in response to short-run shocks to their
valuation for the asset. This is because they are aware that it will take them time to change
their positions back should an oﬀsetting shock hit. Since agents become less responsive to
shocks in either direction, search frictions have an ambiguous eﬀect on the price, consistent
with Duﬃe, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2008). Lagos, Rocheteau, and Weill (2011) study the
eﬀects of shocks that move the market away from steady state, and show that the speed of
recovery is non-monotonic in search frictions. Afonso and Lagos (2011) study price formation
in the interbank market, and determine how the Federal Funds Rate depends on the search
frictions and on Federal Reserve policy actions.
Search models emphasize the idea that matching buyers and sellers takes time. In their
work on participation costs, Grossman and Miller (1988) model a related idea: a liquidity
shock experienced by some agents is absorbed ﬁrst by a small set of market participants and
then by a larger set of agents who gradually arrive in the market. The market participants
who ﬁrst absorb the shock act as intermediaries, building up inventories and then unwinding
them. Search models provide a natural setting to study the process through which assets are
reallocated across agents via the temporal variation in intermediaries’ inventories. This is done,
for example, in Weill (2007), where intermediaries are modeled as a special class of agents who
can be contacted more easily than others. It is also done in Afonso and Lagos (2011), where
agents engage endogenously in intermediation when they meet others with large liquidity shocks:
they absorb more than their ﬁnal share of a shock knowing that they can unload it to others
in future bilateral meetings. Duﬃe and Strulovici (2011) model the process through which new

47

agents slowly become informed about liquidity shocks in one market and bring their capital
into that market. Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007) and Duﬃe (2010) emphasize the idea
that capital moves slowly across markets in response to proﬁtable investment opportunities.
All papers mentioned so far assume that agents have symmetric information about the asset
payoﬀ. If some agents receive private signals, then these can be revealed gradually through the
bilateral meetings, as agents learn the information of those they meet and of those that their
meeting partners have met in the past. Papers studying the transmission of private information
in decentralized markets include Wolinksy (1990), Blouin and Serrano (2001), Duﬃe and Manso
(2007), Duﬃe, Malamud, and Manso (2009), Golosov, Lorenzoni, and Tsyvinski (2011) and Zhu
(2011).
Finally, some papers study portfolio choice under the assumption that agents can trade
only after a lag, which could reﬂect unmodeled search frictions or market breakdowns. For
example, Longstaﬀ (2001) restricts trading strategies to be of bounded variation, while Ang,
Papanikolaou, and Westerﬁeld (2011) assume that investors can trade only at exogenous random
times. Both papers take prices as given and compute the utility loss from infrequent trading.
This exercise is in the spirit of the one performed in Constantinides (1986) in the case of
transaction costs, but the utility loss is larger in the case of infrequent trading. Longstaﬀ
(2009) shows in an equilibrium model that infrequent trading has large eﬀects on asset prices.

3

Empirical Evidence

In this section we survey the empirical literature on market liquidity. In Section 3.1 we present
various measures of illiquidity, and discuss their inter-relationships from a theoretical viewpoint.
We also use the theory to examine how well these measures reﬂect the underlying market
imperfections. In Section 3.2 we survey the empirical evidence on how illiquidity measures
vary across assets and over time, how they relate to asset characteristics such as supply and
volatility, and how they relate to each other. In Section 3.3 we examine the link between
illiquidity measures and expected asset returns.

3.1

Empirical Measures of Illiquidity

Empirical papers employ a wide variety of illiquidity measures. Some measures, such as lambda
and price reversal, are motivated by theory, while others, such as bid-ask spread, market depth,
turnover and trade size, are more intuitive or heuristic. Within our uniﬁed model, we compute
48

lambda and price reversal, and study their relationship with a variety of market imperfections.
Price impact λ is deﬁned as the regression coeﬃcient of returns on signed volume, and is based
on the idea that trades in illiquid markets should have large price impact. Price reversal γ
is deﬁned as minus the autocovariance of returns, and is based on the idea that trades in
illiquid markets should generate transitory deviations between price and fundamental value.
The measures λ and γ capture two fundamental and distinct aspects of illiquidity, so we start
by surveying the empirical work on them. We then review a number of additional measures.
An early paper that emphasizes the link between systematic price reversals and market
imperfections is Niederhoﬀer and Osborne (1966). Using stock ticker data, they ﬁnd that
prices in consecutive transactions revert on average, and argue that these reversals are linked
to the mechanics of the market making process. Roll (1984) shows that the bouncing of prices
between the bid and the ask causes systematic reversals, and derives analytically an increasing
relationship between γ and the bid-ask spread. Based on this relationship, he argues that γ can
be used to estimate the bid-ask spread when data on the latter are not available. He computes
this estimator using daily and weekly returns. One diﬃculty with the estimation is that γ
can occasionally be negative because of, e.g., sampling noise, while a positive bid-ask spread
implies a positive γ. Harris (1990) derives statistical properties of the estimator in Roll (1984),
and shows that its small-sample bias can be large. Hasbrouck (2009) derives a Bayesian Gibbs
estimator, which is in the spirit of Roll (1984) but has better statistical properties. Bao, Pan,
and Wang (2011) estimate γ for corporate bonds.
Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) show that the autocovariance of daily stock returns
is more negative when trading volume is large. They explain this ﬁnding theoretically in a model
similar to Grossman and Miller (1988), in which risk-averse market makers absorb liquidity
shocks. Price movements without volume are caused by fundamentals, while movements with
volume are caused by buying or selling pressure. Since the latter movements are transitory,
price reversals are larger conditional on volume.
The analysis in Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) suggests that illiquidity should
be measured by γ conditional on trading volume. This measure is more precise than the
unconditional γ because it focuses more sharply on the eﬀects of price pressure. Llorente,
Michaely, Saar, and Wang (2002) show that conditional γ correlates negatively with measures of
asymmetric information, consistent with the theoretical model of Wang (1994). As in Campbell,
Grossman, and Wang (1993), conditional γ is derived as minus the coeﬃcient of a regression of
a stock’s daily return on the product of volume times return on the previous day, controlling for
previous-day return. Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) deﬁne a similar measure, but use returns in
49

excess of a market index instead of raw returns, and volume signed by return instead of volume
times return. They aggregate their measure across stocks to construct a proxy for aggregate
illiquidity, which they show is a priced risk factor.
Reﬁned measures of γ can be derived using data not only on trading volume but also on
market maker inventories. Indeed, since market makers absorb liquidity shocks, changes to
their inventories away from the long-run average should signal transitory price movements and
hence predict future returns. Even more importantly, data on inventories can help determine
the horizon of liquidity eﬀects and hence better estimate those eﬀects. Indeed, computing γ
with daily returns assumes implicitly that the horizon is one day. The horizon, however, could
be longer if, for example, a liquidity shock is generated by a trader breaking a large trade into
many smaller ones over several days (a phenomenon shown theoretically in models of imperfect
competition, surveyed in Section 2.5, and empirically in, e.g., Chan and Lakonishok (1993)).
Data on inventories could help identify such eﬀects. Ho and Macris (1980) and Madhavan and
Smidt (1993) show that changes in the inventories of market makers in the stock market correlate
positively with contemporaneous movements in stocks’ transaction prices. Hendershott and
Menkveld (2011) use inventories to predict future stock returns.
Kyle (1985) deﬁnes price impact λ and links it to the degree of asymmetric information.
While price impact in Kyle (1985) is permanent because market makers are risk neutral and
competitive, in general it consists of a transitory and a permanent component. The transitory
component measures proﬁts earned by market makers. These can be a compensation for risk,
information asymmetry, transaction costs or participation costs, or rents from monopoly power.
Glosten and Harris (1988) attempt to separate the permanent and transitory component using
stock transaction data. They observe only trade size, and identify whether a trade is buyer- or
seller-initiated through the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm, i.e., trades taking place above the
midpoint of the bid-ask spread are classiﬁed as buyer-initiated while those taking place below
are seller-initiated. Because they observe only transactions and not the bid-ask spread, they use
maximum likelihood to infer buyer- and seller-initiated trades and to estimate the parameters of
their model. They further allow each of the transitory and permanent components to be aﬃne
in transaction size. The linear part of the sum of the two aﬃne functions is λ, and the ﬁxed
(constant) part is related to the bid-ask spread. Sadka (2006) estimates a similar model using a
larger cross-section of stocks and data that include not only transactions but also quotes. This
allows for a more precise estimation of the model parameters, e.g., the variable and ﬁxed parts
of the permanent and transitory components.
Measures related to λ can be constructed by comparing volume and absolute returns.

50

An early such measure is Aminvest (e.g., Dubofsky and Groth (1984)) which divides volume
aggregated over twenty trading days by the sum of absolute values of returns during those days.
More recently, Amihud (2002) divides absolute daily return by daily volume and averages over
a number of days. Since high price impact means high absolute return per unit of volume, it is
associated with a low value of the Aminvest measure and a high value of the Amihud measure.
An advantage of the two measures over the estimates of λ in Glosten and Harris (1988) and
Sadka (2006) is that they can be constructed using only daily data on volume and returns,
rather than intraday data on returns, transactions, and quotes.
Because λ is the coeﬃcient of a linear regression, it measures the average slope of the
price impact function, which can be non-linear. Loeb (1983) and Keim and Madhavan (1996)
ﬁnd that the function is concave, i.e., price impact per unit trade is smaller for large orders.
Earlier studies of the price eﬀect of large orders include Kraus and Stoll (1972) and Holthausen,
Leftwich, and Mayers (1990).
How do γ-based measures compare to λ-based ones? Each of γ and λ captures a fundamental and distinct aspect of illiquidity, so the two measures are not substitutes but can be taken
together to give a more complete picture. At the same time, each measure has some advantages
over the other, from the viewpoint of empirical estimation or theory.
Estimating γ is simpler than λ for several reasons. First, γ requires only data on returns,
while λ requires additional data on transactions and quotes. Second, λ can fail to reﬂect a
causal eﬀect of volume of prices. For example, if prices or other public news cause volume,
then λ can be positive even if volume has no causal eﬀect on prices.11 Third, even if causality
goes only from volume to prices, λ requires identifying the signed trades of liquidity demanders.
Such identiﬁcation is typically done using the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm (e.g., Glosten
and Harris (1988) and Sadka (2006)), but the algorithm can misclassify trades. For example,
Asquith, Oman, and Safaya (2010) ﬁnd that short sales are often classiﬁed mistakenly as buyerinitiated because of a requirement that they are executed at an uptick or above the existing
bid. This can underestimate the short-sales’ price impact.
Identifying the signed trades of liquidity demanders becomes easier when data on the identity of traders are available. Such data often exist for designated market makers, present in
many markets. Under the assumption that market makers mostly supply rather than demand
liquidity, signed trades of liquidity suppliers can be identiﬁed. Examples of papers that estimate
11
The causality problem does not arise in our uniﬁed model. Indeed, volume is generated by shocks observable
only to liquidity demanders, such as the liquidity shock z and the signal s. Since these shocks can aﬀect prices
only through the liquidity demanders’ trades, λ measures correctly the price impact of these trades.

51

price impact using data on market maker trades or inventories are Hendershott and Menkveld
(2011) for stocks and Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) for corporate bonds. As is the case
of γ, data on inventories can help determine the horizon of liquidity eﬀects and hence better
estimate those eﬀects.
The diﬃculties in estimating λ should be set against an important theoretical advantage
of that measure. This is that λ captures not only the transitory component of price impact, as
does γ, but also the permanent component, driven by the information that trades convey. The
latter component is an important aspect of illiquidity and should not be ignored. The model of
Kyle (1985) provides a simple illustration of this point. Since market makers are assumed risk
neutral and competitive, γ is equal to zero. Yet, this does not mean that liquidity is perfect:
a trader entering into the market would suﬀer from price impact. The imperfect liquidity is
reﬂected correctly in λ, which is positive.
Our uniﬁed model delivers a similar message concerning the theoretical advantage of λ.
While participation costs, transaction costs, and funding constraints increase both λ and γ
(Results 1, 2, 3, 11 and 12), we show that λ reﬂects better than γ the remaining imperfections.
Indeed, both asymmetric information and imperfect competition increase λ (Results 5 and 8)
but can decrease γ (Results 6 and 9). And while search frictions can decrease both λ and γ,
the conditions for λ to decrease are more stringent than for γ (Results 14 and 15).
An additional measure of illiquidity is the probability of informed trading (PIN), introduced
by Easley, Kiefer, and O’Hara (1997). As with λ and γ, PIN is motivated by theory: it is
derived from a structural estimation of the Easley and O’Hara (1992) model of sequential
order arrival. PIN is high when there is a large imbalance between buyer- and seller-initiated
trades, as classiﬁed by the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm. This follows from two assumptions
on liquidity traders: they are equally likely to trade in either direction, and their trades are
independent over time. These assumptions imply that long sequences of buying or selling
are more likely to come from informed traders. The assumption that liquidity trades are
independent over time is strong: for example, a liquidity trader can break a large trade into a
long sequence of small trades in the same direction. Hence, it is important to investigate the
performance of PIN outside the Easley and O’Hara (1992) model and for a variety of market
imperfections—a task that we undertake for λ and γ in this survey. Some results in this direction
are in Buss and Dumas (2011), who show that PIN is positive in a symmetric-information model
with transaction costs.
An intuitive and widely used measure of illiquidity is the bid-ask spread. Several versions
of this measure exist. One is the quoted spread, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the quoted
52

ask and bid prices. A drawback of quoted spread is that many trades are executed inside
the spread, i.e., at more favorable prices. A measure remedying this drawback is the eﬀective
spread, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between transaction price and mid-point of the quoted spread.
This diﬀerence is taken in absolute value, and is multiplied by two so that it is expressed
in the same terms as the quoted spread. A third measure is the realized spread, deﬁned as
the reversal between consecutive (or near-consecutive) transactions: the price of the current
transaction minus of the future transaction if the current transaction is above the mid-point,
and the opposite if the current transaction is below. This diﬀerence is multiplied by two, as
with the eﬀective spread. The realized spread measures proﬁts earned by liquidity suppliers.
These can be a compensation for risk, transaction costs or participation costs, or rents from
monopoly power. If instead liquidity suppliers are risk neutral, competitive, and incur no costs,
then the realized spread is zero. The eﬀective spread can still be non-zero, however, because of
asymmetric information, as in Glosten and Milgrom (1985). A detailed discussion of quoted,
eﬀective, and realized spread is in Huang and Stoll (1996), who compare the liquidity of the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the NASDAQ based on these measures. Biais, Glosten, and
Spatt (2005) develop a uniﬁed model showing how the bid-ask spread is aﬀected by asymmetric
information, market maker risk aversion, order-processing costs, and imperfect competition.
The bid-ask spread in their model is closely related to λ. An earlier paper linking the bid-ask
spread to many of the same variables is Stoll (1978b).
While the bid-ask spread is an intuitive measure of illiquidity, it has some limitations. First,
its estimation requires detailed data on transactions and quotes. Second, because the spread
is valid only for transactions up to a certain size, it provides no information on the prices at
which larger transactions might take place. By the same token, it provides no information
on how the market might respond to a long sequence of transactions in the same direction.
Such a sequence could be generated, for example, by a trader breaking a large trade into many
smaller ones, and could span several days. The market’s response to large buying or selling
pressure is an important aspect of illiquidity. The measures λ and γ capture that aspect better
than the bid-ask spread, especially if returns are computed over a horizon matching that of the
liquidity eﬀects. The bid-ask spread is related to these measures but imperfectly as we show
in Section 3.2. This could be because the relative eﬀects of the various market imperfections
on the measures can diﬀer. For example, in line with the theoretical analysis of Section 2,
the bid-ask spread could be more aﬀected by order-processing costs, while λ and γ could be
inﬂuenced more heavily by the risk aversion of liquidity suppliers.
A measure of illiquidity which is related to the bid-ask spread is market depth, deﬁned as
the quantity of limit orders at the bid and the ask. Higher market depth is a sign of higher
53

liquidity since the bid and ask prices are valid for larger transaction sizes. The limitations of
market depth are similar to those of the bid-ask spread: it is data intensive, and it gives only
a partial picture of the market’s response to large buying or selling pressure.
In addition to the measures of illiquidity described so far, empirical papers have also used
a number of more heuristic measures. Some of these measures relate to trading activity. For
example, Bhushan (1994) measures illiquidity by the inverse of trading volume. Lesmond,
Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999) propose the LOT measure, which is based on the number of nontrading days. Mahanti, Nashikkar, Subrahmanyam, Chacko, and Mallik (2008) propose “latent
liquidity,” deﬁned as the turnover of investors holding an asset weighted by their asset holdings.
The idea behind this measure is that if investors with large holdings trade frequently, then
they can absorb large shocks on short notice. Other measures relating to trading activity
include turnover, trade size, trade frequency, and number of non-trading days. Fleming (2003)
uses trading volume and trade size, alongside bid-ask spread and price impact, to measure the
illiquidity of Treasury bonds. Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) use LOT, number of non-trading
days, and bid-ask spread to measure the illiquidity of corporate bonds.
Measuring illiquidity by the inverse of trading activity can be motivated by theory. Indeed,
many of the models surveyed in Section 2 yield the intuitive result that market imperfections
reduce trading volume.12 Moreover, models with transaction costs, surveyed in Section 2.3,
show that the costs give rise to a no-trading region and hence reduce trading frequency. But
while a negative eﬀect of market imperfections on trading activity is intuitive, using the inverse
of trading activity to measure illiquidity has some drawbacks. First, trading activity does not
provide a direct estimate of the costs of trading. A direct estimate requires translating trading
activity into a measure of costs, as is done in the case of LOT. Second, trading activity can be
inﬂuenced by variables other than the market imperfections, such as the supply of an asset, the
number of investors holding it, and the size of their trading needs. These variables can imply
the opposite relationship between illiquidity, as measured by λ and γ, and trading activity. For
example, the parameter σz2 , which characterizes the trading needs of investors in our uniﬁed
model, increases both trading volume and γ. Hence, it implies a positive relationship between
illiquidity, as measured by γ, and trading activity. We return to this issue in Section 3.2, where
we discuss the relationship between measures of illiquidity and asset characteristics.
Other heuristic measures of illiquidity include asset characteristics such as the supply of
12

The result does not arise in all the models. In Kyle (1985), for example, asymmetric information increases
volume because it triggers trades by the insider but has no eﬀect on the activity of noise traders, which is
exogenous. Endogenizing noise trading, however, can restore the negative eﬀect of asymmetric information on
volume. An extreme version of this result is the possibility of market breakdown shown in Section 2.5.

54

an asset, the volatility of its payoﬀs, and its time from issuance. For example, Karpoﬀ and
Walkling (1988) measure the illiquidity of stocks under the assumption that it is positively
related to price volatility and negatively related to the price level, market capitalization, and
number of shares. Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) use issuance size, time from issuance, time
to maturity, rating, and γ to gauge the illiquidity of corporate bonds. These measures are
imperfect proxies of illiquidity, and do not provide direct estimates of the costs of trading.
Their use, however, can be motivated by theory in some cases. For example, as we point out
in Section 3.2, volatility typically increases both λ and γ.
An aspect of liquidity that most of the measures presented so far do not capture is market resiliency, the speed at which liquidity recovers from shocks. Consider, for example, the
dynamics of liquidity in a limit-order market. When a market order hits the existing limit
orders, it causes the price to change. Moreover, as existing limit orders are consumed, new
orders arrive gradually and liquidity recovers. Most measures of illiquidity do not capture this
gradual recovery; price reversal γ does but only to a limited extent because it measures the
reversal of price rather than of liquidity. Obizhaeva and Wang (2006) show that the intraday
dynamics of liquidity in limit-order markets have an important eﬀect on the optimal execution
of large orders. Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995) study these dynamics empirically and show
that market resiliency is ﬁnite. Other empirical studies of intraday resiliency include Coppejans, Domowitz, and Madhavan (2004), Degryse, De Jong, Van Ravenswaaij, and Wuyts (2005)
and Dong, Kempf, and Yadav (2007). The survey by Parlour and Seppi (2008) contains more
references to empirical work on limit-order markets.
The measures of illiquidity presented so far concern an individual asset. Illiquidity, however,
can vary over time in a correlated manner across assets and markets, as we show in Section 3.2.
Hence, it is useful to also measure it at a more aggregate level. A number of papers, surveyed
in Section 3.3, measure the aggregate illiquidity of an asset class by averaging the measures
presented so far over individual assets within the class. Yet, it is possible to construct more
direct measures. For example, Longstaﬀ (2004) uses the yield spread between RefCorp and US
Treasury bonds to measure the “ﬂight to liquidity” premium. Since both types of bonds are
guaranteed by the US Federal government, the spread should arise mainly from their relative
liquidity.
Fontaine and Garcia (2011) and Hu, Pan, and Wang (2011) measure the illiquidity of the
US Treasury market by the deviations of observed Treasury yields from a ﬁtted term structure.
The logic behind their measures derives from funding constraints and limited arbitrage, which
we study theoretically in Section 2.6. When arbitrageurs are well capitalized, they can supply

55

ample liquidity, and so can eliminate deviations between Treasury yields and their fundamental
values which are assumed to lie on the ﬁtted term structure. When instead capital is scarce,
liquidity is imperfect and substantial deviations can appear.
Fontaine and Garcia (2011) assume that the residuals from the ﬁt depend on a latent
liquidity factor, which they estimate under parametric assumptions on how the residuals depend
on that factor and on a bond’s maturity and time from issuance. They show that consistent
with the funding-constraint interpretation, the illiquidity of the Treasury market is negatively
related to the asset size of the shadow banking sector. Hu, Pan, and Wang (2011) use the
sum of squared residuals as a measure of illiquidity, and not just for the Treasury market but
also for the overall ﬁnancial market. They show that their measure rises sharply during crises
even outside the Treasury market. Thus, the illiquidity of Treasuries seems to reﬂect broader
market-wide conditions. Consistent with this evidence, Hu, Pan, and Wang (2011) ﬁnd that
their measure is a priced risk factor for a broad set of assets.

3.2

Properties of Illiquidity Measures

In this section we survey empirical evidence on the cross-section and time-series variation of
illiquidity measures. To set the stage for what follows, we report in Table 1 means, medians,
and standard deviations for some of the measures presented in Section 3.1. These are taken
from Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009), and concern 400 randomly selected US stocks over
1993-2005. Each measure is computed for each stock and month, and the summary statistics
concern stock-month observations.
The eﬀective and realized spread are expressed as (approximate) percentages of the midpoint because prices are in logs. The median eﬀective spread is 1.6%, implying an average
diﬀerence between transaction price and mid-point of 0.8%. The mean eﬀective spread is 2.9%,
signiﬁcantly higher than the median because of a large tail of stocks with low liquidity. The
median realized spread is about one third of the median eﬀective spread, meaning that one
third of the eﬀective spread reﬂects a transitory component associated to price reversal. Note
that the reversal is measured over a very short horizon of ﬁve minutes, and can fail to capture
reversal over longer horizons.
The price impact λ is computed as in Hasbrouck (2009): it is the coeﬃcient of a regression
of the return over a ﬁve-minute interval on the signed squared-root dollar volume during that
interval. Signed squared-root dollar volume is the sum over transactions of the squared root
of the dollar transaction size times an indicator which is one if the transaction is below the

56

Table 1: Illiquidity measures for US stocks.
Eﬀective spread is the diﬀerence between transaction price and mid-point of the quoted spread, in
absolute value and multiplied by two. Realized spread is the price of a current transaction minus that
of a transaction ﬁve minutes later if the current transaction is above the mid-point, and the opposite if
the current transaction is below. This diﬀerence is multiplied by two. Price impact λ is the coeﬃcient
of a regression of the return over a ﬁve-minute interval on the signed squared-root dollar volume during
that interval. Signed squared-root dollar volume is the sum over transactions of the squared root of
the dollar transaction size times an indicator which is one if the transaction is below the mid-point
and minus one if it is above. Realized price impact is the current mid-point minus the mid-point ﬁve
minutes later if the current transaction is above the current mid-point, and the opposite if the current
transaction is below. The Amihud measure is an average of daily ratios of absolute return over volume.
The Pastor-Stambaugh measure is minus the coeﬃcient of a regression of a stock’s daily return in
excess of the market index on the previous day’s signed volume, controlling for the previous day’s
return. Volume on a given day is signed using the excess return on that day. Prices are in logs. The
sample consists of 400 randomly selected stocks traded in NYSE/NASDAQ/AMEX over 1993-2005. All
averages and regression coeﬃcients are computed for each stock and month, and the summary statistics
concern stock-month observations. The data in the table are taken from Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka
(2009), but we deﬁne Pastor-Stambaugh with the opposite sign.
Measure

Mean

Eﬀective Spread
0.029
Realized Spread
0.015
Price impact λ
130.425 × 10−6
Realized price impact
0.016
Amihud
6.314 × 10−6
Pastor-Stambaugh
0.179

Median Standard deviation
0.016
0.005
15.793 × 10−6
0.010
0.104 × 10−6
0.000

0.040
0.032
2446.202 × 10−6
0.038
91.957 × 10−6
10.129

mid-point and minus one if it is above. The median price impact is 15.793. To map this into an
actual price change, suppose that there is only one transaction during the ﬁve-minute interval
√
and it is for $10000. The price change then is 15.793 × 10000 × 10−6 = 0.0016, i.e., 16 basis
points. The “realized price impact” measures the typical impact of volume over the ﬁve-minute
interval, and is deﬁned in terms of the movement of the mid-point. Its median is 1%, i.e., 100
basis points. The median of the Amihud measure is 0.104 × 10−6 , meaning that if daily volume
is $10000, then the price change is 0.104 × 10000 × 10−6 = 0.001, i.e., 10 basis points. This is
comparable to the value derived using λ.
Table 1 shows that all measures of illiquidity have high standard deviation compared to
their mean and median. Some of this variation reﬂects a secular downward trend, i.e., increase in
liquidity over time. For example, Comerton-Forde, Hendershott, Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes
(2010) report that the value-weighted eﬀective spread in the NYSE in 2005 was about one tenth
of its 1994 value. Yet, time-series variation around the trend as well as cross-sectional variation
are also important, and we examine them next.
An important source of cross-sectional variation in illiquidity is the size of a stock, as

57

measured, for example, by market capitalization or number of shares. Large stocks are typically
more liquid that small stocks. For example, Loeb (1983) and Stoll and Whaley (1983) ﬁnd that
market capitalization correlates negatively with the bid-ask spread. Demsetz (1968), Benston
and Hagerman (1974) and Hamilton (1976) ﬁnd a negative correlation between the number of
shares and the bid-ask spread. Roll (1984) ﬁnds that market capitalization correlates negatively
with the γ-based estimator of the bid-ask spread, and Sadka (2006) ﬁnds that it also correlates
negatively with the price impact λ. The eﬀect of size is economically signiﬁcant: for example,
Hendershott and Moulton (2007) ﬁnd that the eﬀective spread for the lowest and second-lowest
market-capitalization quintile of US stocks is about six and three times, respectively, that for
the highest quintile.
Many theoretical models imply a negative relationship between illiquidity and size, provided
that the former is measured by λ and the latter by the aggregate trading needs of investors
holding an asset. For example, in models with participation costs, surveyed in Section 2.2,
higher trading needs by liquidity demanders induce more participation by liquidity suppliers,
and this reduces λ. In models with asymmetric information, surveyed in Section 2.4, higher
trading needs reduce the informational content per unit trade, also reducing λ. These eﬀects
also hold in our uniﬁed model, in which the parameter σz2 measures the trading needs of liquidity
demanders. The eﬀects of σz2 on γ, however, are generally in the opposite direction than for
λ: an increase in σz2 increases γ except under participation costs, where there is no eﬀect.
Intuitively, higher trading needs cause larger price eﬀects, and while the eﬀect per unit trade
(corresponding to λ) can be smaller, the total eﬀect (corresponding to γ) is generally larger.
A negative relationship between λ and trading needs translates to a negative one between
λ and market capitalization or number of shares if the latter two variables are positively related
to trading needs. Such a positive relationship arises naturally in most of the search models
surveyed in Section 2.7, which assume that the probability that an asset holder needs to sell is
independent of the total number of asset holders.
In addition to size, an important source of cross-sectional variation in illiquidity is the
volatility of asset payoﬀs. For example, Stoll (1978a) ﬁnds that more volatile stocks have higher
bid-ask spreads. Stoll (1978a) also ﬁnds that more than 80% of the cross-sectional variation
in stocks’ bid-ask spreads can be explained by volatility combined with measures of trading
activity, number of market makers, and price level. Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) ﬁnd that
illiquidity as measured by bid-ask spread, LOT, and number of non-trading days is higher for
corporate bonds with lower rating or higher maturity, characteristics which are associated with
higher price volatility. Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) and Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)
58

ﬁnd similar results measuring illiquidity by a price-impact based estimate and γ, respectively.
A positive relationship between illiquidity and volatility is implied by many theoretical
models, as well as by our uniﬁed model. Intuitively, liquidity suppliers trading high-volatility
assets are exposed to more risk and possibly to more asymmetric information. Therefore, they
require a larger price movement to absorb liquidity shocks, which means that these shocks have
larger price impact and cause larger transitory deviations between price and fundamental value.
Signiﬁcant variation in illiquidity arises not only within asset classes, e.g., stocks or corporate bonds, but also across classes. Spiegel (2008) summarizes related evidence, drawing on
Goyenko, Subrahmanyam, and Ukhov (2011) for Treasury bonds, Chen, Lesmond, and Wei
(2007) for corporate bonds, and Hendershott and Moulton (2007) for stocks. Bid-ask spreads
for Treasury bonds are generally smaller than for stocks, which are generally smaller than for
corporate bonds. As Spiegel (2008) points out, the theory can readily explain some but not
all of these comparisons. In particular, the lower bid-ask spreads of Treasury bonds relative
to stocks and corporate bonds can be due to their less volatile payoﬀs. At the same time,
the higher bid-ask spreads for corporate bonds relative to stocks are puzzling, given that the
former have less volatile payoﬀs. Possible explanations are that the corporate-bond market
is less transparent (e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007)) and there is less competition
between market makers. A negative eﬀect of market-maker competition on bid-ask spreads has
ﬁrst been shown in Tinic and West (1972).
Papers studying the time-series variation of illiquidity document that there is some commonality across assets, i.e., the illiquidity of diﬀerent assets moves up and down together.
Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000) show that the eﬀective bid-ask spread of the average NYSE stock increases by 0.778% for each 1% increase in the average eﬀective bid-ask
spread of the other stocks. At the same time, the R-squared of this regression is only 1.4%,
meaning that the importance of the common factor relative to idiosyncratic ones in driving
time-series variation is small. The explanatory power of the common factor increases for stocks
with large market capitalization. Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001) also ﬁnd a common factor with
small explanatory power for the stocks in the Dow Jones index, using both eﬀective spread and
λ. Huberman and Halka (2001) provide additional evidence for commonality, and show that it
persists even after controlling for market-wide returns and volatility.
The commonality in illiquidity can be linked to a number of aggregate variables. Huberman and Halka (2001) show that illiquidity increases following negative market returns and
increased market volatility. Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Chordia, Sarkar, and

59

Subrahmanyam (2005) and Hameed, Kang, and Viswanathan (2010) also ﬁnd strong increases
in illiquidity following market drops. This evidence is consistent with the increase in illiquidity
during market crises, such as the stock market crash of 1987, the debt market crisis of 1998,
and the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007-9. Using γ as a measure of illiquidity, Bao, Pan, and Wang
(2011) ﬁnd that the illiquidity of corporate bonds is not inﬂuenced by volatility in the bond
market, but increases following negative returns and increased volatility in the stock market.
This suggests that factors inﬂuencing illiquidity in the stock market matter also for bonds, and
possibly vice-versa, a result also found in Chordia, Sarkar, and Subrahmanyam (2005).
While commonality in illiquidity can be linked to some aggregate variables, the variation
cannot be fully explained by these variables, as Huberman and Halka (2001) show. ComertonForde, Hendershott, Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes (2010) provide evidence helping to account
for the unexplained variation. They show that bid-ask spreads in the NYSE increase following
periods when market makers have realized losses, even after controlling for market returns and
volatility. Thus, the funding constraints on market makers could account for a signiﬁcant fraction of the commonality in illiquidity and its sharp increase following crises. This is consistent
with the theoretical models of funding constraints, surveyed in Section 2.6 and in Gromb and
Vayanos (2010b).13
The common variation of illiquidity explored in the previous papers concerns how a given
measure computed for diﬀerent assets comoves over time. We next examine the extent to
which diﬀerent measures of illiquidity comove, both across assets and over time. Table 2
reports correlations between the measures included in Table 1. These are taken from Goyenko,
Holden, and Trzcinka (2009) and concern 400 randomly selected US stocks over 1993-2005.
Each measure is computed for each stock and month. Cross-sectional correlations are computed
for each month and are averaged across months. Time-series correlations concern an equally
weighted portfolio of the stocks.
In terms of the taxonomy of the previous section, the measures in Table 2 can be divided
into three groups: (a) λ-based, consisting of Amihud, price impact λ, and realized price impact,
(b) γ-based, consisting of Pastor-Stambaugh, and (c) spread-based, consisting of eﬀective and
realized spread. An additional taxonomy concerns the horizon at which these measures are
computed: (i) measures computed using high-frequency intraday data, consisting of eﬀective
spread, realized spread, price impact λ, and realized price impact, which correspond to the rows
of Table 2, and (ii) measures computed using low-frequency daily data, consisting of Amihud
13
Funding constraints are not the only imperfection that can generate time-varying aggregate illiquidity. For
example, Eisfeldt (2004) shows that aggregate illiquidity can decrease during downturns because asymmetric
information becomes more severe.

60

Table 2: Correlation across illiquidity measures for US stocks.
The deﬁnition of the measures is in Table 1. The sample consists of 400 randomly selected stocks traded
in NYSE/NASDAQ/AMEX over 1993-2005. All measures are computed for each stock and month.
Cross-sectional correlations are computed for each month and are averaged across months. Time-series
correlations concern an equally weighted portfolio of the stocks. The data in the table are taken from
Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009), but we deﬁne Pastor-Stambaugh with the opposite sign.
Amihud

Pastor-Stambaugh

Cross Section Time Series
Eﬀective Spread
Realized Spread
Price impact λ
Realized price impact

0.571
0.305
0.317
0.516

0.608
0.511
0.400
0.511

Cross Section

Time Series

0.118
0.031
0.064
−0.035

0.366
0.351
0.192
0.230

and Pastor-Stambaugh, which correspond to the columns.
All measures of illiquidity in Table 2 covary positively. Yet, the correlations are relatively
low: they range from 30-60% for Amihud and 0-40% for Pastor-Stambaugh. Moreover, the
correlations appear to be driven mainly by the second taxonomy because they are roughly the
same regardless of whether the high-frequency measures are λ- or spread-based. One interpretation of these results is that the low-frequency measures are imperfect proxies of illiquidity,
which is measured more precisely by the high-frequency measures. Under that interpretation,
low-frequency measures should be used only when high-frequency data are not available, which
is often the case for the long samples needed for asset-pricing analysis (Section 3.3). Moreover,
Amihud seems to capture illiquidity better than Pastor-Stambaugh, given its higher correlation
with the high-frequency measures.
An alternative interpretation of the results in Table 2 is that diﬀerent frequencies capture
diﬀerent phenomena. For example, and as pointed out in Section 3.1, the bid-ask spread and
the price impact evaluated over a horizon of ﬁve minutes might fail to capture how the market
would respond to a long sequence of transactions in the same direction. Thus, high-frequency
measures might not be capturing the most relevant aspect of illiquidity. Moreover, the lower
correlations for Pastor-Stambaugh relative to Amihud are not necessarily evidence that the
former measure is less suitable than the latter in capturing illiquidity. Instead, it could be
capturing diﬀerent aspects. Diﬀerences in behavior across λ- and γ-based measures are, indeed,
to be expected given the diﬀerences in the theoretical properties of λ and γ, discussed in Sections
3.1 and 3.2.
Sadka (2006) computes correlations involving measures based on trading activity. He ﬁnds
61

that trading activity is inversely correlated with price impact λ, consistent with the use of
its inverse as a proxy for illiquidity. The correlations are low, however. For example, the
correlation between trading volume and λ is -0.18, and that between turnover and λ is -0.11.
The correlations become -0.06 and -0.05 when λ is replaced by Amihud. The low correlations
are consistent with the theoretical discussion in Section 3.1. Yet, while the theory can provide
suggestions as to why correlations between various measures of illiquidity can be low, more
work is needed to explain the exact properties of these correlations.

3.3

Illiquidity and Asset Returns

Many of the papers linking illiquidity to asset prices and expected returns focus on the level
of illiquidity rather than its time variation. Amihud and Mendelson (1986) sort stocks into
portfolios according to quoted bid-ask spreads and market betas, and regress portfolio returns
on these characteristics. They ﬁnd that returns are increasing and concave in transaction costs,
a result which they also derive theoretically. The eﬀects are signiﬁcant, as can be seen by
comparing returns across the seven portfolios they consider when sorting along the bid-ask
spread dimension. The average annual return of the stocks in the middle spread portfolio
exceeds that in the lowest spread portfolio by 2.88%. The average bid-ask spread diﬀerence
between the stocks in the two portfolios is 0.66%, implying an expected return premium of 4.36
per unit of spread. The corresponding quantities in the comparison between the highest and
the middle spread portfolios are 5.22% for the return, 2.06% for the bid-ask spread, and 2.53
for the expected return premium per unit of spread. The return-per-spread ratio is higher for
the less liquid stocks, consistent with a concave return-spread relationship.
Amihud and Mendelson (1986) show additionally that illiquidity can help explain the smallﬁrm eﬀect, namely that small stocks earn higher expected returns than large stocks (Banz (1981)
and Reinganum (1981)). Including size in their regression, they show that the higher returns
of small stocks can be largely explained by these stocks’ higher bid-ask spreads. The idea that
transaction costs can help explain the size eﬀect is also explored in Stoll and Whaley (1983).
Eleswarapu and Reinganum (1993) question the ﬁndings of Amihud and Mendelson (1986) by
showing that the eﬀect of bid-ask spread on expected returns holds only in January. Eleswarapu
(1997) ﬁnds, however, a strong eﬀect for both January and non-January months on a sample
of NASDAQ stocks.
Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996) measure the illiquidity of stocks by price impact λ
instead of bid-ask spread. They employ the model of Glosten and Harris (1988) to separate

62

price impact into a variable part, equal to λ, and a ﬁxed part. Unlike the previous papers, they
control for risk using the Fama-French three-factor model instead of the CAPM. They show that
returns are positively related to both the variable and the ﬁxed part of price impact. Curiously,
however, the bid-ask spread is negatively related to returns. They attribute this result to a
possible correlation between the spread and a risk factor not captured by the Fama-French
model.
Additional papers linking the level of illiquidity to expected stock returns include Brennan,
Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998), who use the inverse of trading volume as a measure of
illiquidity, Datar, Naik, and Radcliﬀe (1998), who use inverse turnover, and Chalmers and
Kadlec (1998), who use amortized spread. Amortized spread measures the aggregate cost of
the bid-ask spread to investors, and is roughly equal to spread times turnover. These papers
ﬁnd a positive relationship between illiquidity and expected returns.
Spiegel and Wang (2005) provide a more skeptical assessment of the eﬀects of illiquidity.
They regress stock returns on idiosyncratic risk and various illiquidity measures, and show that
idiosyncratic risk renders many of these measures insigniﬁcant. Idiosyncratic risk, however,
could also be a measure of illiquidity, especially when measured using short-horizon returns.
Indeed, transitory deviations between price and fundamental value, caused by liquidity shocks,
are larger for illiquid stocks. Moreover, these deviations are more likely to manifest themselves
on the idiosyncratic component of returns, which liquidity suppliers cannot hedge away, than
on the systematic component. Hence, illiquid stocks are likely to be characterized by higher
idiosyncratic volatility.
A diﬀerent criticism of illiquidity eﬀects comes from Ben-Rephael, Kadan, and Wohl (2010).
They ﬁnd that while these eﬀects were strong in the distant past, they have become weak more
recently. For example, the coeﬃcient of a cross-sectional regression of expected returns of NYSE
stocks on Amihud’s illiquidity measure has declined by a factor of 16 from the period 1964-1974
to 1997-2008, and its value in the latter period is statistically insigniﬁcant. This suggests a
strong decline of illiquidity eﬀects: not only transaction costs have been declining, as pointed
out in the previous section, but liquidity premia per unit of transaction costs seem to have been
declining as well.
Measuring the eﬀects of illiquidity on stock prices and expected returns requires separating
them from the eﬀects of risk. The papers mentioned so far control for risk using the CAPM
or a multi-factor model, but such adjustments are likely to be imperfect. Sharper tests can be
derived by identifying stocks with identical cash ﬂows that diﬀer only in liquidity. One such
example is restricted versus publicly-traded stocks. Restricted stocks cannot be traded publicly

63

for a given period after issuance, which was two years until 1997, because of regulatory reasons.
The ﬁrms issuing them, however, issue publicly-traded stocks as well, which are identical to
restricted stocks in all aspects other than the trading restriction. Empirical studies on the pre1997 period (e.g., Silber (1991)) ﬁnd that restricted stocks were priced on average 35% below
their publicly-traded counterparts.14
Assets with similar cash ﬂows can be found not only in the stock market but also among
Treasury bonds. A number of papers examine the yield diﬀerential between on- and oﬀ-the-run
Treasury securities with similar time to maturity. On-the-run securities are newly issued and
actively traded, while oﬀ-the-run ones have been issued in the more distant past and trade less
actively. Amihud and Mendelson (1991) ﬁnd that oﬀ-the-run Treasury notes trade at lower
prices and hence higher yields than on-the-run Treasury bills with same time to maturity. The
eﬀect is signiﬁcant: the average yield is 6.52% for notes and 6.09% for bills, implying a yield
diﬀerential of 43 basis points (bps). Further supporting evidence is in Kamara (1994). Warga
(1992) compares the returns of on- and oﬀ-the-run portfolios that have matched duration and
are rebalanced annually. The average annual return of on-the-run portfolios is 55bps below that
of their oﬀ-the-run counterparts. Additional evidence on the on-the-run phenomenon is in Krishnamurthy (2002), Goldreich, Hanke, and Nath (2005), and Strebulaev (2007). Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993) document a similar eﬀect in Japan: a highly liquid “benchmark” government
bond trades at a yield of 60bps below other bonds with similar characteristics.
While on-the-run eﬀects are of signiﬁcant magnitude, they arise not only because of liquidity
but also because of repo specialness: on-the-run bonds are more expensive than oﬀ-the-run
bonds partly because they constitute better collateral for borrowing funds in the repo market.
Duﬃe (1996) shows that specialness can arise because of the higher liquidity of on-the-run
bonds, and derives the price premium due to specialness. Vayanos and Weill (2008) derive the
higher liquidity and specialness of on-the-run bonds endogenously, and decompose the on-therun premium into a liquidity and a specialness part. Banerjee and Graveline (2011) provide a
model-free decomposition of the premium.
A market that is particularly suited for measuring the eﬀects of illiquidity on prices is the
corporate-bond market. Indeed, corporate bonds are less liquid than Treasury bonds and stocks
(Section 3.2); they typically carry no specialness premia; and they are less risky than stocks so
14
Large discounts have also been found for assets other than stocks. For example, Brenner, Eldor, and Hauser
(2001) report that currency options that are issued by central banks and cannot be traded prior to maturity
were priced on average 21% below exchange-traded options. Comment (2012) argues, however, that restrictedstock discounts are driven primarily by factors other than illiquidity. For example, restricted stocks are placed
privately, but private placements typically occur at prices lower than public placements even for freely-traded
stocks.

64

the confounding eﬀects of risk could be smaller. Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) study how the
yield spreads of corporate bonds relative to Treasuries are aﬀected by illiquidity, measured by
bid-ask spread, LOT, and number of non-trading days. They ﬁnd that more illiquid corporate
bonds have higher yield spreads. Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) ﬁnd a robust and even stronger
positive relationship between yield spreads and illiquidity, when the latter is measured by γ.
The empirical papers mentioned so far examine whether a variety of illiquidity measures
are positively related to expected asset returns. Our uniﬁed model suggests, however, that the
relationship is more complex: it depends on the underlying cause of illiquidity, on the measure
of illiquidity being used, and on the sources of cross-sectional variation. Accounting for these
complexities can both shed light on existing empirical ﬁndings and help with the design of new
tests.
To illustrate some of the complexities, suppose that illiquidity is caused by asymmetric
information. If it is measured by λ, then its empirical relationship with expected returns will
be positive since asymmetric information raises both λ and expected returns (Results 5 and
7). If, however, it is measured by γ, then the relationship can turn negative since asymmetric
information can reduce γ (Result 6). Furthermore, if the imperfection is imperfect competition,
then a negative relationship can arise even if illiquidity is measured by λ. This is because
imperfect competition raises λ but can lower expected returns (Results 8 and 10). Finally,
if cross-sectional variation is driven by the variance σz2 of liquidity shocks rather than by the
imperfections, then the relationship between λ and expected returns will be negative. Indeed,
under both asymmetric information and imperfect competition, larger σz2 lowers λ and raises
expected returns (Vayanos and Wang (2011)). In summary, a positive relationship between
illiquidity and expected returns is more likely to arise when illiquidity is measured by λ rather
than γ, and when cross-sectional variation in trading needs is appropriately controlled for.
Evidence consistent with our theory comes from recent studies of the corporate-bond market. Dick-Nielsen, Feldhutter, and Lando (2012) examine how yield spreads are linked to λ,
as approximated by the Amihud measure, and to γ. They ﬁnd that the positive relationship
between spreads and λ is more robust than that between spreads and γ, both across diﬀerent rating categories and across the pre- and post-2008-crisis sample periods. Moreover, for
the post-crisis period, the relationship between spreads and γ becomes insigniﬁcant except for
AAA-rated bonds. For speculative-grade bonds the relationship becomes even negative. Given
that speculative-grade bonds are more likely to be subject to asymmetric information, this
ﬁnding appears consistent with our theory. Rayanankorn and Wang (2012) provide additional
evidence along these lines.

65

Recent work linking illiquidity to expected returns focuses on the time variation of illiquidity
and its possible role as a priced risk factor. Amihud (2002) examines how time variation in
illiquidity aﬀects stock returns. He computes the illiquidity of the aggregate stock market by
averaging the Amihud measure over stocks. He shows that in a year when aggregate illiquidity
increases, returns are low, consistent with a negative eﬀect of illiquidity on prices. Moreover,
returns are predicted to be high over the next year, consistent with a positive eﬀect of illiquidity
on expected returns.
The ﬁnding that movements in aggregate illiquidity aﬀect stock returns opens up the possibility that illiquidity might be a priced risk factor. Indeed, investors might prefer to avoid
stocks that go down when illiquidity goes up because they become exposed to a systematic
risk. As a consequence, such stocks with “high liquidity risk” might be earning high expected
returns, controlling for other risk characteristics. Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) test for this
eﬀect. They compute aggregate illiquidity by averaging the Pastor-Stambaugh measure over
stocks, and show that stocks with high liquidity risk earn abnormally high expected returns.
The eﬀect is signiﬁcant: stocks in the highest liquidity-risk decile outperform stocks in the
lowest decile by 7.5% annually, controlling for the three Fama-French factors and a momentum
factor.
Acharya and Pedersen (2005) allow illiquidity to aﬀect expected returns both through its
level and as a risk factor. They derive these eﬀects in a theoretical model, which shows that
liquidity risk aﬀects expected returns through three covariances: between a stock’s return and
aggregate illiquidity, as in Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), between a stock’s illiquidity and the
return on the aggregate stock market, and between a stock’s illiquidity and aggregate illiquidity.
Using the Amihud measure for illiquidity, they ﬁnd that all three covariances matter in a way
consistent with their model.
Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) ﬁnd that liquidity risk can explain about 50% of the momentum anomaly (Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)). Sadka (2006) explores further the link between
liquidity risk and asset-pricing anomalies, using price impact as a measure of illiquidity. He
decomposes price impact into a variable part λ and a ﬁxed part, and shows that only λ is a
priced risk factor. This risk factor can explain more than 50% of momentum and of the postearnings-announcement drift anomaly (Bernard and Thomas (1989)). Korajczyk and Sadka
(2008) ﬁnd that only the common component across illiquidity measures is a priced risk factor.
Hasbrouck (2009) ﬁnds weak evidence that illiquidity is a priced risk factor when measured
using his Bayesian Gibbs estimator. Watanabe and Watanabe (2008) ﬁnd that the pricing of
liquidity risk is time varying. Lin, Wang, and Wu (2011) ﬁnd that liquidity risk is priced in

66

the corporate bond market, while Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen (2012) ﬁnd that only the
level of illiquidity is priced. Sadka (2010) and Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012) ﬁnd that
liquidity risk is priced in the cross section of hedge funds and private equity, respectively.
Most of the papers studying illiquidity as a priced risk factor focus on a single asset class.
This leaves open the question whether liquidity risk is truly systematic and common to many
asset classes. Hu, Pan, and Wang (2011), which measure aggregate illiquidity based on pricing
errors of US Treasury bonds, provide evidence in favor of a systematic risk factor. They show
that the covariance with aggregate illiquidity helps explain the returns of two sets of assets that
are sensitive to market-wide conditions: hedge funds and currency carry trades.
A challenge for the empirical literature on liquidity risk is to establish that the eﬀects are
driven by risk and not by the level of illiquidity. Indeed, an asset’s illiquidity level is typically
positively correlated with the asset’s loading on the illiquidity risk factor: this correlation is
particularly high for stocks as shown in Acharya and Pedersen (2005), and lower for corporate
bonds as shown in Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen (2012). Some papers on liquidity risk
side-step the multi-collinearity problem by omitting the level of illiquidity.
While empirical papers provide suggestive evidence that illiquidity is a priced risk factor,
more theoretical work is needed to clarify the nature of that factor and interpret the evidence.
Does the illiquidity factor reﬂect variation in illiquidity only, or is such variation caused by
more fundamental factors which might be aﬀecting asset prices through additional channels?
And what fundamental characteristics of an asset determine its liquidity risk, i.e., its sensitivity
to the illiquidity factor? For example, if the illiquidity factor is a crisis factor, it could be
aﬀecting asset prices also through the risk premium because risk aversion increases during
crises. Moreover, an asset’s sensitivity to that factor could be determined by sensitivities to
both risk aversion and illiquidity. Work on funding constraints, surveyed in Section 2.6, has
begun to address these issues. Further work in that area could provide more comprehensive
answers and put empirical research on liquidity risk on a ﬁrmer theoretical foundation.

4

Conclusion

Illiquidity can be viewed as a consequence of various forms of market imperfections. A large
theoretical literature shows that even simple imperfections can break the clean properties of the
perfect-market model and lead to rich but complex behavior. Moreover, this behavior can be
sensitive to the particular form of imperfection and the speciﬁcation of the model. The situation
is reminiscent of the saying “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in

67

its own way.” The lack of a uniﬁed framework and robust predictions makes it diﬃcult not
only to advance our theoretical understanding of illiquidity, but also to provide guidance for
empirical work, e.g., how to measure illiquidity, what theoretical predictions to test, and how
to interpret the empirical ﬁndings.
In this survey we hope to demonstrate that a framework can be constructed to unify the
existing theoretical work. Our framework allows us to examine in a consistent manner how
various forms of market imperfections aﬀect illiquidity and expected asset returns. It also
shows how well diﬀerent empirical measures of illiquidity capture the underlying imperfections.
Furthermore, it provides new insights in interpreting existing empirical ﬁndings and guiding
further analysis. Needless to say, the framework has a number of limitations, some of which are
pointed out in the Introduction. But this only suggests that more research is needed; and the
limitations of the framework may well point us to new and fruitful directions.

68

References
Acharya, Viral, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of Financial
Economics 77, 375–410.
Acharya, Viral, and S Viswanathan, 2011, Leverage, moral hazard, and liquidity, Journal of
Finance 66, 99–138.
Admati, Anat, 1985, A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset securities markets, Econometrica 53, 629–658.
, and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price variability,
Review of Financial Studies 1, 3–40.
, 1991, Sunshine trading and ﬁnancial market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies
4, 443–481.
Afonso, Gara, and Ricardo Lagos, 2011, Trade dynamics in the market for Federal Funds,
working paper New York University.
Aiyagari, Rao, and Mark Gertler, 1991, Asset returns with transaction costs and uninsurable
individual risks: A stage III exercise, Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 309–331.
Akerlof, George A., 1970, The market for lemons : Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism, The Quaterly Journal of Economics 84, 359–369.
Albagli, Elias, 2011, Ampliﬁcation of uncertainty in illiquid markets, working paper University
of Southern California.
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 1994, Limited market participation and volatility of asset prices, American Economic Review 84, 933–955.
Almgren, Robert, 2003, Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and tradingenhanced risk, Applied Mathematical Finance 10, 1–18.
, and Neil Chriss, 1999, Value under liquidation, Risk 12, 61–63.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series eﬀects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership market: Market-making with inventory, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 31–53.
, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 223–
249.
69

, 1991, Liquidity, maturity, and the yield on US treasury securities, Journal of Finance
46, 479–486.
Amihud, Yacov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Liquidity and asset pricing, Foundations and Trends in Finance 1, 269–364.
Ang, Andrew, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Mark Westerﬁeld, 2011, Portfolio choice with illiquid
assets, working paper Columbia University.
Asquith, Paul, Rebecca Oman, and Chris Safaya, 2010, Short sales and trade classiﬁcation
algorithms, Journal of Financial Markets 13, 157–173.
Attari, Mukarram, Antonio Mello, and Martin Ruckes, 2005, Arbitraging arbitrageurs, Journal
of Finance 60, 2471–2511.
Back, Kerry, 1992, Insider trading in continuous time, Review of Financial Studies 5, 387–409.
, and Shmuel Baruch, 2004, Information in securities markets: Kyle meets Glosten and
Milgrom, Econometrica 72, 433–465.
, 2011, Strategic liquidity provision in limit order markets, working paper Rice University.
Back, Kerry, Charles Cao, and Gregory Willard, 2000, Imperfect competition among informed
traders, Journal of Finance 55, 2117–2155.
Back, Kerry, and Hal Pedersen, 1998, Long-lived information and intraday patterns, Journal
of Financial Markets 1, 385–402.
Bagehot, Walter, 1971, The only game in town, Financial Analysts Journal 22, 12–14.
Bai, Yang, Eric C. Chang, and Jiang Wang, 2006, Asset prices and short-sale constraints,
working paper.
Balduzzi, Pierluigi, and Anthony Lynch, 1999, Transaction costs and predictability: Some
utility cost calculations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47–78.
Banerjee, Snehal, and Jeremy Graveline, 2011, The cost of short-selling liquid securities, Journal
of Finance forthcoming.
Banz, Rolf, 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks, Journal
of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.

70

Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang, 2011, The illiquidity of corporate bonds, Journal of
Finance 66, 911946.
Baruch, Shmuel, 2002, Insider trading and risk aversion, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 451–
464.
Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An equilibrium model with restricted stock
market participation, Review of Financial Studies 11(2), 309–341.
Beber, Alessandro, Joost Driessen, and Patrick Tuijp, 2012, Pricing liquidity risk with heterogeneous investment horizons, working paper Cass Business School.
Ben-Rephael, Azi, Ohad Kadan, and Avi Wohl, 2010, The diminishing liquidity premium,
working paper Tel-Aviv University.
Benston, George, and Robert Hagerman, 1974, Determinants of bid-ask spreads in the overthe-counter market, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 353–364.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency costs, net worth, and business ﬂuctuations,
The American Economic Review 1, 14–31.
Bernard, Victor, and Jacob Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
response or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1–48.
Bernhardt, Dan, and Eric Hughson, 1997, Splitting orders, Review of Financial Studies 10,
69–102.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, and Andrew Lo, 1998, Optimal control of execution costs, Journal of
Financial Markets pp. 1–50.
Bhattacharya, U, and M Spiegel, 1991, Insiders, outsiders, and market breakdowns, Review of
Financial Studies 4, 255–282.
Bhushan, Ravi, 1994, An informational eﬃciency perspective on the post-earnings drift, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 18, 46–65.
Biais, Bruno, 1993, Price formation and equilibrium liquidity in fragmented and centralized
markets, Journal of Finance 48, 157–185.
, Lawrence Glosten, and Chester Spatt, 2005, Market microstructure: A survey of
microfoundations, empirical results and policy implications, Journal of Financial Markets 8,
217–264.

71

Biais, Bruno, Florian Heider, and Marie Hoerova, 2012, Risk-sharing or risk-taking? counterparty risk, incentives and margins, working paper University of Toulouse.
Biais, Bruno, Pierre Hillion, and Chester Spatt, 1995, An empirical analysis of the limit order
book and the order ﬂow in the paris bourse, Journal of Finance 50, 1655–1689.
Biais, Bruno, Johan Hombert, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2011, Trading and liquidity with limited
cognition, .
Biais, Bruno, David Martimort, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2000, Competing mechanisms in a
common value environment, Econometrica 68, 799–837.
Blouin, Max, and Roberto Serrano, 2001, A decentralized market with common values uncertainty: Non-steady states, Review of Economic Studies 68, 323–346.
Bongaerts, Dion, Frank De Jong, and Joost Driessen, 2012, An asset pricing approach to
liquidity eﬀects in corporate bond markets, working paper Tilburg University.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert Whitelaw, 1993, Liquidity as a choice variable: A lesson from
the Japanese government bond market, Review of Financial Studies 6, 265–292.
Brennan, Michael, Tarun Chordia, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative factor
speciﬁcations, security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected returns, Journal of
Financial Economics 49, 345373.
Brennan, Michael, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1996, Market microstructure and asset pricing: On the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics
41, 441–464.
Brenner, Menachem, Raﬁ Eldor, and Shmuel Hauser, 2001, The price of options illiquidity,
Journal of Finance 56, 789–805.
Brown, David, and Robert Jennings, 1990, On technical analysis, Review of Financial Studies
2, 527–552.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Predatory trading, Journal of Finance 60,
1825–1863.
, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–
2238.
Buﬀa, Andrea, 2011, Insider trade disclosure, market eﬃciency, and liquidity, working paper
London Business School.

72

Burdett, Kenneth, and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Building blocks: An introduction to block
trading, Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 193–212.
Buss, Adrian, and Bernard Dumas, 2011, The equilibrium dynamics of liquidity and illiquid
asset prices, working paper Goethe University Frankfurt.
Buss, Adrian, Raman Uppal, and Grigory Vilkov, 2011, Asset prices in general equilibrium with
transactions costs and recursive utility, working paper Goethe University Frankfurt.
Caldentey, Rene, and Ennio Stacchetti, 2010, Insider trading with a random deadline, Econometrica 78, 245283.
Campbell, John, Sanford Grossman, and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading volume and serial correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 905–939.
Cao, H., M. Evans, and R. Lyons, 2006, Inventory information, Journal of Business 79, 325–364.
Carlin, Bruce, Miguel Lobo, and S. Viswanathan, 2007, Episodic liquidity crises: Cooperative
and predatory trading, Journal of Finance 62, 2235–2274.
Casamatta, Catherine, and Sebastien Pouget, 2011, Fund managers’ contracts and ﬁnancial
markets’ short-termism, working paper University of Toulouse.
Cespa, Giovani, and Thierry Foucault, 2011, Learning from prices, liquidity spillovers and
endogenous market segmentation, working paper HEC Paris.
Chalmers, John, and Gregory Kadlec, 1998, An empirical investigation of the amortized spread,
Journal of Financial Economics 48, 159–188.
Chan, Louis, and Josef Lakonishok, 1993, Institutional trades and intraday stock price behavior,
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 173199.
Chau, Minh, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2008, Strong form eﬃciency with monopolistic insiders,
Review of Financial Studies 21, 2275–2306.
Chen, Long, David Lesmond, and Jason Wei, 2007, Corporate yield spreads and bond liquidity,
Journal of Finance 62, 119–149.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity,
Journal of Financial Economics 56, 3–28.
, 2001, Market liquidity and trading activity, Journal of Finance 56, 501–530.

73

Chordia, Tarun, Asani Sarkar, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, An empirical analysis of
stock and bond market liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 85129.
Chowhdry, B., and V. Nanda, 1991, Multimarket trading and market liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 4, 483–511.
Cohen, Kalman J., Steven F. Maier, Robert A. Schwartz, and David K. Whitcomb, 1981,
Transaction costs, order placement strategy, and the existence of the bid-ask spread, Journal
of Political Economy 89, 287–305.
Comerton-Forde, Carole, Terrence Hendershott, Charles Jones, Pamela Moulton, and Mark
Seasholes, 2010, Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues, Journal of Finance 65, 295–331.
Comment, Robert, 2012, Revisiting the illiquidity discount for private companies: A new (and
“skeptical”) restricted-stock study, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 24, 80–91.
Constantinides, G. M., 1986, Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs, Journal of
Political Economy 94, 842–862.
Copeland, Thomas, and Dan Galai, 1983, Information eﬀects on the bid-ask spread, Journal of
Finance 38, 1457–1469.
Coppejans, Mark, Ian Domowitz, and Ananth Madhavan, 2004, Resiliency in an automated
auction, working paper Barclays Global Investors.
Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, 2011, Balance sheet capacity and
endogenous risk, working paper London School of Economics.
Datar, Vinay, Narayan Naik, and Robert Radcliﬀe, 1998, Liquidity and stock returns: An
alternative test, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 203–219.
Davis, Mark H. A., and Andrew Norman, 1990, Portfolio selection with transaction costs,
Mathematics of Operations Research 15, 676–713.
De Long, Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990, Noise
trader risk in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703738.
Degryse, Hans, Frank De Jong, Maarten Van Ravenswaaij, and Gunther Wuyts, 2005, Aggressive orders and the resiliency of a limit order market, Review of Finance 9, 201–242.
DeMarzo, Peter, and Branko Urosevic, 2006, Ownership dynamics and asset pricing with a
large shareholder, Journal of Political Economy 114, 774–815.
74

Demsetz, Harold, 1968, The cost of transacting, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, 33–53.
Diamond, Douglas, and Robert Verrecchia, 1981, Information aggregation in a noisy rational
expectations economy, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 221–235.
, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset price adjustment to private information,
Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277–311.
Diamond, Peter A., 1982, Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium, Journal of
Political Economy 90, 881–894.
Dick-Nielsen, Jens, Peter Feldhutter, and David Lando, 2012, Corporate bond liquidity before
and after the onset of the subprime crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 471–492.
Dong, Jiwei, Alexander Kempf, and Pradeep Yadav, 2007, Resiliency, the neglected dimension
of market liquidity: Empirical evidence from the new york stock exchange, working paper
University of Oklahoma.
Dow, James, and Gary Gorton, 1994, Arbitrage chains, Journal of Finance 49, 819–49.
Dubofsky, David, and John Groth, 1984, Exchange listing and stock liquidity, Journal of Financial Research 7(4), 291–302.
Duﬃe, Darrell, 1996, Special repo rates, Journal of Finance 51, 493–526.
, 2010, Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, Journal of
Finance 65, 12371267.
, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending, shorting, and pricing,
Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307–339.
, 2005, Over-the-counter markets, Econometrica 73, 1815–1847.
, 2008, Valuation in over-the-counter markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1865–
1900.
Duﬃe, Darrell, Semyon Malamud, and Gustavo Manso, 2009, Information percolation with
equilibrium search dynamics, Econometrica 77, 1513–1574.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Gustavo Manso, 2007, Information percolation in large markets, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97, 203–209.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Bruno Strulovici, 2011, Capital mobility and asset pricing, working paper
Stanford University.
75

Dumas, Bernard, and Elisa Luciano, 1991, An exact solution to a dynamic portfolio choice
problem under transactions costs, Journal of Finance 46, 577–595.
Easley, David, Nicholas Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, One day in the life of a very common
stock, Review of Financial Studies 10, 805–835.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and information in securities
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 69–90.
, 1992, Time and the process of security price adjustment, Journal of Finance 47,
576–605.
, 2004, Information and the cost of capital, Journal of Finance 59, 1553–1583.
Edwards, Amy, Lawrence Harris, and Michael Piwowar, 2007, Corporate bond market transaction costs and transparency, Journal of Finance 62, 1421–1451.
Eisfeldt, Andrea, 2004, Endogenous liquidity in asset markets, Journal of Finance 59, 1–30.
Eleswarapu, Venkat, 1997, Cost of transacting and expected returns in the NASDAQ markets,
Journal of Finance 52, 2113–2127.
, and Marc Reinganum, 1993, The seasonal behavior of liquidity premium in asset
pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 373–386.
Ellul, Andrew, and Marco Pagano, 2006, IPO underpricing and after-market liquidity, Review
of Financial Studies 19, 381–421.
Fardeau, Vincent, 2011, Strategic liquidity provision and predatory trading, working paper
London School of Economics.
Fishman, Michael, and Kathleen Hagerty, 1992, Insider trading and the eﬃciency of stock
prices, RAND Journal of Economics 23, 106–122.
Fleming, Michael, 2003, Measuring treasury market liquidity, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Economic Policy Review September, 83–108.
Fleming, Wendell, Sanford Grossman, Jean-Luc Vila, and Thalia Zariphopoulou, 1990, Optimal
portfolio rebalancing with transactions costs, working paper Brown University.
Fontaine, Jean-Sebastien, and Rene Garcia, 2011, Bond liquidity premia, Review of Financial
Studies forthcoming.
Foster, Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, 1996, Strategic trading when agents forecast the forecasts
of others, Journal of Finance 51(4), 1437–1478.
76

Foucault, Thierry, 1999, Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order
market, Journal of Financial Markets 2, 99–134.
, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2005, Limit order book as a market for liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 18, 1171–1217.
Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private equity performance
and liquidity risk, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Garleanu, Nicolae, 2009, Portfolio choice and pricing in illiquid markets, Journal of Economic
Theory 144, 532–564.
, and Lasse Pedersen, 2004, Adverse selection and the required return, Review of Financial Studies 17, 643–665.
Garman, Mark, 1976, Market microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 257–275.
Geanakoplos, John, 1997, Promises, promises, in B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane, ed.: The
Economy as an Evolving Complex System II . pp. 285–320 (Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA).
, 2003, Liquidity, default and crashes: Endogenous contracts in general equilibrium, in
M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen, and S. Turnovsky, ed.: Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications II, Econometric Society Monographs: Eighth World Congress
. pp. 170–205 (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK).
Glosten, Lawrence, 1989, Insider trading, liquidity and the role of the monopolist specialist,
Journal of Business 62, 211–235.
, 1994, Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?, Journal of Finance 49,
1127–1161.
, and Lawrence Harris, 1988, Estimating the components of the bid-ask spread, Journal
of Financial Economics 21, 123–142.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Goettler, Ronald, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2005, Equilibrium in a dynamic limit
order market, Journal of Finance 60, 2149–2192.
Goldreich, David, Bernd Hanke, and Purnendu Nath, 2005, The price of future liquidity: Timevarying liquidity in the US treasury market, Review of Finance 9, 1–32.

77

Goldsmith, David, 1976, Transaction costs and the theory of portfolio selection, Journal of
Finance 31, 1127–1139.
Golosov, Mikhail, Guido Lorenzoni, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2011, Decentralized trading with private information, working paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Goyenko, Ruslan, Craig Holden, and Charles Trzcinka, 2009, Do liquidity measures measure
liquidity?, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153–181.
Goyenko, Ruslan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Andrey Ukhov, 2011, The term structure of
bond market liquidity and its implications for expected bond returns, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 46, 111–139.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with ﬁnancially
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.
, 2010a, Limits of arbitrage, Annual Review of Financial Economics 2, 251–275.
, 2010b, A model of ﬁnancial market liquidity based on intermediary capital, Journal
of the European Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings pp. 456–466.
, 2011a, The dynamics of ﬁnancially constrained arbitrage, working paper INSEAD.
, 2011b, Financially constrained arbitrage and cross-market contagion, working paper
INSEAD.
Grossman, Sanford, 1976, On the eﬃciency of competitive stock markets when traders have
diverse information, Journal of Finance 31, 573–585.
, and Merton Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of Finance 43,
617–637.
Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationnaly eﬃcient
markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Grossman, Sanford, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1992, Optimal investment strategies with leverage
constraints, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27, 151–168.
Grundy, Bruce, and Maureen McNichols, 1989, Trade and the revelation of information through
prices and direct disclosure, Review of Financial Studies 2, 495–526.
Guo, Ming, and Hui Ou-Yang, 2010, A continuous-time model of risk-averse strategic trading
with dynamic information, working paper Chueng-Kong Graduate School of Business.

78

Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang, and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Stock market declines and liquidity, Journal of Finance 65, 257294.
Hamilton, James, 1976, Competition, scale economies, and transaction cost in the stock market,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 11, 779–802.
Harris, Lawrence, 1990, Statistical properties of the roll serial covariance bid/ask spread estimator, Journal of Finance 45(2), 579–590.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human
capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 841–879.
, 1995, An analysis of the role of hard claims in constraining management, American
Economic Review 85, 567–585.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2007, Empirical Market Microstructure (Oxford University Press: Oxford).
, 2009, Trading costs and returns for US equities: Estimating eﬀective costs from daily
data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445–1477.
, and Duane Seppi, 2001, Common factors in prices, order ﬂows and liquidity, Journal
of Financial Economics 59, 383–411.
He, H., and J. Wang, 1995, Diﬀerential information and dynamic behavior of stock trading
volume, Review of Financial Studies 8, 919972.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2011, A model of capital and crises, Review of Economic Studies
forthcoming.
Heaton, John, and Deborah J. Lucas, 1996, Evaluating the eﬀects of incomplete markets on
risk sharing and asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443–487.
Hellwig, Martin, 1980, On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal of
Economic Theory 22, 477–498.
Hendershott, Terrence, and Albert Menkveld, 2011, Price pressures, working paper University
of California, Berkeley.
Hendershott, Terrence, and Pamela Moulton, 2007, The shrinking New York Stock Exchange
ﬂoor and the hybrid market, working paper University of California, Berkeley.
Ho, Thomas, and Richard Macris, 1980, Dealer bid-ask quotes and transaction prices: An
empirical study of some amex options, Journal of Finance 39, 23–45.
79

Ho, Thomas, and Hans Stoll, 1980, On dealer markets under competition, Journal of Finance
35, 259–267.
, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under trading transactions and return uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 47–73.
, 1983, The dynamics of dealer markets under competition, Journal of Finance 38,
1053–1074.
Holden, Craig, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1992, Long-lived private information and imperfect competition, Journal of Finance 47, 247–270.
, 1994, Risk aversion, imperfect competition, and long-lived information, Economic
Letters 44, 181–190.
Holthausen, Robert, Richard Leftwich, and David Mayers, 1990, Large-block transactions, the
speed of response, and temporary and permanent stock-price eﬀects, Journal of Financial
Economics 26, 71–95.
Hombert, Johan, and David Thesmar, 2011, Overcoming limits of arbitrage: Theory and evidence, working paper HEC.
Hu, Xing, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang, 2011, Noise as information for illiquidity, working paper
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Huang, Jennifer, and Jiang Wang, 2009, Liquidity and market crashes, Review of Financial
Studies 22, 2607–1643.
, 2010, Market liquidity, asset prices, and welfare, Journal of Financial Economics 95,
107–127.
Huang, Ming, 2003, Liquidity shocks and equilibrium liquidity premia, Journal of Economic
Theory 109, 104–129.
Huang, Roger, and Hans Stoll, 1996, Dealer versus auction markets: A paired comparison of
execution costs on NASDAQ and the NYSE, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 313–357.
Huberman, Gur, and Dominika Halka, 2001, Systematic liquidity, Journal of Financial Research
24, 161–178.
Huberman, Gur, and Werner Stanzl, 2005, Optimal liquidity trading, Review of Finance 9,
165–200.

80

Huddart, Steven, John Hughes, and Carolyn Levine, 2001, Public disclosure and dissimulation
of insider trades, Econometrica 69, 665–681.
Jackson, Matthew, 1991, Equilibrium, price formation, and the value of private information,
Review of Financial Studies 4, 1–16.
Jang, Bong-Gyu, Hyeng Keun Koo, Hong Liu, and Mark Loewenstein, 2007, Liquidity premia
and transaction costs, Journal of Finance 62, 2329–2366.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
losers: Implications for stock market eﬃciency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Jurek, Jakub, and Halla Yang, 2007, Dynamic portfolio selection in arbitrage, working paper
Princeton University.
Kamara, Avraham, 1994, Liquidity, taxes, and short-term treasury yields, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403–417.
Karpoﬀ, Jonathan, and Ralph Walkling, 1988, Short-term trading around ex-dividend days,
Journal of Financial Economics 21, 291–298.
Keim, Donald, and Ananth Madhavan, 1996, The upstairs market for large-block transactions:
Analysis and measurement of price eﬀects, Review of Financial Studies 9, 1–36.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105,
211–248.
Klemperer, Paul, and Margaret Meyer, 1989, Supply function equilibria in oligopoly under
uncertainty, Econometrica 57, 1243–1277.
Kondor, Peter, 2009, Risk in dynamic arbitrage: Price eﬀects of convergence trading, Journal
of Finance 64, 638–658.
Korajczyk, Robert, and Ronnie Sadka, 2008, Pricing the commonality across alternative measures of liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 45–72.
Kraus, Alan, and Hans Stoll, 1972, Price impacts of block trading on the new york stock
exchange, Journal of Finance 27, 569–588.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The bond/old-bond spread, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
463–506.
Kyle, Albert, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1336.

81

, 1989, Informed speculation with imperfect competition, Review of Economic Studies
56, 317–356.
, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth eﬀect, Journal of Finance 56, 1401–1440.
Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques, and Eric Maskin, 1990, The eﬃcient market hypothesis and insider
trading on the stock market, Journal of Political Economy 98, 70–93.
Lagos, Ricardo, and Guillaume Rocheteau, 2009, Liquidity in asset markets with search frictions, Econometrica 77, 403–426.
, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2011, Crises and liquidity in over the counter markets, Journal
of Economic Theory forthcoming.
Lee, Charles, and Mark Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of
Finance 46, 733–746.
Leland, Hayne, 1992, Insider trading: Should it be prohibited, Journal of Political Economy
100, 859–887.
Lesmond, David, Joseph Ogden, and Charles Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction
costs, Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113–1141.
Lin, Hai, Junbo Wang, and Chunchi Wu, 2011, Liquidity risk and expected corporate bond
returns, Journal of Financial Economics pp. 628–650.
Liu, Hong, 2004, Optimal consumption and investment with transaction costs and multiple
risky assets, Journal of Finance 59, 289–338.
, and Mark Loewenstein, 2002, Optimal portfolio selection with transaction costs and
ﬁnite horizons, Review of Financial Studies 15, 805–835.
Liu, Jun, and Francis Longstaﬀ, 2004, Losing money on arbitrage: Optimal dynamic portfolio
choice in markets with arbitrage opportunities, Review of Financial Studies 17, 611–641.
Llorente, Guillermo, Roni Michaely, Gideon Saar, and Jiang Wang, 2002, Dynamic volumereturn relation of individual stocks, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1005–1047.
Lo, Andrew, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang, 2004, Asset prices and trading volume under
ﬁxed transactions costs, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1054–1090.
Loeb, Thomas, 1983, Trading cost: The critical link between investment information and results, Financial Analysts Journal 39, 39–44.

82

Longstaﬀ, Francis, 2001, Optimal portfolio choice and the valuation of illiquid securities, Review
of Financial Studies 14(2), 407–431.
, 2004, The ﬂight-to-liquidity premium in US treasury bond prices, Journal of Business
77, 511–526.
, 2009, Portfolio claustrophobia: Asset pricing in markets with illiquid assets, American
Economic Review 99, 1119–1144.
Lynch, Anthony, and P. Balduzzi, 2000, Predictability and transaction costs: The impact on
rebalancing rules and behavior, Journal of Finance 55, 2285–2310.
Lynch, Anthony, and Sinan Tan, 2011, Explaining the magnitude of liquidity premia: The
role of return predictability, wealth shocks and state-dependent transaction costs, Journal of
Finance 66, 1329–1368.
Madhavan, Ananth, 2000, Market microstructure: A survey, Journal of Financial Markets 3,
205–258.
, and Seymour Smidt, 1993, An analysis of changes in specialist inventories and quotations, Journal of Finance 48, 1595–1627.
Mahanti, Sriketan, Amrut Nashikkar, Marti Subrahmanyam, George Chacko, and Gaurav
Mallik, 2008, Latent liquidity: A new measure of liquidity, with an application to corporate bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 272–298.
Mankiw, N.G., and S. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and nonstockholders,
Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97–112.
Mayshar, Joram, 1979, Transaction costs in a model of capital market equilibrium, Journal of
Political Economy 87, 673–700.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 15(2), 145–161.
Merton, Robert, 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,
Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
, 1987, Presidential address: A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.
Milbradt, Konstantin, 2011, Level 3 assets: Booking proﬁts, concealing losses, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.
83

Mildenstein, Eckart, and Harold Schleef, 1983, The optimal pricing policy of a monopolistic
marketmaker in equity market, Journal of Finance 38, 218–231.
Mitchell, Mark, Lasse Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow moving capital, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 97, 215–220.
Mortensen, Dale, 1982, Property rights and eﬃciency in mating, racing, and related games,
American Economic Review 72, 968–979.
Naik, Narayan, Anthony Neuberger, and S. Viswanathan, 1999, Trade disclosure regulation in
markets with negotiated trade, Review of Financial Studies 12, 873–900.
Niederhoﬀer, Victor, and M. Osborne, 1966, Market making and reversal on the stock exchange,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 61, 897–916.
Obizhaeva, Anya, and Jiang Wang, 2006, Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics, working paper University of Maryland.
O’Hara, Maureen, 1995, Market Microstructure Theory (Blackwell Publishers: Cambridge).
, 2003, Liquidity and price discovery, Journal of Finance 58, 1335–1354.
Pagano, Marco, 1989a, Endogenous market thinness and stock price volatility, Review of Economic Studies 56, 269–287.
, 1989b, Trading volume and asset liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 255–
274.
, and Ailsa Roell, 1996, Transparency and liquidity: A comparison of auction and dealer
markets with informed trading, Journal of Finance 51, 579–611.
Parlour, Christine, 1998, Price dynamics in limit order markets, Review of Financial Studies 1,
789–816.
, and Duane Seppi, 2008, Limit order markets: A survey, in Arnoot Boot, and Anjan
Thakor, ed.: Handbook of Financial Intermediation and Banking (North Holland).
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal
of Political Economy 111(3), 642–685.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon, 2008, The role of portfolio constraints in the international
propagation of shocks, Review of Economic Studies 75, 1215–1256.

84

Pissarides, Christopher, 1985, Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies,
and real wages, American Economic Review 75, 676–690.
Pritsker, Matthew, 2005, Large investors: Implications for equilibrium asset, returns, shock
absorption, and liquidity, working paper Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Qiu, Weiyang, and Jiang Wang, 2010, Asset pricing under heterogeneous information, working
paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Rayanankorn, Surapap, and Jiang Wang, 2012, Diﬀerent aspects of corporate bond illiquidity
and bond yields, working paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Reinganum, Marc, 1981, Misspeciﬁcation of capital asset pricing: Empirical anomalies based
on earnings yields and market values, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 19–46.
Repullo, Rafael, 1999, Some remarks on Leland’s model of insider trading, Economica 66,
359–374.
Roll, Richard, 1984, A simple implicit measure of the eﬀective bid-ask spread in an eﬃcient
market, Journal of Finance 39, 1127–1139.
Rostek, Marzena, and Marek Weretka, 2011, Dynamic thin markets, working paper University
of Wisconsin.
Rosu, Ioanid, 2009, A dynamic model of the limit-order book, Review of Financial Studies 22,
4601–4641.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2006, Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309–349.
, 2010, Liquidity risk and the cross-section of hedge fund returns, Journal of Financial
Economics 98, 54–71.
Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343–1366.
, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35–55.
Silber, William, 1991, Discounts on restricted stock: The impact of illiquidity on stock prices,
Financial Analysts Journal pp. 60–64.
Spiegel, M, 2008, Patterns in cross market liquidity, Financial Research Letters 5, 2–10.
Spiegel, Matthew, and Xiaotong Wang, 2005, Cross-sectional variation in stock returns: Liquidity and idiosyncratic risk, working paper Yale University.
85

Stoll, Hans, 1978a, The pricing of security dealer services: An empirical study of NASDAQ
stocks, Journal of Finance 33, 1153–1172.
, 1978b, The supply of dealer services in securities markets, Journal of Finance 33,
1133–1151.
, and Robert Whaley, 1983, Transaction costs and the small ﬁrm eﬀect, Journal of
Financial Economics 12, 57–79.
Strebulaev, Ilya, 2007, Liquidity and asset pricing: Evidence from the US treasury securities
market, working paper Stanford University.
Suominen, Matti, and Kalle Rinne, 2011, A structural model of short-term reversals, working
paper Aalto University.
Tinic, Seha, and Richard West, 1972, Competition and the pricing of dealer services in the
over-the-counter market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 7, 1707–1727.
Tuckman, Bruce, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1992, Arbitrage with holding costs: A utility-based approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1283–1302.
, 1993, Holding costs and equilibrium arbitrage, working paper 1153 Anderson Graduate
School of Management, UCLA.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 1998, Transaction costs and asset prices: A dynamic equilibrium model,
Review of Financial Studies 11, 1–58.
, 1999, Strategic trading and welfare in a dynamic market, Review of Economic Studies
66, 219–254.
, 2001, Strategic trading in a dynamic noisy market, Journal of Finance 56, 131–171.
, 2004, Flight to quality, ﬂight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, working paper London
School of Economics.
, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1999, Equilibrium interest rate and liquidity premium with transaction costs, Economic Theory 13, 509–539.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jiang Wang, 2010, Liquidity and asset prices: A uniﬁed framework,
working paper London School of Economics.
, 2011, Liquidity and expected returns under asymmetric information and imperfect
competition, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

86

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Tan Wang, 2007, Search and endogenous concentration of liquidity in
asset markets, Journal of Economic Theory 136, 66–104.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2008, A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon, Journal of Finance 63, 1361–1398.
Venter, Gyuri, 2011, Financially constrained strategic arbitrage, working paper Copenhagen
Business School.
Vives, Xavier, 1995, The speed of information revelation in a ﬁnancial market mechanism,
Journal of Economic Theory 67, 178–204.
Wang, Jiang, 1993, A model of intertemporal asset prices under asymmetric information, Review
of Economics Studies 60, 249–282.
, 1994, A model of competitive stock trading volume, Journal of Political Economy 102,
127–168.
Warga, Arthur, 1992, Bond returns, liquidity, and missing data, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 27, 605–617.
Watanabe, Akiko, and Masahiro Watanabe, 2008, Time-varying liquidity risk and the cross
section of stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2449–2486.
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2007, Leaning against the wind, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1329–
1354.
, 2008, Liquidity premia in dynamic bargaining markets, Journal of Economic Theory
140, 66–96.
Wilson, Robert, 1979, Auctions of shares, Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, 675–689.
Wolinksy, Asher, 1990, Information revelation in a market with pairwise meetings, Econometrica
58, 1–23.
Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence trading with wealth eﬀects: An ampliﬁcation mechanism in
ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247–292.
Yuan, Kathy, 2005, Asymmetric price movements and borrowing constraints: A REE model of
crisis, contagion, and confusion, Journal of Finance 60, 379–411.
Zhu, Xiaotong, 2011, Finding a good price in opaque over-the-counter markets, Review of
Financial Studies forthcoming.

87

