                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FX COUNTERPARTY RISK AND TRADING ACTIVITY IN CURRENCY FORWARD
                        AND FUTURES MARKETS

                                         Richard M. Levich

                                        Working Paper 18256
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18256


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




The author gratefully acknowledges financial support from the CME Group Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Richard M. Levich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in Currency Forward and Futures Markets
Richard M. Levich
NBER Working Paper No. 18256
July 2012
JEL No. F31,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

The Global Financial Crisis initiated a period of market turbulence and increased counterparty risk
for financial institutions. Even though the Dodd-Frank Act is likely to exempt interbank foreign exchange
trading from a central counterparty mandate, market participants have the option to trade currency
futures on existing futures markets which standardize counterparty risks. Evidence for the period 2005-11
indicates that the market share of currency futures trading has grown relative to the pre-crisis period.
This shift may be the result of a perceived increase in counterparty risk among banks, as well as changes
in relative trading costs or changes in other institutional factors.


Richard M. Levich
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
RLEVICH@STERN.NYU.EDU
                           FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in
                               Currency Forward and Futures Markets



I. Introduction
        The Global Financial Crisis initiated a period of turbulence the effects of which are still

impacting financial markets. In some respects, the foreign exchange (FX) market performed well

during the crisis. Trading volume held up throughout the crisis and continues to be robust. The

CLS Bank, a relatively new intermediary for settling a substantial fraction of interbank FX

transactions worked as planned, eliminating delivery risk for counterparties using the CLS

system.1 However, in other respects the FX market was like a barometer for gauging market

disruption. After the first signs of a developing crisis in summer 2007, deviations from Covered

Interest Parity, the arbitrage condition that links the forward premium on currency to the short-

term offshore interest differential between a pair of currencies, ballooned from under 10 basis

points to 50 and then several hundred basis points after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in

September 2008. Around the same time, the TED spread (i.e. the spread between short-term U.S.

Treasuries and short-term Eurodollar bank rates) experienced a similar pattern where the spread

moved sharply upward in the summer of 2007, and then shot up to unparalleled levels after the

Lehman bankruptcy. While policy changes and the process of normalization of market

conditions have had the beneficial impact of reducing CIP deviations and the TED spread

considerably, both measures are still substantially greater than in the pre-crisis period. And both

measures are yet two more indicators of a new normal where heightened risk and risk aversion




1
 CLS Bank estimates that they provided settlement risk elimination services for 68% of the global foreign exchange
market in April 2010 for the 17 currencies that are CLS eligible.

                                                                                                                 1
seem to be driving a larger wedge between the traditional linkages in international financial

markets.


        In this paper, our interest is in exploring some of the implications that follow based on

the perception that counterparty risk has grown among many traditional FX market participants.

Of special interest here, the Dodd-Frank Act (2010) mandated that swap transactions must be

traded and cleared through a centralized counterparty (CCP). Despite the critical importance of

foreign exchange and the enormous volume of daily interbank FX trading, in April 2011 the U.S.

Treasury proposed that FX swaps and forward contracts be exempted from the CCP mandate.2


         Whether or not the U.S. Treasury proposal is adopted, market participants have the

alternative to substitute the use of currency futures contracts traded and cleared through a CCP in

place of currency forward contracts traded and settled through the interbank market. The general

hypothesis we wish to examine is whether these developments (i.e. preservation of the status quo

in trading and settling arrangements for FX swaps and forwards; and rising idiosyncratic risks

among various important financial institutions) have helped induce FX market participants to

migrate trading activity toward centralized trading and clearing organizations. As currency

market participants assess their risks of dealing in the FX market, counterparty risks may be

greater or more difficult to gauge in the current environment, inducing a preference for the

transparency and reliability afforded by a CCP.


        Because data on interbank market trading is more limited than data on futures market

activity, our statistical methodology is somewhat limited. However, based on the data that are


2
  In the 2010 survey, FX swaps and outright forwards accounted for 47% and 13% respectively of the nearly $4
trillion daily global turnover volume. However, the U.S. Treasury (2011, p. 7) reaffirmed that FX options, currency
swaps, and non-deliverable forwards would not be exempted from the Commodity Exchange Act’s definition of a
swap. In other words, these contracts would still be subject to the CCP mandate in the Dodd-Frank Act.

                                                                                                                      2
available, the data suggest that since the onset of the Global Financial Crisis the volume of

trading in currency futures has grown and gained market share while the market share that can be

attributed to interbank currency forward contracts has declined. Possible explanations for the

shift toward currency futures include an increase in bank counterparty risks, especially at the

onset of the European sovereign debt crisis in late 2009. However other possible explanations

such as a relative increase in interbank trading costs or other institutional changes need to be

considered.


        In the next section, we review some metrics that summarize the impact of the crisis on

international capital mobility. We then outline the basic architecture for interbank currency

trading and highlight the important but limited role played by the CLS Bank in reducing delivery

risk for interbank currency transactions. In Section IV, we describe our data on currency forward

and futures market trading activity, and then present our analysis of that data in Section V. A

summary of the results with policy implications and suggestions for follow-up research are in the

final section.


II. Some Metrics of the Global Financial Crisis
        The ongoing history of the Global Financial Crisis is well-documented and numerous

studies have analyzed its origins.3 For our purposes, however, the Covered Interest Parity (CIP)

relationship can be taken as nearly a sufficient statistic for the trading and operational efficiency

of the foreign exchange market.4 The gist of CIP is that arbitrage activity will drive the one-

period interest differential on a pair of currencies, i($) – i(£), toward equality with the forward

currency premium, (F-S)/S, when the exchange rates are expressed in units of $/£. In a perfect


3
  See Lo (2012) for a summary and review of 21 such volumes. See Acharya and Richardson (2009, Chapter 1) for a
summary of events through late 2008.
4
  Exchange rate economists use covered interest parity as a measure of perfect capital mobility.

                                                                                                              3
market with transactions costs at zero and no counterparty or default risk, arbitrageurs would

insure that deviations from CIP are zero. While meaningful deviations from CIP were observed

in the first half of the twentieth century, once the offshore markets (then referred to as

“Euromarkets”) developed in the 1960s, numerous economic studies confirmed that for the

major currencies trading in liquid markets, CIP deviations were very small, and almost always

smaller than the cost of engaging in arbitrage.5


         Exhibit 1 shows CIP deviations based on the 3-month maturity for the Euro versus the

US Dollar from January 1, 2000 until April 30, 2012.6 The period through July 2007 appears

tranquil with essentially all deviations bounded within 25 basis points of parity and upwards of

95% of all deviations bounded within 10 basis points of parity. This period strongly conveys the

notion of a highly liquid capital market with virtually perfect capital mobility between short-term

EUR and USD instruments.


         The graph and the message change in the summer of 2007 when two hedge funds

operated by Bear Stearns suspended redemptions and BNP-Paribas announced that they were

unable to value three hedge funds. More events followed into 2008 as Northern Rock, one of the

top mortgage banks in the United Kingdom, was nationalized and Bearn Stearns collapsed and

was sold to JP Morgan Chase. In the initial phase of this pre-Lehman crisis period, deviations

from CIP jumped to roughly 40 basis points, then recovered, and after the Bear Stearns collapse

returned to the 40-50 basis point range through the summer of 2008.


         Once Lehman Brothers failed on September 15, 2008, deviations from CIP in the most

active currency pair in the most active financial market in the world spiked to over 200 basis

5
  See Levich (2012) for a survey of the literature on covered interest parity including empirical evidence from the
1960s through the recent Global Financial Crisis.
6
  This section is based on the discussion in Levich (2012).

                                                                                                                      4
points and for the most part remained above 100 basis points for the next three months. CIP

deviations subsided to the 25-50 basis point range by spring 2009, and continued in that range

for another two years. However, deviations again surged in August 2011 exceeding 100 basis

points throughout November and December 2011 and then retreated to the 50 basis point range

in spring 2012. The data make clear that CIP deviations have been, and are now in a far higher

range compared to the tranquil period of near perfect capital mobility in the first few years of the

millennium.7


         Several authors have studied what factors led to the sharp increase in CIP deviations at

the start of the crisis, and the rapid decline in CIP deviations in the spring of 2009. According to

Baba and Packer (2009) and corroborated by Coffey et al. (2009), the combination of funding

shortages in US financial markets as well as a heightened sense of counterparty risk even among

large banks active in the foreign exchange market led to a deterioration in liquidity and observed

deviations from covered interest parity in the USD-EUR pair.8 Both of these studies find that

prior to the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, capital constraints and liquidity risk proxies explain

much of the observed deviations from CIP. After the Lehman collapse, Coffey et al. (2009) find

that counterparty risk and credit risk proxies become significant variables explaining CIP

deviations.


         The economic implications of these deviations from CIP were critical. European banks

that might normally borrow USD from US banks were effectively shut out due to the crisis and

7
  Graphs of other exchange rates reveal a similar pattern of small CIP deviations during the tranquil period up until
the summer of 2007, followed by a period of increasing turbulence and larger CIP deviations, and then a large spike
in deviations after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. In most cases, CIP deviations are now generally larger than at
the start of the millennium.
8
  Griffoli and Ranaldo (2011) analyze CIP deviations using high frequency data on 5 currency pairs including the
EUR-CHF, a non-dollar pair. The authors conclude that most CIP deviations can be explained by funding liquidity
constraints in USD, and only a small part due to the risk of default by the forward counterparty. Hence, based on this
dataset, the possibility of risk was not a major factor in limiting arbitrage and opening up CIP deviations.

                                                                                                                    5
heightened concerns about counterparty risks, banks’ desire to retain adequate risk capital, and

the declining economic climate. Europeans could create USD synthetically by borrowing EUR

and completing an FX swap, but this raised their costs by the excess of the deviation from CIP.


       In the spring of 2009, the U.S. Federal Reserve along with other central banks opened up

substantial official swap facilities. With these official swaps, the supply of USD offshore

increased and non-U.S. banks could access USD through their home central bank rather than

through their traditional U.S. commercial bank counterparties (who were subject to heightened

default risk). Coffey et al. (2009) show that the successive rounds of official swap facility lines

opened in the spring 2009 played a significant role in bringing down CIP deviations, and in that

sense, helped to restore greater international capital mobility.


       Despite these policy initiatives, Exhibit 1 suggests that deviations from covered interest

parity are experiencing a new normal, with deviations in the range of 25-50 basis points for the

EUR-USD pair rather than in the range of 10-25 basis points which had been observed a decade

previously.


       The TED spread shown in Exhibit 2a shows a similar pattern to CIP deviations. For many

years extending into the new millennium, the TED spread was typically in the 10-25 basis point

range. The spread began climbing in 2006-7 but remained well under 100 basis points until

spiking in the summer of 2007, and then hitting unprecedented levels in the fall of 2008. The

TED spread has declined considerably since 2008 as shown in Exhibit 2b, but it remains higher

than a decade earlier.


       Credit default swap (CDS) rates may offer the most direct evidence of increased risk at

major banks. Exhibit 3 shows the monthly average for 10 international banks of their 5-year CDS


                                                                                                  6
rates from January 2005 – April 2012. Similar to our earlier charts, CDS rates were small (under

20 basis points) and fairly tranquil until summer 2007 when the average rate doubled, and then

doubled again in spring 2008 to over 100 basis points. In September 2008, average rates jumped

to over 150 basis points before peaking to over 200 basis points in March 2009 when equity

prices hit their lows. CDS rates subsided through 2009 and remained fairly steady through 2010.

With the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis and concerns over the levels of bank capital,

average CDS rates resumed their climb in the fall of 2011 to over 200 basis points before

tapering off in spring 2012. The similarity in the patterns of CDS rates and CIP deviations is

apparent.


        In sum, data on deviations from CIP, the TED spread, and particularly CDS rates suggest

that credit risk and counterparty default risk have increased for large international financial

institutions relative to their pre-crisis levels.


III. Simple Mechanics of Interbank Foreign Exchange Trading and the Role of the CLS
Bank9
        While the foreign exchange market has evolved considerably over the last 20 years, some

important features of the traditional or classic market remain in place.10 The foreign exchange

market has always been and remains a geographically dispersed, broker-dealer market. The

interbank FX market is not housed in any city or trading floor, but instead is comprised of

individuals known as dealers, traders or market makers who work for large banks and financial

institutions. FX dealers communicate and trade with one another either through brokers who

assemble price quotations from numerous other market makers and match counterparties, or via

direct dealing whereby a dealer from Bank A contacts a dealer from Bank B, either via cable,

9
 This section is adapted from Pojarliev and Levich (2012).
10
  See King, Osler, and Rime (2011) for a more detailed discussion of foreign exchange market structure and its
evolution.

                                                                                                                 7
telex, telephone, or web-based network depending on the available technology. Using a voice

broker, or for the last 25 years or so an electronic broking system, allows the bank dealers to

remain anonymous until the trade is agreed upon and delivery and settlement information is

exchanged. Direct dealing on the other hand puts bank dealers A and B in direct contact with one

another, which eliminates the broker’s fee but exposes the dealers to the risk of revealing

information about their inventory positions or their view on market conditions.

        The corporate or retail sector of the FX market represents another market segment that is

serviced by the core interbank market. Traditionally, corporate FX transactions were executed

based on communication between a corporate treasury manager and a bank corporate FX trading

desk. Corporate treasurers were free to shop amongst their relationship banks, but shopping

could be time consuming and costly (in terms of lost opportunities). Since 2000, newly

introduced web-based platforms have given corporations the option to conduct their FX trades in

a reverse-auction setting, whereby banks bid for the corporate trade.11 For equity investors, banks

and custodians have typically bundled the FX trade into the execution of a foreign securities

transaction. For example, when a U.S. pension fund manager buys or sells shares of Nestle on

the Swiss market, the broker or custodian handling the equity trade would also handle the

attendant currency transaction.12 The development of prime brokerage agreements has greatly

facilitated the entry of many smaller banks, mutual funds, hedge funds, and specialized money

managers into the foreign exchange market. While these entities would have appeared as retail

clients in the past, they now trade on far more favorable essentially interbank terms.



11
   Companies offering this service include Currenex, founded in 2000 and acquired by State Street Bank in 2007, FX
Alliance, and FX Connect.
12
   Linking the equity and FX pieces of the transaction could be desired to take account of timing differences in
clearing and settlement between equity and FX. Litigation is now pending between several U.S. pension funds and
custodian banks regarding alleged irregularities in FX trades that were bundled with equity transactions. See Dash
(2009) and Dash and Lattman (2011).

                                                                                                                8
         The structure of FX trading has some important differences compared to equity and

futures market trading, especially those trades executed on an organized exchange. As noted

above, the foreign exchange market is a geographically dispersed market with no centralized

trading floor. Trading in the major currency pairs (EUR/USD, USD/JPY, and GBP/USD) is

essentially continuous throughout the 24-hour day, although trading is more active as the major

trading centers (i.e. Tokyo, followed by Europe, and then the United States) have their sequential

normal business hours. Unlike most equity and futures markets, there is no national regulatory

authority that oversees interbank FX trading.13 Also, unlike equity and futures trades that are

funneled through an exchange, there is no public record of the price and volume of interbank FX

transactions as they occur through the day. The terms of a trade between Bank A and Bank B or

between Bank A and their client remains private information. There is no ticker tape that reports

actual transaction prices of FX trades. Prices that are circulated via Bloomberg and other web

based systems are usually indicative meaning that actual transaction prices could be different.14

         The bilateral nature of FX transactions (i.e. Bank A trades with Bank B, or Bank A trades

with their client) suggests the heterogeneous nature of prices and trading risks that accompany

seemingly similar trades between the same pair of currencies. Because the FX market is not

centralized and many visible quotations are not necessarily indicative of future transaction

prices, there can be some heterogeneity in transaction prices between Banks A and B versus

prices between Banks C and D at any instant of time. Perhaps more important, because banks in


13
   There are industry groups in many of the major trading centers who work to develop guidelines for FX trading
and best practices for operational risk management. The web site of New York’s Foreign Exchange Committee (see
http://www.newyorkfed.org/fxc/links.html ) provides further information and links to other sites.
14
   Some studies suggest that it is the opaque nature of the foreign exchange market that enables market-makers to
profit. Banks may take an incoming order to buy or sell at a small deviation from market prices, and then cover their
position quickly without much impact on prices. See Yao (1997) and Lyons (2001). Hafeez and Brehon (2010)
suggest that some corporate clients and equity investors are somewhat price insensitive, as they view foreign
exchange as a cost rather than their mainline business, which further supports the prospects for profitable market-
making.

                                                                                                                    9
this example each have a distinct credit risk, the risk profiles of the two trades (i.e. a EUR/USD

trade involving Banks A and B, versus another EUR/USD trade involving Banks C and D) could

also differ. By comparison, the ultimate counterparties to all trades on organized futures and

option exchanges as well as trades on US equity exchanges are anonymous to one another. This

system functions because for futures and options, the exchange clearinghouse acts as the legal

counterparty to all trades, and all transactions in US equity exchanges pass through the

Depositary Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC) system which at the end of day T+1 inserts

the National Security Clearing Corporation (NSCC) as the counterparty to all trades.15

        As an example of a type of trading risk that impacts foreign exchange trading, consider a

transaction whereby Bank A sells JPY 80 million to Bank B in exchange for USD 1 million for

delivery on day T. Bank A would deliver its JPY to Bank B’s account in Tokyo on the morning

of day T. The problem is that when it is 10:00 a.m. in Tokyo, the time in New York is usually

9:00 p.m. on the evening of day T-1, a time when New York banks are closed for business. If

Bank B were unable to deliver its USD in New York 10-12 hours later (because of bankruptcy or

some other reason), then Bank A would have suffered a total loss by paying out its leg of the

transaction (the JPY) in Tokyo while not receiving the other leg of the transaction (the USD) in

New York.

        While this example could seem like a remote possibility, or simply extremely bad luck,

events like this have occurred in the past. On the morning of June 26, 1974, various banks paid

out millions of Deutsche Marks to the Herstatt Bank in Cologne, Germany. Latter that day, but




15
 See Morris and Goldstein (2009), Guide to Clearing and Settlement, for an overview of clearing and settlement in
US equity markets.

                                                                                                               10
before it could make USD payments to its counterparties in New York, Herstatt Bank filed for

bankruptcy thus leaving its counterparties with a total loss.16

         The possibility of a total loss coupled with the hard reality that banking hours around the

world do not sufficiently overlap led policymakers and bankers to develop a new institution.

Beginning in 2002, the CLS Bank was launched to help standardize and reduce the settlement

risk that affects foreign exchange transactions. In brief, the CLS Bank, an acronym for

continuous linked settlement, operates a payment-versus-payment system for settling

transactions. In our example, Bank A would transfer its JPY to the CLS Bank which holds them

until Bank B has transferred its USD to the CLS Bank representing the matching leg of the

transaction. After the CLS Bank verifies that both legs of the transaction have been paid in, then

the CLS Bank pays out the USD and JPY balances. In the event that the CLS Bank does not

receive one leg of the transaction, then any funds that are received are returned to the one

performing counterparty.17


         As this example of a busted trade demonstrates, the CLS Bank removes the possibility of

Bank A transferring JPY 80 million to Tokyo and getting nothing in return. However, in the

event of a busted trade where Bank A is left holding JPY 80 million, Bank A could find that it

requires more than JPY 80 million to purchase USD 1 million as it originally intended. In this




16
   Other examples of “Herstatt” risk have been documented. Most recently, the KfW Bank in Germany had arranged
for bilateral settlement of a EUR/USD transaction with Lehman Brothers for delivery on September 15, 2008. KfW
delivered approximately EUR 300 million to a Lehman Brothers European bank account. However, once it declared
bankruptcy, Lehman did not produce its USD leg of the transaction. See Kulish (2008).
17
   The U.S. Treasury (2011) pointed to a well-functioning settlement process plus the fact that FX swaps and
forwards require a physical exchange of currency on fixed terms set at the outset of the contract and other factors as
reasons to exempt FX swaps and forwards from the requirement in the Dodd-Frank act for a central clearinghouse
for derivative securities. The U.S. Treasury proposal was offered in April 2011 and has yet to be enacted.

                                                                                                                   11
case, Bank B’s default on its leg of the original transaction will inflict a partial loss on Bank A,

but not a total loss had it decided to settle bilaterally rather than by using the CLS Bank.18


         To restate this result more succinctly, for interbank FX trading, the CLS Bank entirely

mitigates the possibility of delivery risk but each counterparty retains the price risk element of

credit risk in the event that one counterparty fails to deliver its leg of the transaction. In that

event, the surviving counterparty must seek a new counterparty to complete the original deal,

running the risk that the new price from the new counterparty will be inferior to the original price

arranged with the original now defunct counterparty.


         Thus, while the CLS Bank creates an enormous benefit for the interbank FX market, it

does not completely mitigate the counterparty risk that is a feature of any bilateral transaction.

Transactions at the time of the REFCO bankruptcy in October 2005 illustrate the benefits and

limitations of CLS. According to Jonathan Butterfield, a CLS vice president at the time, “There

were no fails with Refco. If trades were left in the system, we got payment versus payment

(PVP). All participants had full oversight of their trades’ status and daily net positions as the

situation developed.”19 But this obscures the point that when a counterparty fails, it then becomes

incumbent on the counterparties to settle in some other way. Oliver (2005) summarizes the

limited task of the CLS Bank as follows: “CLS is not a clearing house, as many wrongly assume,

so it does not guarantee a trade in the event of a counterparty’s collapse. It does not, in fact, even

guarantee settlement. What it does do is ensure that if trades are entered, one side of the

transaction cannot be paid away unless there is PVP [payment versus payment], which is the

simultaneous exchange of the two currencies involved in the deal.”
18
   The price risk associated with default could be more important for forward contracts where there is a longer
period between booking the trade and delivery, and therefore more time for one counterparty to fail prior to
settlement date.
19
   Quoted in Oliver (2005).

                                                                                                                  12
        By comparison, currency futures contracts traded on a centralized exchange all carry the

identical counterparty risk of the clearinghouse that stands behind each futures contract. Thus an

agent who transacts in currency futures eliminates both the delivery risk and price risk that

accompany a bilateral forward FX contract in the event of default. The trade-off is that the agent

accepts the cash flow risk that comes with the mark-to-market convention of futures contracts,

the risk that the CCP itself might fail, and the residual risks that come from using a standardized

futures contract rather than a customized currency forward contract.20 The recent bankruptcy of

MF Global also brings to light the risk that brokerage firms could misappropriate customer

margin account funds needed to support futures trading. While futures exchanges are likely to

make brokerage firms subject to more stringent guidelines regarding investing customer funds,

customer confidence in the system has been impacted.21


        Overall, the institutional features of the two venues suggest that with the increase in bank

counterparty risk and the imperfect mechanism in the interbank market for mitigating

counterparty default risk, agents may be attracted to centralized currency futures markets as a

way to reduce their exposure to these risks. At the same time, banks may be less keen to deal

with, or arrange prime brokerage relationships for new or smaller currency players, leaving them

to trade in futures markets.22




20
   A futures contract may offer an imperfect match for the amount and maturity date of a forward currency
commitment.
21
   See Weitzman (2012).
22
   Assets under management in the Barclay Currency Traders Index which tracks currency hedge fund performance
have grown substantially, from under $5 billion in 2000 to nearly $30 billion in 2011. See Pojarliev and Levich
(2012).

                                                                                                             13
IV. Data on Currency Forward and Currency Futures Trading Activity


       Data on currency futures trading activity is readily available as these contracts are traded

on regulated exchanges. We collected daily data from Bloomberg on the volume of trading for

six major currency futures contracts (EUR, JPY, GBP, CAD, CHF, and AUD) traded against the

USD on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) for the period June 2005 – December 2011.

Data are on the aggregate volume of futures trades including the near-term contract, which is

usually the most active, as well as longer maturity contracts. Each contract represents a certain

number of foreign currency units which when converted at the current spot exchange rate yields

the USD volume of futures contract trading. A small number of other exchanges (e.g. Osaka

Securities Exchange, Tokyo Financial Exchange, among others) trade currency futures but their

volumes tend to be small relative to the CME.


       Data on interbank currency trading is more difficult to obtain. The Bank for International

Settlements (BIS) conducts a triennial survey by selecting a representative month (April) and

engaging many central banks to administer a survey of currency trading activity over the month.

The last survey was administered in April 2010 involving 53 central banks and over 1,300

reporting dealers. This survey has been administered since 1989 and in conjunction with earlier

less elaborate surveys provides a useful timeline for general trends in FX turnover.


       In this study, we make use of separate data collected by various “FX Committees” that

have developed in many of the world’s major FX trading centers. These committees are quasi-

official bodies that act as an interface between bank regulators and the FX trading community

and work to develop guidelines for FX trading operations. We rely on six sources including the

Australian FX Committee, Canadian FX Committee, FX Joint Standing Committee (London),



                                                                                                14
New York FX Committee, Singapore FX Market Committee, and Tokyo FX Market Committee

for data starting in October 2005 until October 2011. Three committees (London, New York, and

Singapore) survey trading activity twice annually (in April and October) for all the major

currency pairs (EUR, JPY, GBP, CAD, CHF, and AUD) that match the futures contracts traded

on the CME. Australia does not cover the GBP, CAD, and CHF until April 2007. Canada only

reports CAD trading. And Tokyo only conducts the survey in April and only for 4 currencies

(EUR, JPY, GBP, and AUD). We collected the data on outright forward contract trading volume

for each currency pair and survey month as reported by each FX committee.




V. Empirical Results


EUR-USD Futures and Forwards


        In this paper, we concentrate on data for the EUR-USD exchange rate which is the most

actively traded currency pair in the interbank FX market, capturing 28% of all FX market

turnover according to the BIS 2010 survey. The second most active pair is the USD-JPY rate

which reflects 14% of all market turnover. The shares of turnover for the other four currencies

GBP, AUD, CAD and CHF (against the USD) are 9%, 6%, 5% and 4% respectively making a

total 66% share of total FX turnover for these 6 currency pairs.


        Exhibit 4 shows the daily average trading volume for EUR futures on the CME and

outright forwards as reported by four FX Committees (London, New York, Singapore and

Australia).23 A general upward drift in the daily volume of futures and forward trading is


23
  According to the BIS 2010 survey, these four locations accounted for 36.7%, 17.9%, 5.3% and 3.8% respectively
(or collectively 63.7%) of all global FX turnover. Japan which was omitted because it provides data only in April

                                                                                                               15
apparent, from roughly $58 billion in October 2005 to almost $132 billion in October 2011. A

spike in interbank forward volume stands out in October 2008 immediately after the Lehman

Brothers bankruptcy, and then a collapse in volume at the next survey in April 2009. Foreign

exchange trading volume generally expanded significantly in the month after the Lehman

bankruptcy as market participants rushed to liquidate positions, raise liquidity, and reduce

exposure to foreign exchange risks. Thanks to the CLS Bank and the virtual certainty that

delivery risk could be assumed away, banks gained the confidence to trade in quantity with

counterparties around the world.24 However, by April 2009 the economic contraction had taken

hold and the volume of both outright forwards and currency futures shrank to levels somewhat

lower than their pre-crisis levels.


        In the six surveys since the October 2008 spike, the upward trend in volume has resumed

and noticeably at a steeper rate of increase for currency futures compared with currency

forwards. Post-Lehman Brothers, the daily average volume of currency futures has expanded by

102% from $29.8 billion in April 2009 to $60.2 billion in October 2011. By comparison, over the

same period the daily average volume of currency forwards grew by only 25% from $57.6 billion

to $71.8 billion. Expressing these data in terms of market share, Exhibit 5 shows that the market

share of CME currency futures has risen to somewhere in the mid-40% range whereas prior to

the crisis, the CME share was in the low 30% range.


        To probe a bit further, it would be interesting to examine whether this shift in market

share is the result of an increase in the rate of growth in futures trading, or a decrease in the rate


and not October accounted for 6.2% of all FX turnover. However, daily average trading in EUR-USD outright
forwards in the April survey months was only about $1 billion in Japan. And Canada, the final omitted country for
lack of EUR-USD data accounted for only 1.2% of FX turnover in the BIS 2010 survey. So the impact of omitting
Japan and Canada in these calculations should not be material.
24
   See Levich (2009) for a discussion of the CLS Bank and FX trading activity over this period.

                                                                                                                16
of growth in forward market trading, or both. Unfortunately, because of the limited data on

interbank trading activity, only rough answers are possible. Exhibit 6 shows the daily average of

trading for CME futures on the EUR based on a 3-month moving average (right scale). The

results of the 13 surveys of the interbank forward trading are superimposed (left scale). The

graph makes the visual impression that CME futures volume for the EUR is growing at roughly

the same rate post-crisis as it was pre-crisis. The disruption associated with the crisis itself, and

the difficulty in dating the start, or end, of the crisis makes sharper comparisons problematic. For

the interbank market, leaving out the spike on October 2008, the data give the impression of a

shift down in volume, and possibly also a slow down in the rate of growth.




Futures and Forwards on Other Currency Pairs


       We also collected data on the volume of futures trading for the five other currency pairs

covered in the periodic FX Committee surveys. Exhibit 7 shows the time series behavior of

average daily trading volume for AUD, GBP, CAD, JPY, and CHF currency futures as well as

the EUR. The chart plots an index of the 3-month moving average of the USD-denominated

value of daily trading from September 1, 2005 – December 31, 2011 with the initial observation

set at 100. Note that AUD trading volume rose in value by about 10 times over this period as

expressed on the right-hand axis. Trading volume for the other five currencies rose by roughly 2-

3 times over the period as shown on the left-hand axis.


       For most currencies, trading volume declines considerably in the vicinity of the Lehman

Brothers bankruptcy on September 15, 2008. The decline comes a little earlier for the CHF, GBP

and CAD, and a little later for the JPY. Volume bottoms out around March 2009 (coincident with


                                                                                                  17
the lows of the U.S. equity market) and then begins to climb rapidly with the exception of the

JPY where volume does not begin to advance until June 2009. Two currencies show a marked

decline in trading volume toward the end of the sample. The volume of JPY futures trading

declines by about 40% from April 2011, about one month after the major Japanese earthquake

and tsunami, until December 2011. Starting around August 2011, just ahead of the Swiss

National Bank’s massive intervention resulting in what many economists label a de facto pegged

rate, the volume of CHF futures trading declines by almost 60% until December 2011.


       To gauge the impact of exchange rate changes on the above results, Exhibit 8 reports the

daily average number of contracts traded in 2011-Q4 compared with 2005-Q3. The volume of

CHF contracts shows a decline of about 15% over this time span, whereas contract volume has

grown by 60-170% for the JPY, CAD, EUR and GBP. The AUD is an outlier where the daily

average number of contracts traded is 7.2 times as large in 2011-Q4 compared with 2005-Q3.

Given the general depreciation of the USD against our sample currencies, the USD value of

contracts traded on the CME has grown considerably more for the AUD, but also to some extent

for the CAD, JPY and CHF. The USD tended to strengthen versus the GBP, so that the growth in

the USD value of contracts traded is slightly less than the growth in contract volume.


       Finally, Exhibit 9 provides estimates of the percentage market share of CME trading

volume in the combined market of futures and forwards. As mentioned earlier, these estimates

are only available for April and October when the FX Committees survey interbank market

trading activity. Data for the EUR in column 1 was reviewed earlier. These data suggest that the

CME’s market share for EUR currency futures has risen to somewhere in the mid-40% range

whereas prior to the crisis, the CME share was in the low 30% range. The increase for the AUD

is considerably greater, with the CME’s market share is in the 35-40% range now versus 20-30%

                                                                                             18
prior to the crisis. There also appears to be growth for the CME’s market share in the CAD,

although the share itself appears small at only 10%. For the other three currencies (GBP, JPY,

and CHF), the CME’s market share shows no clear pattern of change post- versus pre-crisis.

Incorporating the annual April interbank numbers from the Tokyo survey for the JPY shows the

impact (as expected) in the CME market share estimate when Tokyo’s interbank forwards are

included, but there is still no clear pattern of change in market share.




VI. Summary and Policy Implications


       The onset of the Global Financial Crisis and the Lehman bankruptcy were clearly

watershed events that disrupted virtually all aspects of national financial markets and

international financial market relationships. While the deep dislocations associated with the crisis

are past, deviations from Covered Interest Parity have increased significantly relative to pre-

crisis levels, signaling a decrease in international capital mobility. In addition, a second shock

emanating from the European sovereign debt crisis and concern over the creditworthiness of

banks generally have kept CDS rates high even though monetary authorities have taken steps to

address the capital mobility problem.


       Despite the increased awareness of risk and the desire to insulate financial institutions

from future dislocations, the U.S. Treasury has recommended that FX swaps and forwards be

exempt from using a central counterparty for clearing and settlement. This recommendation was

based in part on the judgment that the interbank foreign exchange market already enjoys a well-

functioning settlement process (of which the CLS Bank is one element) and that FX swaps and

forwards require a physical exchange of currency on fixed terms set at the outset of the contract.


                                                                                                 19
However, FX market participants who feel that the interbank market offers too few safeguards

have the alternative to use exchange-traded currency futures contracts in place of forwards. At

the same time, banks may be less willing to provide financing and access to the FX market for

new currency fund managers and a small but growing retail sector. While it is well known that

various institutional features make futures and forward imperfect substitutes, market participants

are free to evaluate all the trade-offs and migrate toward their preferred market venue.


       Data collected on trading activity in currency forward and futures over a period roughly

three years before and after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy suggest that a shift toward currency

futures is beginning to take place, at least among the few currencies we analyzed. The perceived

upward shift in bank counterparty risk, especially at the onset of the European sovereign debt

crisis in late 2009, offers one plausible explanation for the apparent increase. However other

possible explanations such as a relative increase in interbank trading costs or other institutional

changes need to be considered.




                                                                                                20
References


Acharya, Viral and Matthew Richardson, (eds.) 2009. Restoring Financial Stability: How to
Repair a Failed System, John Wiley, Inc.
Baba, Naohiko and Frank Packer. 2009 “Interpreting Deviations from Covered Interest Parity
During the Financial Market Turmoil of 2007-08,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 33, pp.
1953-62.
Coffey, Niall, Warren B. Hrung and Asani Sarkar. 2009 "Capital Constraints, Counterparty Risk,
and Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Reports, no. 393 (September).
Dash, Eric. 2009. “State Street Bank Accused of Fraud by California,” New York Times, October
21.

Dash, Eric and Peter Lattman. 2011. “U.S. and New York Sue Bank of New York Mellon Over
Foreign Exchange Fees,” New York Times, October 4.

Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law 111-203, §2, July 21,
2010, 124 Stat. 1386.

Griffoli, T.M. and A. Ranaldo. 2011. "Limits to arbitrage during the crisis: funding liquidity
constraints and covered interest parity" Swiss National Bank, working paper. (February)
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1549668

Hafeez, Bilal and Daniel Brehon. 2010. “30 Years of FX Investment Returns: dbCR and
dbCR+,” Exchange Rate Perspectives, Deutsche Bank, February 10.

King, Michael R., Carol Osler and Dagfinn Rime. 2011. “Foreign exchange market structure,
players and evolution,” Norges Bank, working paper #10.
Kulish, Nicholas. 2008. “Uproar Over German Bank’s Payout to Lehman,” New York Times,
September 19.
Levich, R.M. 2009. "Why foreign exchange transactions did not freeze up during the global
financial crisis: The role of the CLS Bank," posted at http:///www.VoxEU.org.
Levich, R.M. 2012. "Evidence on Financial Globalization and Crises: Interest Rate Parity,” in
Gerard Caprio (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Financial Globalization, Elsevier Publishing Inc.,
forthcoming.
Lo, Andrew W. 2012. "Reading about the Financial Crisis: A Twenty-One-Book Review,"
Journal of Economic Literature Vol. 50, No. 1, (March): 151-78.
Lyons, Richard K. 2001. The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. MIT Press,
Cambridge,
MA.

                                                                                           21
Morris Virginia B. and Stuart Z. Goldstein. 2009. Guide to Clearance & Settlement, New York:
Lightbulb Press.

Oliver, Lee. 2005. “Settlement: CLS Passes the Refco Test,” Euromoney, December.
Pojarliev, M. and R.M. Levich. 2012. Currency Management in the Post-Crash Era, CFA
Institute, Charlottesville, VA. forthcoming.
United States Treasury. 2011. “Determination of Foreign Exchange Swaps and Foreign
Exchange Forwards under the Commodity Exchange Act,” Notice of Proposed Determination,
April.
Weitzman, Hal. 2012. “MF Global Leaves Industry Scarred,” Financial Times, April 29.

Yao, Jian. 1997. Essays on Market Making in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market,
unpublished PhD thesis, New York University.




                                                                                         22
Exhibit 1.                    Deviations from Covered Interest Parity for the EUR-USD, 3-month maturity



                                                  Deviations from Covered Interest Parity, 3‐month maturity
                                                                January 1, 2000 ‐ April 30, 2012
                    300




                    250




                    200




                    150
     Basis Points




                    100




                     50




                      0
                     Jan‐00    Jan‐01   Jan‐02   Jan‐03   Jan‐04     Jan‐05      Jan‐06     Jan‐07   Jan‐08   Jan‐09   Jan‐10   Jan‐11   Jan‐12



                    ‐50

                                                                   CIP Deviation Based on EUR‐USD




                    Note: Daily data on EUR/USD spot rates, 3-month forward rates, and 3-month LIBOR
                    rates on the USD and EUR are from Bloomberg. Deviations from covered interest parity
                    in basis points per annum calculated as [(F/S) x (1+i(EUR)/400) – (1+i(USD)/400)] x
                    40,000 .




                                                                                                                                         23
Exhibit 2a.          The TED Spread Prior to the Global Financial Crisis



                                                                            TED Spreads (U.S. Treasury - Eurodollar Rate)
                                                                             Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors
                                                       8



                                                       7



                                                       6
                                  Percent per annum




                                                       5



                                                       4



                                                       3



                                                       2



                                                       1



                                                       0
                                                      July-01   July-02       July-03      July-04        July-05      July-06      July-07   July-08
                                                                                    1-Mo TED Spread            3-Mo TED Spread




Exhibit 2b.          The TED Spread During and After the Global Financial Crisis


                                                                            TED Spreads (U.S. Treasury - Eurodollar Rate)
                                                                             Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors
                                                8



                                                7



                                                6
              Percent per annum




                                                5



                                                4



                                                3



                                                2



                                                1



                                                0
                                          Jan-07                          Jan-08                 Jan-09                    Jan-10               Jan-11
                                                                                        1-Mo TED Spread             3-Mo TED Spread




                                                                                                                                                         24
Exhibit 3.            5-Year CDS Rates: Monthly Average of 10 International Banks, January 2005 –
                      April 2012


                          5-Year CDS Rates: Monthly Average of 10 International Banks
                                           January 2005 - April 2012
  700


  600


  500


  400


  300


  200


  100


    0
        Jan-   Jul-    Jan-   Jul-   Jan-   Jul-   Jan-   Jul-   Jan-      Jul-   Jan-   Jul-     Jan-   Jul-   Jan-
         05    05       06     06     07     07     08    08      09       09      10    10        11    11      12

                                       Average Rate          Lowest Rate           Highest Rate




Note:      The banks in the sample are BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, UBS, Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland, HSBC
           Bank, Credit Suisse, Citibank, Goldman Sachs, and JP Morgan Chase. Data on CDS rates are from
           Bloomberg.




                                                                                                                       25
Exhibit 4.                Daily Average Trading Volume for EUR-USD Futures and Forward Contract


                                               EUR Futures and Forwards
                                      Daily Average Trading Volume in USD Millions



                                                                                96,031




                                                                                                                                            71,338      71,836
                                                                    67,782
                                            62,652                                                      63,288                  63,014               61,966
                                                                                                                                         59,687
                    56,998                              57,231                              57,620
                                                                                                                     55,733
                                                                                                                 53,484     54,482
                                46,579
        40,594                                                               40,310                  41,442
                                                                 38,606

                                                     30,866                              31,704
                                         29,152

                 21,800      23,414
  19,842




   Oct‐05         Apr‐06      Oct‐06      Apr‐07      Oct‐07      Apr‐08      Oct‐08      Apr‐09      Oct‐09       Apr‐10     Oct‐10      Apr‐11      Oct‐11
                                                  CME Contracts            Interbank Forward Contracts


Note:      Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg. Data on interbank outright forward
           contracts are from periodic surveys conducted by FX Committees in London, New York, Singapore, and
           Australia.




                                                                                                                                                                 26
Exhibit 5.            CME Market Share in the Combined Market for Currency Futures and Currency
                      Forward Contracts, EUR-USD pair only


              CME Market Share in the Combined Market for Currency Futures
                   and Currency Forward Contracts, EUR‐USD pair only


                                                                                        0.49
                                                                                                 0.46              0.46
                                                                                                          0.46



                                                                               0.40

                                                    0.36
                                           0.35                       0.35
    0.33                 0.33
                                  0.32
                                                             0.30
               0.28




   Oct‐05     Apr‐06    Oct‐06   Apr‐07   Oct‐07   Apr‐08   Oct‐08   Apr‐09   Oct‐09   Apr‐10   Oct‐10   Apr‐11   Oct‐11


Note:      Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg. Data on interbank outright forward
           contracts are from periodic surveys conducted by FX Committees in London, New York, Singapore, and
           Australia.




                                                                                                                           27
Exhibit 6.               EUR Interbank Forward Contracts and CME Futures on EUR, Daily Average
                         Trading Volume in USD Millions


                               EUR Interbank Forward Contracts and CME Futures on EUR
                        Daily Average Trading Volume in USD Millions, 3‐month moving average
         120,000                                                                                                                                   70,000


                                                                            Oct. 2008
                                                                             95,147                                                                60,000
         100,000



                                                                                                                                                   50,000
          80,000
                                                                                                                              April 2011
                                                                                                                               70,663
                                                  April 2007                                                   April 2010
                               April 2006           60,990 Oct. 2007                 April 2009                                                    40,000
                                                                                                                54,985
                                55,786                       55,835                   56,760                                           Oct. 2011
          60,000                                                                                                                        71,836
                                          Oct. 2006                                                Oct. 2009         Oct. 2010
                     Oct. 2005             45,919                       April 2008                  62,583            62,380                       30,000
                      39,826                                             66,316
          40,000
                                                                                                                                                   20,000



          20,000
                                                                                                                                                   10,000



                 0                                                                                                                                 0
            05


                          06


                                      06


                                                07


                                                         07


                                                                  08


                                                                           08


                                                                                     09


                                                                                              09


                                                                                                        10


                                                                                                                    10


                                                                                                                             11


                                                                                                                                      11
            20


                          20


                                     20


                                                20


                                                         20


                                                                  20


                                                                           20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                              20


                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                      20
          1/


                        1/


                                   1/


                                              1/


                                                       1/


                                                                1/


                                                                         1/


                                                                                  1/


                                                                                            1/


                                                                                                      1/


                                                                                                                 1/


                                                                                                                           1/


                                                                                                                                    1/
        9/


                      3/


                                 9/


                                            3/


                                                     9/


                                                              3/


                                                                       9/


                                                                                3/


                                                                                          9/


                                                                                                    3/


                                                                                                               9/


                                                                                                                         3/


                                                                                                                                  9/
                                          Interbank Forward Contracts (Left Axis)                  CME Contracts (Right Axis)



Note:     Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg and include the period June 1, 2005 –
          December 31, 2011. Data on interbank outright forward contracts are from periodic surveys conducted by
          FX Committees in London, New York, Singapore, and Australia.




                                                                                                                                                   28
Exhibit 7.               Daily Average Trading Volume for CME Currency Futures Contracts, Index:
                         September 1, 2005 = 100

                                           Daily Average Trading Volume
                                  3‐month moving average, Index: Sept. 1, 2005 = 100
        500                                                                                                                                    1,400


        450
                                                                                                                                      CAD      1,200
        400


        350                                                                                                                                    1,000

                                                                                      JPY
        300
                                                                                                                                               800
                                   GBP
        250

                                                                                                                                               600
        200
                                                                                                                                    CHF
        150                                                                                                                                    400

        100                              EUR

                                                                                                                                               200
                                                      AUD
         50
                                                   Right Axis

           ‐                                                                                                                                   0
        05


                    06


                             06


                                         07


                                                  07



                                                                8


                                                                        08


                                                                                 09


                                                                                             09


                                                                                                         10


                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                          11
                                                              0
      20


                    20


                             20


                                      20


                                                  20


                                                           20


                                                                        20


                                                                                 20


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                        20
    1/


                  1/


                           1/


                                    1/


                                                1/


                                                         1/


                                                                      1/


                                                                               1/


                                                                                          1/


                                                                                                       1/


                                                                                                                 1/


                                                                                                                             1/


                                                                                                                                      1/
  9/


                3/


                         9/


                                  3/


                                              9/


                                                       3/


                                                                    9/


                                                                             3/


                                                                                        9/


                                                                                                     3/


                                                                                                               9/


                                                                                                                           3/


                                                                                                                                    9/
                           EUR Volume          GBP Volume           CAD Volume          JPY Volume            CHF Volume        AUD Volume



Note:          Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg. The index is a 65-day moving average
               of the daily USD value of trading volume.




                                                                                                                                                       29
Exhibit 8.      Changes in the Daily Average CME Currency Futures Trading Volume and the
                USD Value of Contracts Traded

                   EUR             AUD             GBP              CAD             JPY             CHF


Daily Average Number of Contracts Traded

2005‐Q3            134,376           18,235          37,218          31,494          50,096           29,487


2011‐Q4            301,344          132,027         101,770          82,979          80,837           25,071

Ratio                   2.24            7.24            2.73            2.63            1.61            0.85



Daily Average Value of Contracts, in USD millions


2005‐Q3              20,254           1,394            4,116           2,713           5,527           3,038


2011‐Q4              49,247          13,534            9,883           8,161         13,126            3,343

Ratio                   2.43            9.71            2.40            3.01            2.37            1.10


Note:   Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg. Daily spot exchange rates are from the
        Federal Reserve Board of Governors.




                                                                                                           30
Exhibit 9.      CME Market Share in the Combined Market for Currency Futures and Currency
                Forward Contracts

 Percent Share of CME Trading Volume
 for October and April Survey Months
          USD
           vs.     EUR     AUD     GBP                    CAD       JPY        CHF       JPY*


 October     2005     0.33       0.16           0.18       0.06 0.21            0.33

    April    2006     0.28       0.17           0.24       0.07 0.23            0.33       0.17

 October     2006     0.33       0.19           0.27       0.07 0.27            0.39

    April    2007     0.32       0.24           0.29       0.07 0.31            0.42       0.24

 October     2007     0.35       0.27           0.30       0.08 0.46            0.41

    April    2008     0.36       0.31           0.23       0.07 0.26            0.45       0.21

 October     2008     0.30       0.23           0.20       0.04 0.25            0.43

    April    2009     0.35       0.24           0.23       0.05 0.19            0.36       0.16

 October     2009     0.40       0.34           0.31       0.09 0.20            0.44

    April    2010     0.49       0.36           0.33       0.11 0.19            0.44       0.16

 October     2010     0.46       0.36           0.30       0.11 0.26            0.36

    April    2011     0.46       0.40           0.33       0.09 0.29            0.40       0.24

 October     2011     0.46       0.42           0.28       0.10 0.25            0.40

Note:   Data on the aggregate volume of CME futures are from Bloomberg. Data on interbank outright forward
        contracts are from periodic surveys conducted by FX Committees in London, New York, Singapore,
        Canada and Australia. Last column marked by * includes the annual survey in Tokyo.




                                                                                                       31
