                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ESTIMATING SECOND ORDER PROBABILITY BELIEFS FROM SUBJECTIVE
                            SURVIVAL DATA

                                            Péter Hudomiet
                                            Robert J. Willis

                                        Working Paper 18258
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18258


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




We are grateful to grant U01-AG09740 from the Behavioral and Social Research Program of the National
Institute on Aging for supporting the collection of the HRS data used in this paper and to NIA grant
P01AG026571 for research support. The current paper builds on ideas presented in Hill, Perry and
Willis (2004); we are grateful to the late Dan Hill and to Mike Perry for their valuable insights. We
are also grateful to Gábor Kézdi and participants at a Duke University seminar for many useful comments
on the current paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18258.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Péter Hudomiet and Robert J. Willis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Estimating Second Order Probability Beliefs from Subjective Survival Data
Péter Hudomiet and Robert J. Willis
NBER Working Paper No. 18258
July 2012, Revised November 2012
JEL No. C11,J1

                                              ABSTRACT

Based on subjective survival probability questions in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we
use an econometric model to estimate the determinants of individual-level uncertainty about personal
longevity. This model is built around the Modal Response Hypothesis (MRH), a mathematical expression
of the idea that survey responses of 0, 50 or 100 percent to probability questions indicate a high level
of uncertainty about the relevant probability. We show that subjective survival expectations in 2002
line up very well with realized mortality of the HRS respondents between 2002 and 2010. We show
that the MRH model performs better than typically used models in the literature of subjective probabilities.
Our model gives more accurate estimates of low probability events and it is able to predict the unusually
high fraction of focal 0, 50 and 100 answers observed in many datasets on subjective probabilities.
We show that subjects place too much weight on parents’ age at death when forming expectations
about their own longevity, while other covariates such as demographics, cognition, personality, subjective
health and health behavior are underweighted. We also find that less educated people, smokers and
women have less certain beliefs; and recent health shocks increase uncertainty about survival, too.


Péter Hudomiet
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
503 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
hudomiet@umich.edu

Robert J. Willis
3254 ISR
University of Michigan
P. O. Box 1248
426 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48106
and NBER
rjwillis@isr.umich.edu
Introduction
Textbook models of uncertainty usually treat probabilities as known or knowable objects. This is

the case for outcomes of symmetric devices with known properties that are subject to random

forces such as the toss of a coin or die, the shuffling of a deck of cards or the shaking of an urn

containing balls of different colors. In contrast, the probabilities that confront economic decision

makers are usually less precisely known. 1,2


In this paper, we investigate the probability beliefs held by a given individual about personal

mortality risks elicited from survey questions on the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) that ask

respondents about the numerical probability that he or she will survive to a given age that is 10-

20 years in the future. In forming his belief about mortality risk, a person might consult a life

table based on the experience of millions of individuals. The life table provides an estimate of the

mean probability of survival for persons of given age and sex with essentially no sampling error.

However the individual may be ambiguous about whether this probability represents the risk he

himself faces. He may have personal information that makes him think that he has a higher or

lower risk than the average person of his age and sex. Moreover, he may be unsure about the

influence that personal information such as the ages at death of parents and relatives, health

history and current symptoms, or exercise and dietary habits will have on his likely longevity.

Finally, in answering the survey question, a person must construct a probability judgment “on the

fly,” accessing whatever frequentist data or epistemic beliefs he may have stored in his brain and




1
 Frank Knight, as early as in 1921, introduced the distinction between, as he called, “risk” for known and
“uncertainty” for unknown probabilities.
2
  Paté-Cornell (1996, pp. 96-97) observes that “… uncertainties in decision and risk analyses can be
divided into two categories: those that stem from variability in known (or observable) populations and,
therefore, represent randomness in samples (aleatory uncertainties), and those that come from basic lack
of knowledge about fundamental phenomena (epistemic uncertainties also known in the literature as
ambiguity).”


                                                     1
manipulating this information through reasoning or gut reaction to produce an answer to the

specific question about, say, the probability he will survive to age 80, all within less than a

minute.3


In this paper, we assume that probability beliefs about survival are ambiguous in the sense that an

individual has in mind a range of possible values of the probability that can be described by a

density function, g ( p) , that can take on a variety of shapes depending on both its mean and the

degree of ambiguity. The theory literature calls this density function second order probability

beliefs. (See, for example, Gilboa and Maracini, 2011).


We compare the predicted survival rates of our sample members to the actual survival of sample

members eight years later, as reported in the 2010 wave of HRS. The predictions from our

models track actual mortality fairly closely for sample members who are below age 80, but begin

to diverge substantially at the oldest ages, with older respondents being overly optimistic. The

predicted survival rates co-vary with demographic characteristics, health status, parental

mortality, smoking behavior and cognitive status in largely the same way that they do in

regressions that explain actual mortality. Thus, it appears that the subjective survival probability

answers are good candidates for modeling individual level heterogeneity in survival chances.4




3
  The attempt to determine the probabilistic beliefs of lay people using direct questions on surveys has only
become commonplace in the past two decades (Manski, 2004). There is a related but somewhat separate
tradition of eliciting probability beliefs of experts as part of risk assessments in engineering and operations
research applications. See Paté-Cornell (1996) for a summary of this tradition.
4
  Our findings about the external validity of the HRS subjective probability questions are consistent with
those in earlier papers that have studied these questions in the HRS (Hurd and McGarry, 2002; Smith et.
al., 2001). The overly optimistic expectations of people over 75 in HRS has also been noted by Hurd et al.
(2008) who find the same pattern across eleven European countries in the SHARE (Survey of Health,
Ageing and Retirement in Europe). There are also a few papers that use these questions in models of
behavior under uncertainty such as, for example, Picone, et al. (2004) who find that people who expect to
live longer are more likely to choose medical screening tests.


                                                       2
The major contribution of this paper is to provide an estimate of ambiguity about survival

probabilities that is embodied in the spread of g ( p) . We find that survival expectations are very

uncertain in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and that uncertainty varies in the population:

more educated people have more certain beliefs, women have less certain beliefs, and

deterioration of health, especially from previously excellent levels, leads to more uncertainty

about survival chances.


Identifying second order probability beliefs is possible under the assumptions of our survey

response model, the Modal Response Hypothesis (MRH) which is a mapping from probability

beliefs g  p  to survey responses. It assumes that people report the mode of g  p  whenever it


exists and they report 50%, whenever g  p  is so ambiguous that it does not have a unique

mode. The motivation for the MRH is twofold. First, imagine that people estimate the

probabilities of certain events after observing some successes and failures of these events. Under

some conditions a naïve estimator, which is the ratio of “good cases”, is exactly equal to the

mode of the Bayesian updated posterior probability distribution. Moreover, this estimator is

biased in finite samples. The MRH assumes that people report this simple, naïve estimator in

surveys. The second motivation comes from the literature using numerical subjective probabilities

on surveys. When people are asked to report a numerical probability using any digit between 0

and 100, an unusually large fraction of answers are heaped on 50. The excessive use of 50 has

been interpreted as occurring because many people treat “50-50” as a synonym for “I don’t

know” or even for “God only knows,” a sentiment that suggests that the true probability is

unknowable (Fischoff and Bruine de Bruin, 1999; Bruine de Bruin and Carman, 2012; Lillard and

Willis, 2001).5,6 Researchers have realized that these focal answers might introduce bias into



5
  In recent waves of the Health and Retirement Study, respondents have been asked a follow-up question if
they answered 50 to survival probability question: Do you think that it is about equally likely that you will

                                                      3
estimates of subjective probabilities. As a remedy, Manski and Molinari (2010) think of focal

responses as extreme versions of rounding, where some people always round to 0, 50 or 100

percent. Lumsdaine and Potter van Loon (2012) model the probability of providing a focal

answer as a separate equation in their econometric model. These papers found that accounting for

focal responses is important for valid inference. However, they are agnostic about the reasons so

many people provide such answers. Our approach, instead, is to model focal responses with an

economic model and relate it to the precision of beliefs of individuals. In our model people

answer with an epistemic 50 percent as a way of saying “I am very unsure”, when their beliefs are

too ambiguous. As far as we know the MRH model is the first in the literature that makes use of

the focal responses to learn something about the beliefs of individuals.


For comparison, we present an alternative model of survey response which assumes that the

person reports the mean of g  p  . We show that the MRH model can account quite well for

heaping at 0, 50 and 100 while the mean response model cannot. The overuse of focal responses

can be especially problematic when very low or very high probabilities are modeled since the

high ratio of 50 percent responses can arbitrarily push the estimated mean probabilities away

from their true, extreme values. We show in this paper that our modal response model which

explicitly models focal answers works better than the simple mean model typically used in

research on subjective probabilities. When the modal response model is used for extreme

probabilities both the estimated unconditional means and the average partial effects are closer to

ones estimated from realized mortality data. Alternative models of focal responses, such as



die before 75 as it is that you will live to 75 or beyond, or are you just unsure about the chances? About
two-thirds say that they are “just unsure.” In this paper, we use data from the 2002 wave of HRS which did
not have a follow-up question.
6
 In addition, the answers to the survival questions also exhibit some heaping at 0 and 100. Taken literally,
of course, these answers cannot represent rational probability beliefs except, perhaps, in the case of zero for
persons who know themselves to be terminally ill.


                                                       4
Manski and Molinari (2010) and Lumsdaine and Potter van Loon (2012) might work equally well

to reduce this bias and to predict enough focal answers. The main advantage of the MRH is that it

is based on an economic model of limited information and uncertain beliefs.7


Learning about the degree of uncertainty in individuals’ beliefs can be important for several

reasons. First, the value of information about mortality risk, for example, should be a function of

this uncertainty. Uncertain people might value information more, and certain people might

rationally ignore any new information since they have already established a good understanding

of the risks they face. Even in a fully Bayesian Subjective Expected Utility (SEU) framework the

degree of uncertainty might play an important role if the utility function is not linear in

probabilities. This is the case, for example, if people can invest in learning about their own

mortality risks.8 Second, learning about the degree of uncertainty in individuals’ beliefs is useful

from a survey methodological point of view, too. People whose probability beliefs are more

certain may answer probabilistic survey questions with greater precision. However, if beliefs are

uncertain, as is the case with mortality expectations, we expect large measurement error in survey

responses, that might even account for the discrepancy between subjective and objective survival

probabilities at later ages. Future research should investigate the potential role of measurement

error in subjective expectation data and its link to uncertainty in individuals’ beliefs. Third,



7
  Manski and Molinari (2010) discuss an alternative, more direct approach to learn about the imprecision of
belief. They make use of a follow-up question in a different survey (the ALP) asking about the range of
probabilities responders had in mind when they provided their answers. Roughly half of the sample
reported that their answers were “exact”, and the rest reported relatively wide ranges of probabilities with
the average width being 18 percent. We believe that this approach is very informative about general
uncertainty in the population, but it is less obvious how to make use of the provided ranges. First, the
meaning of an “exact” answer is ambiguous. Second, one would expect that 50 percent responders provide
wider ranges of possible probabilities than people whose answers ended with 0 or 5 (like 10 or 15 percent).
However, they did not find a strong pattern like that in their data.
8
 Another example is Bommier and Villeneuve (2012), who discuss a model of mortality risk aversion,
where the utility function is not additively separable over time, and thus, mortality probabilities enter the
model in a non-linear fashion as well.


                                                       5
learning about the degree of uncertainty in individuals’ beliefs might be very important in Non-

Bayesian/Non-Expected Utility models. While we don’t work in these frameworks, empirical

evidence on ambiguous beliefs may be useful to those who do.


The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we provide a quick overview of the literature on

ambiguity and its role in economic decisions. Section 2 describes the subjective survival data in

HRS that we use in this paper. Section 3 introduces the MRH model that can be used to model

any subjective expectation data that uses the HRS framework. Section 4 describes a simple and

tractable model of individual survival curves. Section 5 discusses the estimation method and

identification and Section 6 shows the results.



1. Ambiguity in economics

Knightian uncertainty, epistemic uncertainty and ambiguity are roughly synonymous terms that

figure prominently in a longstanding and ongoing debate about the link between rationality and

probability beliefs, on the one hand, and the relationship between beliefs and decisions, on the

other hand. In an excellent and authoritative review of this debate since Pascal’s famous bet on

the existence of God in 1670, Gilboa and Marinacci (2011) discuss the different models of

expectation formation, including Bayesian and Non-Bayesian models. They call the model we use

in this paper “the smooth model of ambiguity” or “second order probability beliefs.” In typical

models of ambiguity, agents have a set of possible probability distributions in mind but they are

not able to compound this information into a single probability distribution. The smooth model,

however, makes compounding possible. The real question in the smooth model is whether agents

have a preference for known probabilities (in other words they are ambiguity-averse) or not (in

which case they are simple Bayesians). As Gilboa and Marinacci (2011) write “… beyond the

above mentioned separation [between beliefs and utilities], the smooth preferences model enjoys

an additional advantage of tractability. Especially if one specifies a simple functional form for

                                                  6
[preferences for known probabilities], one gets a simple model in which uncertainty/ambiguity

attitudes can be analyzed in a way that parallels the treatment of risk attitudes in the classical

literature.”, pp. 45.


The major contribution of this paper is to provide an estimate of second order probability beliefs

about survival probabilities that are embodied in the spread of g ( p) . It is important to clarify the

role of this object in alternative views of uncertainty. Conventional economic theory of behavior

under uncertainty, rooted in subjective expected utility (SEU) theory (Savage, 1954), is often

interpreted as having erased the distinction between known and unknown probabilities because

expected utility is a linear function of probabilities. That is, assume that the person’s ambiguous

probability beliefs are described by g ( p) . His expected utility is


                1
         EU    pU live  (1  p)U die g ( p)dp  pU live  (1  p)U die ,
                0




where p is the mean of this ambiguous distribution. Clearly, expected utility is invariant to a

mean preserving spread of g ( p) ; hence, decisions based on expected utility are unaffected by

ambiguity.


In the famous Ellsberg experiments (Ellsberg, 1961) subjects were presented with choices of

drawing balls from different urns whose compositions were either known or ambiguous. Most

people revealed distaste for ambiguity which was at odds with the SEU theory. The survey by

Gilboa and Marinacci (2011) provides a comprehensive and insightful discussion of this.


We separate the issues concerning ambiguity of probability beliefs from those concerning the

effects of epistemic uncertainty and ambiguity aversion on decisions. We do so by utilizing

survey data that asks directly about people’s probability beliefs. As Manski (2004) emphasizes,

this approach differs from the practice in much of applied economics of assuming that individuals


                                                    7
have exogenously given probabilities.       It also differs from Savage’s theory which infers

probability beliefs from choice situations. This means that we can explore empirically how

beliefs about risk and uncertainty vary in the population without being required to take a stand on

how decisions are affected by probability beliefs.



2. Subjective Survival Probability Questions on the HRS
The Health and Retirement Study has asked probabilistic expectation questions on various topics

since its beginning in 1992. The survival question that we use in this paper comes from the 2002

wave and it reads as follows: “What is the percent chance that you will live to be [TARGET

AGE] or more?” The target age exceeds the individual’s age by at least 10 years: it is 80 years for

people below 70, and 85, 90, 95 and 100 for individuals in successive five year age intervals.


Although the subjective probability responses in HRS seem reasonable when averaged across

respondents, individual responses appear to contain considerable noise and are often heaped on

values of “0”, “50” and “100” (See for example Manski, 2004, for a discussion). Considering the

whole group of probability questions in HRS-1998, for example, while only 5% of respondents

refused to answer the probability questions, 52% of questions were heaped on either “0” or “100”

and an additional 15% were heaped on “50”.


These patterns are illustrated in Figure 1 by histograms of responses to the HRS-2002 survival

probability question. We have included separate histograms by the target age used in the survival

question and a total histogram in the six panels of Figure 1. Each histogram shows a high

frequency of focal answers, especially at 50. The ratio of 50 responses is somewhat smaller at

old ages where the actual survival probabilities are low, but it still accounts for 16 percent of the

responses for people above 84.




                                                 8
Figure 1: Distribution of Survival Probabilities to Target Age, by Age of Respondent, HRS-
                                            2002




Note: Target age is 80 years for people below 70, and it is 85, 90, 95 and 100 for individuals in successive five year
age intervals




Some psychologists, especially Fischhoff, Bruine de Bruin and their colleagues (Fischhoff and

Bruine de Bruin, 1999; Bruine de Bruin et al., 2000; Bruine de Bruin and Carman, 2012) have

argued that answers of “50” may reflect “epistemic uncertainty;” that is, a failure to have any

probability belief at all about the event in question or, at least, to have no clear idea of what the

probability could be. Alternatively, of course, an answer of “50” might reflect a very precise

belief about the probability that a fair coin will come up heads or perhaps a somewhat less precise

belief that a given event is about equally likely to occur or not occur. Indeed, while HRS

probability questions offer participants a scale of integers from 0 to 100, the large majority of

“non-focal” answers are integers ending in “5” or “0”, suggesting that responses from most




                                                          9
people involve rounding or approximation. See Manski and Molinari (2010) for a discussion of

the different rounding practices of survey respondents in the HRS and of potential remedies.


There has been much less emphasis in the psychological literature on focal answers at “0” or

“100”. When a probability question concerns an event such as the chance of being alive ten or

fifteen years from now, it does not seem credible to assume that a respondent who gives such an

answer of “100” is completely certain he will be alive then and, apart from a person diagnosed

with a terminal illness, an answer of “0” should not be taken at face value, either9.


Previous researchers have found that the tendency to give focal answers is associated with low

education, lower cognitive ability and it varies with other demographic variables, too. (Lillard and

Willis, 2001; Hurd and McGarry, 1995; Lumsdaine and Potter van Loon, 2012). These covariates

are known to correlate with mortality. Focal responses, thus, might bias estimated average

survival probabilities if we take them at face value and the bias might be stronger in situations

where the underlying probability is far from 50 percent. In order to test whether this is the case,

in the empirical part of the paper we will compare estimated individual survival curves to actual

survival of the respondents eight years later in 2010, which is the last available wave of the HRS.



3. Probability Beliefs and the Modal Response Hypothesis
In this section, we describe a theoretical model which attempts to relate answers that an

individual gives to a survey question about the subjective probability of a given event and his

underlying probability beliefs. In our model we distinguish between ambiguity and epistemic

uncertainty, with the latter corresponding to cases when information is limited.




9
 It is possible to regard answers of “0” or “100” as approximations which are no different in kind than
rounded answers of “5”, “40” or “95”. However, in a discussion of Gan, Hurd and McFadden (2005),
Willis (2005) provides evidence against this interpretation.


                                                    10
Let us assume that person i is faced with the problem of estimating the probability pi of an

event A . Initially he has no information about the probability of this event, he has an uninformed

prior pi
          prior
                  U  0,1 , where U denotes the uniform distribution. The person observes event A

happening  i  1 times and not happening i  1 times. In the survival context, for example, this

means that a person is aware of  i  1 people similar to himself who survived to the given target

age and i  1 similar people who died before reaching that age. It is well known that if this new

information is used to Bayesian update one’s beliefs about pi , the posterior distribution has a

Beta distribution with parameters  i and  i , pi           Beta i , i  .


When faced with a survey question about the probability of event A, the person might respond

with the mean or the mode of this distribution. When  i and  i are larger than one10, the mean

and the mode of the Beta distribution are


                                                             i
                                              pimean               ,                            (1)
                                                          i  i

                                                           i  1
                                            pimod e                 .                           (2)
                                                         i  i  2



A Bayesian agent would report pimean which is the expected value of the Bayesian updated

posterior distribution. Note that pimod e is exactly equal to the naïve estimator of the probability

that can be computed by the number of “good cases” which is  i  1 over the number of all cases

which is i  i  2 . A frequentist agent, thus, would not report the mean but, rather, the mode




10
     Other cases will be discussed below.


                                                        11
of the distribution gi  p  . The modal response hypothesis assumes that people report pimod e

rather than pimean to probabilistic survey questions for at least two reasons. First, as Lillard and

Willis (2001) argue, it is cognitively less burdensome for a respondent to answer a survey

probability question quickly by reporting the most likely value of p, given by the mode of g ( p) ,

than it is to report the expected value given by pimean   pgi ( p)dp . Second, pimod e is equal to a

very simple rule-of-thumb estimator for the probability in question: the frequentist response. In a

survey situation where people have to answer many questions in a very short timeframe, it seems

a reasonable assumption that they give frequentist approximations to probability questions instead

of Bayesian updating their priors. Moreover, in this model the mode is often a good

approximation of the mean.


The formula in (2) does not give the mode of the distribution when either  i or  i is smaller

than 1. Whenever i  1,   1 the distribution is always decreasing and has a unique mode at

zero. Whenever i  1,   1 the distribution is always increasing and its unique mode is at one.

Finally, if i  1,   1 the distribution has a U-shape and it has two maxima at zero and one. In

this case one finds it more probable that the probability of event A is zero or one than that it is 50

percent.


We have motivated the use of the Beta distribution with a Bayesian framework where agents

observe certain numbers of successes and failures. As we shall show, however, the distributions

that occur when either  i or  i is smaller than 1 cannot be derived from Bayesian updating

based on evidence. Indeed, these distributions correspond to situations in which, in effect, the

agent has very little objective evidence on which to base his beliefs and, lacking evidence, tends

to give conventional “epistemic “ responses to survey questions about his probabilistic beliefs. In

particular, we hypothesize that the person will respond with an extreme value of either zero or

                                                 12
one when g ( p) is monotonically decreasing or increasing. When the distribution is U-shaped,

we hypothesize that the person will answer “50” as a synonym for “God only knows” rather than

as necessarily a belief that the outcome in question is equally likely to occur or not.11


To show how the shape of g ( p) is related to the amount of evidence on which an individual

bases his beliefs, we introduce two more parameters that are functions of  and  :


                                                        i
                                               i               ,                                         (3)
                                                       i  i

                                                ni  i  i .                                             (4)



i is the expected value of the distribution of the probability in question, and ni is a measure of

the precision of beliefs. Higher ni means more precise beliefs: that is, a tighter gi ( p) density

function. Earlier, we argued that an uninformed agent with a uniform prior over the unit interval

would update his prior after observing   1 successes and                   1 failures in a sample of

N    2 .         Note that B(1,1) is a uniform distribution so that ni      2 for an

uninformed agent. Equivalently, such an agent observes no data since N  0 . Thus, a necessary

condition for Bayesian updating is that the agent observes a positive amount of data, which

implies that   1,   1 and N  2 . As we have seen, any Beta function satisfying this

condition is unimodal where the mode falls in the interval, 0  p  1 . Conversely, when   1

or   1 g ( p) may be monotonically increasing, decreasing or U-shaped depending on the


11
   In the survival context, a U-shaped distribution could represent the beliefs of someone who is unsure
whether he had inherited a genetically transmitted disease. In case he did, he might face a low survival
probability to the target age, but if he did not he has a high probability of surviving. The posterior
distribution of the survival probability in this case can have a U shape, where the extreme probabilities are
more likely than any middle values. However, it is not plausible that such situations are common enough
to account for the large number of “50” responses that we see in survey responses.



                                                      13
value of  and if     1, g ( p) is always U-shaped. Obviously, Bayesian updating cannot

be the source of such beliefs since one cannot observe a negative number of signals! That is why

we label such beliefs as “epistemic” and distinguish them from “ambiguous” ones.


In our development of the Beta model, the precision parameter, ni  i  i , is assumed to be an

integer equal to the size of the sample less two that is observed by agent i. A broader and more

useful interpretation of precision is that it measures the confidence that an individual has in his

judgment of the risk of a given event. For instance, educated individuals can utilize, in addition

to their personal experience, a broader knowledge of evidence about mortality and its causes from

past coursework, wider reading and better informed family and social networks. Thus, we may

interpret precision as a measure of a person’s capacity to assess his survival risks based on his

knowledge of mortality risks and his ability to translate personal information about his own

health, health behavior and family history into its implications for survival chances.


The relationship between ni , i and g ( p) is depicted in Figure 2. The figure presents a matrix

of 81 probability density functions— g ( p | i , ni ) —corresponding to nine different values of the

mean of g  p  , given by i on the horizontal axis, and nine different degrees of precision,

measured by ni , on the vertical axis. The figure also illustrates the boundary between ambiguous

beliefs that can be represented by a second order probability distribution based on Bayesian

principles and epistemic uncertainty in which the individual has too little knowledge about the

risk in question to be able to form an evidence-based probability judgment. Possible ambiguous

densities appear in the darkly shaded, inverted U-shaped region in Figure 2 for which ni  2 .

Note that throughout this region, reports of p mean and p mod e tend to be very close to one another.

The lightly shaded area at the top of the figure corresponds to epistemic 50 percent responses. As

we can see, when uncertainty is high ( ni is low) for any values of i the model predicts a 50


                                                 14
percent response, including cases when the mean probability is very low or very high. The MRH,

thus, predicts that the large fraction of 50 percent answers, typical in subjective probabilistic

expectation data, can in fact correspond to mean probabilities that are far from 50 percent. The

two unshaded triangular regions in Figure 2 correspond to epistemic 0 and 100 responses. Such

responses are typical in cases when the mean probability, i is also close to 0 or 100. However,

when ni is close to 2, that is beliefs are almost uniform, 0 and 100 percent answers can occur

when i is close to 50 percent. Thus, the MRH can predict a large fraction of focal 0, 50 and 100

answers and the corresponding bias can be either positive or negative.


To summarize, the modal response hypothesis claims that survey respondents report a potentially

rounded version of the mode of gi  p  whenever it exists and they report 50 percent whenever


gi  p  has a U shape,


                                           i  1 
                                    round                  if    i  1, i  1
                                            i  i  2 
                                    
                          pimrh    1                        if    i  1, i  1            (5)
                                    0                        if    i  1, i  1
                                    
                                    0.5                     if    i  1, i  1.



The round function can be rounding to the closest 1 percent, 5 percent, 10 percent or anything

that seems appropriate in the context of the survey. Manski and Molinari (2010), for example, use

a framework where there are individual differences in rounding practices. Their approach can also

be modeled in our framework by letting the round function vary across individuals.




                                                    15
   Figure 2: Density of probability beliefs (gi(p)) for different mean (µi) and precision (ni)
                                             values




The hypothesis of this paper is that people answer subjective probabilistic expectation questions

according to the MRH. It would be desirable, however, to test the MRH against other survey

response models. A natural candidate for comparison is the mean model where people respond a

potentially rounded version of the mean of gi ( p)


                                         pimm  round  i  .                                    (6)



In the mean model the precision of beliefs ( ni ) is not identified, only the mean ( i ) is. The mean

and the mode models, however, converge to each other as ni goes to infinity. That is, the mean

model is embedded in the MRH, and thus, a relatively small estimated belief precision (n) would

be evidence in favor of the MRH.




                                                 16
4. Individual subjective survival curves
In the previous section, we introduced two survey response models that transform second order

probability distributions g  p | i , ni  into the survey response pimrh or pimm . These models can

be applied to any subjective probabilities in the HRS format and not just to survival data. To close

the model, however, we need to specify the mean ( i ) and the precision ( ni ) of beliefs. There is

no unique way of modeling these two variables; it is the task of the researcher to find the

appropriate model in the context of the particular project. In this section, we show how i and ni

can be modeled in the context of survival probabilities.


The so-called Gompertz model of longevity has been widely used in both demography and

biology because its increasing mortality hazard assumption lines up with mortality data of

humans and other species very well (Vaupel, 1997). The Gompertz model assumes that the

hazard of death is exponentially increasing with age:


                                       h  a    0 1 exp  1a  ,                            (7)


where  0 is a positive scale and  1 is a positive shape parameter. By simple calculation, (7) leads

to the following survival probability from age a to age t:


                                                                            
                           S  a, t   exp  0  exp  1t   exp  1a   .                 (8)


The main advantage of subjective survival data is that we can estimate individual heterogeneity in

survival chances. With objective survival data we can only identify group-specific survival

probabilities by computing the ratio of survivors in a particular group. Unobserved heterogeneity

within groups, however, is not identified. In contrast, subjective survival data enables us to

estimate individual heterogeneity in survival chances as we collect probability data on the

individual level. We follow Vaupel (1979) by allowing the scale parameter (  0 ) to have a gamma


                                                    17
distribution with shape parameter k and scale parameter  and we assume that the shape

parameter (  1 ) is fixed in the population:


                                                 0i      k ,  .                                       (9)


The expected value of the gamma distribution is k and thus both parameters increase mortality

chances and decrease the probability of survival (see equation (8)). The main advantage of using

the gamma distribution, as we shall argue, is analytic tractability. Note, however, that this is a

flexible 2 parameter distribution with both parameters being estimated, and hence this assumption

is not very restrictive. The first advantage of the gamma distribution is that the average survival

probabilities can be derived analytically. As we show in Online Appendix C2, in the gamma-

gompertz model the average survival probabilities from age a to age t is



                                                   
                      E  Si  a, t | k , ,  1    1    exp  1t   exp  1a     
                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                      .   (10)



The second advantage of the gamma-gompertz framework is that we can analytically derive the

effect of individual heterogeneity on sample selection. Different survival chances are modeled by

letting  0 have a distribution in the population. In this paper we refer to  0 as “frailty” (Vaupel,

1979), which includes genetic, environmental and behavioral factors that affect the underlying

mortality of individuals other than age. As long as survival chances are heterogeneous in a

population, fit individuals will be overrepresented in the sample over time as frail individuals are

more likely to die and not participate in the HRS. By applying the formula from Vaupel (1979)

we can analytically characterize this sample selection. See the online appendix C1 for details.


To sum up, we use the following structural equations for individual survival chances.


                         i  Si  a, t   exp   0i  exp  1t   exp  1a    ,                 (11)


                                                        18
                                               0i       k , i  ,                          (12)

                                                        1
                              i                                             and              (13)
                                     1
                                            exp   1a   exp   1r  
                                     r

                                                    r  xi'  .                              (13)
 r represents the scale parameter of the gamma distribution in the reference cohort which is the

50 year old ( r  0.5 ). Equation (13) shows the effect of sample selection. The scale parameter

i    is decreasing with age, as fit individuals are increasingly overrepresented in the sample.

Equation (13) shows that we add covariates to the scale parameter of the 50 year old cohort.

Finally Online appendix C3 shows how average partial effects of the different covariates can be

derived after fitting this model.


So far we have only talked about how to model the mean survival probability, i . For modeling

the precision of beliefs ( ni ), we use a very simple log-normal framework.


                                           ln  ni   zi' n  uni ,                          (14)

                                             uni          
                                                      N 0,  n2 .                             (15)



Equations (11)-(15) together with the survey response models of the previous section fully

specify our model.



5. Estimation and identification
Our structural model has two unobservables: 0i which is a function of the mean survival

probability and uni which is the unobserved heterogeneity in the precision of beliefs. Based on

the distributional assumptions from the previous section, the model is fully specified and it can be

estimated with maximum likelihood.



                                                        19
We only observe one survival probability answer in HRS. In Section 3, we proposed two survey

response models. The mean model assumed that people report a rounded version of their true

survival chances, while the MRH model assumed that people report a rounded version of the

mode of the distribution of probability beliefs g  p | i , ni  or 50 percent when the mode does

not exist.


The joint distribution of the two random variables 0i and uni is complicated because one is

gamma, the other is normal and they enter the model in a non-linear fashion. The estimation of

the MRH, thus, can be carried out by maximum simulated likelihood. The estimation of the mean

model is more straightforward as the precision of beliefs plays no role in the model. Online

Appendix C4 and C5 show how the likelihood function of these two models can be constructed.


It is worth discussing how our main parameters are identified. We seek to estimate the following

set of parameters: 1 , k ,  ,  n ,  n . In the case of the mean model, parameters of the belief

precision,  n and  n are not identified. Parameter 1 is the shape parameter of the individual

survival function and it is identified from how fast the probability responses ( pihrs ) change with


                    
age E pihrs | a / a . Parameters k and  determine the scale parameter of the individual


subjective survival curves ( 0i ) and they are identified from the location and dispersion of the


                                                   
individual responses ( E pihrs | xi and V pihrs | xi ).


The identification of the belief precision parameters  n and  n primarily comes from the

fraction of different focal answers in different demographic groups. If we have many focal

answers, we expect ni to be small. If we have many different types of focal answers (0, 50 and

100), we expect a high  n , indicating a high dispersion of belief precision in the population.




                                                 20
6. Empirical Analysis
Beliefs about subjective survival probabilities presumably depend on an individual’s knowledge

of different risk factors and demographic differences in the society; his personal information

about his own health, habits and family members’ longevity; his ability to translate this

information into a probability and on his level of optimism or pessimism. In the empirical model

estimated in this section, we use the information available in the HRS to try to capture several of

the major determinants of beliefs in a parsimonious fashion.


6.1. Sample and Measures Employed


The sample used in the empirical analysis consists of 13,038 age eligible respondents to the 2002

Health and Retirement Study, over age 54 in 2002,12 who provided responses to the subjective

survival probability question.        Excluded from the sample are proxy respondents and non-

respondents in the 2000 wave of data collection. Also excluded are persons over 90 who were

not asked the survival probability questions and people for whom we did not have realized

survival information in 2010.13 Table A1 in Appendix A presents descriptive statistics for the

variables used in our analyses. The average age of our sample members is just over 68 years

(ranging from 54 to 89 years) and on average the target age was 16 years from their current age.

The modal sample member is a white female with a high school education although there is

substantial variance in each of these dimensions.


Our theory suggests that people may utilize personal information in forming their subjective

survival beliefs. Parents’ age at death, one’s own current health status and health behavior are

such variables. As Table A1 shows, 16 percent of our sample still has a living mother but only 5



12
     The 2002 HRS is a representative panel sample of the 54+ population and their spouses.
13
 Actual mortality of HRS respondent is very precisely measured from administrative data (the National
Health Index) and it is even available for people who dropped out of the survey in a later wave.


                                                      21
percent has a living father. The average age at death of the mothers is 76 years while the

corresponding number for the fathers is 72 years.           We construct six variables about parental

mortality. Three of them correspond to the mortality of the same sex parent (father-son, mother-

daughter pairs) and three correspond to the opposite sex parent. Within each pair we first take the

age at death of the parent if he/she is dead. If (s)he is alive we impute the expected age at death of

the parent based on his/her gender and age. In all models we include dummy variables about

whether the parents are alive to control for potential imputation bias. Finally we create a linear

spline from the imputed parental mortality with a single cut-off point at the age of the

interviewee. This approach is motivated by the idea that individuals might consider parental

mortality less informative about their own survival chances if they have already lived longer than

their parents.14 These four splines (two for each parent) together with the two dummies constitute

our six parental mortality variables.


We also include in our analysis three sets of variables on health related behavior. As Table A1

shows, 43 percent of our sample reports regular exercise at least three times a week. While only

14 percent of the sample smoked in 2002, almost 60 percent reported having smoked in the past.

There is a big variation in the sample in drinking behavior. Roughly half of our sample (48

percent) reports that they drink alcohol sometimes, but the majority are not regular alcohol

consumers. Among those who are, the average number of days when they drink is 3.4 days a

week, and the average number of alcoholic beverages consumed is 1.9.


Self-rated health in the HRS is measured on a five-point scale--1) Excellent, 2) Very Good, 3)

Good, 4) Fair and 5) Poor. We translate these into three categories: 1) excellent/very good; 2)




14
   Simple exploratory work suggested that parental mortality has a stronger effect on expectations when the
parent died at an old age. The specification we use in this paper is not the only way to allow for such non-
linearity and future work should explore alternative models.


                                                    22
good; 3) fair/poor15. We then construct dummy variables representing the combination of self-

rated health in 2000 and 2002 for each respondent with excellent/very good in both years as the

baseline case. In Table A1 we only show the marginals of this joint distribution. As we can see

the fraction of people in “excellent/very good” health decreased from 47 percent in 2000 to 43

percent in 2002. The fraction of people in “good” health did not change much (31 and 32 percent)

and the fraction in “fair/poor” health increased from 22 to 25 percent.


We also include two cognitive measures (“Vocabulary” and the “27-point cognitive capacity

scale”16 ), and the CESD depression score which measures depressive symptoms. 17 Table A1

shows that the average member of our sample has higher cognitive and lower depression scores

than the average HRS respondent.


6.2 Maximum Likelihood Model Estimates


The objective of this section is to test the modal response hypothesis (MRH) through a series of

performance tests. All the results we present in this section are based on the twelve estimated

models shown in Table A2 in Appendix A and B1, B5 and B9 in Online appendix B. Table A2

reports models without covariates, Table B1 adds basic demographic information, Table B5

expands the model with cognition, personality and parental mortality and finally Table B9

contains all variables including subjective health. All tables present three models. The first

columns show actual eight year survival of the HRS respondents between 2002 and 2010

estimated with nonlinear least squares. The second columns shows results using subjective



15
  These three categories represent relatively good, average and relatively bad health. The reason for the
aggregation is that we interact subjective health in 2000 and 2002 and adding 5 x 5 = 25 interactions would
make the interpretation of these variables difficult.
16
  The 27-point scale Langa-Weir method is discussed in Crimmins, et al. (2011). HRS cognitive measures
are described in Fisher, et al. (2012).
17
     See Ofstedal et. al. (2002).


                                                    23
expectations based on the mean model and the last two columns show results from the MRH. All

the parameters of our model (  0 , , n,  1 , k , sd  n  ) are assumed to be positive and thus their
                                                            50



logarithms enter the likelihood function. Covariates potentially enter two equations. The first is

the equation of  50 which is the scale parameter of the gamma distribution of the mortality

hazard at the age of 50. In the actual survival models we model  0 directly. Covariates with

positive coefficients are estimated to increase the mortality hazard and decrease the survival

chances. The magnitudes of these coefficients will be analyzed later when we derive average

partial effects of them on various survival probabilities. The second equation where covariates

appear is the equation of the precision of beliefs ( n ). Positive coefficients mean tighter, more

precise probability beliefs.



   Figure 3: Average actual and expected survival probabilities and dispersion in beliefs
  Panel A: 8 year actual and expected survival                        Panel B: Heterogeneity in the subjective survival
          probabilities by age in 2002                                             curves, MRH model
                                                                                               1
                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                   Survival probabilities




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                     50   55   60   65    70       75     80     85     90     95   100
                                                                                                                               Target age

                                                                                                                     10th quantile             25th quantile
                                                                                                                     50th quantile             75th quantile
                                                                                                                     90th quantile




Panel A of Figure 3 compares estimated actual 8 year survival probabilities of HRS respondents

to subjective survival beliefs in 2002 computed from the models in Table A2 with no covariates.

The horizontal axis shows the current age of respondents in 2002 and the vertical axis shows the

fitted average 8 year survival chances from the three models. As we discussed in Section 3,

heterogeneity in survival chances leads to sample selection as people with better fitness are more


                                                                 24
likely to survive and become respondents of the HRS survey at older ages. In the case of realized

survival, only the interpretation of the estimates changes, but we do not need to make any further

adjustments of the parameters. The demography literature calls survival tables of this sort

“Survival probabilities of the survivors.” In the case of subjective survival chances, however, we

do have to properly adjust for the unmeasured genetic and environmental differences of cohorts

as discussed in Section 4. As we can see, both the mean and the MRH model track the actual

survival chances very well up until about age 84, when the subjective probabilities become too

optimistic. While the 8 year actual survival chance of a 90 year old is roughly 20 percent, the

corresponding numbers in the MRH and mean models are                     45 and 55 percent, respectively.

Thus, although the MRH model provides numbers that are closer to the true survival chances at

old ages, these numbers are still too large on average. It is not obvious, however, whether these

overly optimistic numbers are biases in people’s heads or biases due to measurement error in the

survey. In this paper we do not try to separate these two types of bias and we simply compare the

mean, the mode and the actual survival models using the raw data.

Panel B of Figure 3 shows the estimated heterogeneity of survival chances in our sample. The

different curves correspond to different values of  0 with lower values meaning better fitness. As

we can see, there is notable variability in survival chances. For example, the difference in median

survival (i.e., half-life) between those in the 10th and 90th percentiles of the estimated frailty

distribution is about 25 years. That is, comparing two groups of 50 year olds, half of those in the

90th percentile are expected to survive to age 70 while among those in the 10th percentile half are

expected to survive to age 95. Using only mortality data, one cannot identify the unobserved

heterogeneity in survival chances.18




18
  There is a long history of discussion about the difficulty in separately identifying duration effects and
unobserved heterogeneity. See, for example, Vaupel (1979) and Heckman and Singer (1984). Using
subjective survival data, however, identifying unobserved heterogeneity in frailty is easier, because we

                                                      25
   Figure 4: Simulated survey responses based on the mean and the mode models with all
                covariates and the empirical distribution of survey responses




The reason the MRH model is somewhat better than the mean model in predicting low probability

events is that the high fraction of 50 percent answers are allowed to be focal answers that do not

arbitrarily push the mean survival chances up. To visualize this effect we simulated survey

responses based on the estimated models of subjective survival chances in Table B9. In order to

get precise numbers, we used 651.900 observations for simulation which is 50 times the size of

our dataset ( 651,900  50 13,038 ). As we can see in Figure 4, the MRH model is able to

predict histograms of responses that are very similar to the histogram of actual responses in the



observe probabilities of survival on the individual level. This contrasts with the use of mortality data, where
it is hard to know which survivor is fit and which is simply luckier than other non-survivors. Even though
we use a particular functional form for how unobserved heterogeneity enters the model (the gamma-
gompertz framework) it is important to note that these functional form assumptions are not needed for
identifying unobserved heterogeneity in subjective frailty.


                                                      26
bottom panel. The ratio of 50 percent answers is around 25 percent, while the ratio of 0 and 100

percent answers are both around 10 percent. What is more important, the MRH model recognizes

that the high fraction of focal answers should not be taken at face value as a large fraction of them

only reflect imprecise knowledge. The mean model, however, takes all the focal answers at face

value. Consequently, the mean model is not able to predict a histogram similar to actual

responses, and it seriously biases the estimation of low or high probability events.


Much of a person’s personal information about health is likely embodied in his assessment of the

level and trajectory of self-rated health. To explore the effects of other covariates, we present

estimates of models with and without subjective health in Table 2 and 1 respectively. Both tables

show estimated average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to75 and from 75 to 95. Online

appendix B contains more detailed versions of these tables and further specifications, including

models with only demographic variables and partial effects of surviving from 2002 to 2010.


The tables show that the majority of the coefficients are smaller in absolute value when subjective

as opposed to objective information is used, but the coefficients based on the MRH are closer to

objective values. This pattern is more obvious for low probability events (surviving from age 75

to 95), as the coefficients are roughly two times as big in the MRH. Thus, not only the average

survival probabilities (Figure 3), but the average partial effects are also closer to objective values

compared to the mean model. We take it as evidence that the MRH model is more successful for

modeling subjective probabilistic expectations, particularly for low probability events, because

the bias from focal answers are explicitly modeled.




                                                 27
Table 1: Average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to 75 and from 75 to 95 in three
models with demographic, personality and personal information variables: actual survival
and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                                          55-75                                75-95
                            Actual                                 Actual
                           survival        Mean          MRH      survival     Mean        MRH
 Demographics
 Education                 -0.003**      0.009***      0.009***   -0.004**    0.003***    0.005***
 Female                    0.073***      0.035***      0.051***   0.097***    0.012***    0.029***
 Black                     0.043***      0.031***       0.07***   0.058***    0.011***    0.04***
 Hispanic                  0.055***     -0.052***       -0.04**   0.073***    -0.019***   -0.023**
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition                 0.055***      0.02***       0.019***   0.073***    0.007***    0.011***
 Vocabulary                  0.003         0.003         -0.003     0.004       0.001      -0.002
 Depression                -0.031***    -0.053***      -0.06***   -0.041***   -0.019***   -0.034***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own age
 Same sex, sp1               0.026         0.068         -0.048     0.035       0.024      -0.028
 Same sex, sp2             0.159***      0.314***      0.415***    0.21**     0.112***    0.239***
 Same sex lives              0.011         0.001         0.006      0.014        0          0.003
 Opp. sex, sp1               0.038       0.186***      0.156***     0.051     0.066***    0.09***
 Opp. sex, sp2             0.144**       0.097**        0.116**   0.191**     0.035**     0.067**
 Opp. sex lives              0.028         0.007         0.007      0.038       0.002       0.004
 Health related behavior
 Exercises                 0.096***      0.054***      0.061***   0.128***    0.019***    0.035***
 Ever smoked               -0.076***     -0.02***      -0.015**   -0.101***   -0.007***   -0.008**
 Smokes now                -0.097***    -0.059***      -0.06***   -0.128***   -0.021***   -0.035***
 Ever drinks               0.056***      0.044***      0.033***   0.074***    0.016***    0.019***
 # of days drinks          0.007***       0.004*        0.005**   0.01***      0.001*     0.003**
 # of drinks               -0.012***     -0.009**      -0.008**   -0.016***   -0.003**    -0.004**
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                           28
Table 2: Average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to 75 and from 75 to 95 in three
models with demographic, personality, personal information and subjective health
variables: actual survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival
expectations
                                          55-75                                75-95

                             Surv         Mean           MRH        Surv       Mean        MRH
 Demographics
 Education                 -0.006***    0.006***       0.004***   -0.007***   0.003***    0.003***
 Female                    0.067***     0.026***       0.039***   0.086***    0.01***     0.024***
 Black                     0.051***     0.046***       0.086***   0.067***    0.018***    0.053***
 Hispanic                  0.071***     -0.04***        -0.019    0.092***    -0.016**     -0.012
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition                 0.05***       0.009**       0.008**    0.064***    0.004**      0.005*
 Vocabulary                  0.002        0.003         -0.003      0.003       0.001      -0.002
 Depression                -0.009***    -0.026***     -0.031***   -0.012***   -0.01***    -0.019***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own age
 Same sex, sp1               0.019       0.104**        -0.022      0.025     0.041**      -0.014
 Same sex, sp2             0.122**      0.268***       0.375***   0.157**     0.105***    0.231***
 Same sex lives              0.011        -0.001         0.002      0.014        0          0.001
 Opp. sex, sp1               0.043       0.206**       0.155***     0.056     0.081***    0.095***
 Opp. sex, sp2               0.093        0.061          0.1**      0.12        0.024     0.061**
 Opp. sex lives              0.041        0.006          0.003      0.053       0.002       0.002
 Health related behavior
 Exercises                 0.066***     0.025***       0.03***    0.086***    0.01***     0.019***
 Ever smoked               -0.067***      -0.005        -0.002    -0.086***    -0.002      -0.001
 Smokes now                -0.093***    -0.053***     -0.056***   -0.121***   -0.021***   -0.034***
 Ever drinks               0.045***     0.021***        0.013*    0.059***    0.008**      0.008*
 # of days drinks          0.005**        0.002          0.003    0.007**       0.001       0.002
 # of drinks                -0.01**     -0.009**       -0.007**   -0.013**    -0.003**     -0.004*
 Subjective health in 2000/2002
 Excel./excel.               ref.          ref.           ref.      ref.        ref.        ref.
 Excel./good               -0.095***    -0.063***     -0.071***   -0.123***   -0.025***   -0.044***
 Excel./poor               -0.177***    -0.118***     -0.137***   -0.23***    -0.046***   -0.084***
 Good/excel.               -0.05***     -0.05***      -0.055***   -0.064***   -0.02***    -0.034***
 Good/good                 -0.095***    -0.097***     -0.113***   -0.124***   -0.038***   -0.069***
 Good/poor                 -0.192***    -0.17***      -0.173***   -0.248***   -0.067***   -0.106***
 Poor/excel.               -0.124***     -0.1***      -0.108***   -0.161***   -0.04***    -0.066***
 Poor/good                 -0.142***    -0.139***     -0.146***   -0.183***   -0.055***   -0.09***
 Poor/poor                 -0.209***    -0.237***     -0.263***   -0.27***    -0.093***   -0.162***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                           29
However, the majority of the coefficients are still smaller in absolute value in the MRH than in

the actual survival models. There are two potential explanations for this. Either there is

measurement error in the data or people are underestimating the effect of some variables when

forming expectations about their longevity. Without further assumptions, measurement error,

other than focal responses, is not identified in our model. Note, however, that not all coefficients

are attenuated equally. In fact two coefficients are systematically higher in absolute value in the

subjective models: same sex parents’ age at death and depression. This is consistent with a model

in which agents base their expectations on easily observable determinants of mortality (parent’s

survival) because they have limited information on demographic differences in the society and on

the role of different behavioral factors, such as smoking and exercising, on survival. In this case

the partial effects of personal information is expected to be higher for subjective than for

objective survival; and the pattern is expected to be the reverse for other variables. This is exactly

what we see in the data.


Table 1 and 2 also show that people are aware that regular exercising is beneficial, and smoking

is harmful for them, although they underestimate the role of these factors. We can also see that

regular but limited alcohol consumption is not damaging, while teetotalling and heavy drinking is

unhealthy. Even more interesting is the comparison of the models with and without controlling

for subjective health. Not surprisingly both the objective and subjective survival probabilities are

less affected by behavior when subjective health is controlled. However, the subjective values

shrink more strongly. For example, as Table 1 shows those who quit smoking expect a 2

percentage point lower chance of surviving from age 55 to 75 compared to those who never

smoked. However, this effect disappears when subjective health is taken into account (Table 2). It

means that healthy quitters falsely believe that their survival chances are the same as those who

never smoked; whereas quitters who had already acquired a disease understand its consequences.




                                                 30
It is also worth noting the demographic differences in subjective and objective survival. As

expected, females are more likely to live longer and this is reflected in their subjective

expectations. Racial differences, however, are more complex. Conditional on education, personal

information, health and behavior, blacks and Hispanics have a higher chance of survival than

whites in this age range. African Americans’ expectations reflect this difference, but Hispanics

are more pessimistic than Non-Hispanics. Table B2-B4 in the online appendix show roughly

similar patterns when only demographic variables enter the model. Finally even though the

educated are more likely to live longer (Table B2-B4), when personality, personal information

and behavior are controlled, the effect of education becomes negative (!). Further investigation,

not shown in the paper, shows that this result is driven by the cognitive capacity variable.

Education and cognition has a strong positive correlation but cognition is a better predictor of

survival than education. Moreover, the educated also have better subjective health, and thus the

effect of education becomes even more negative when health is controlled (Table 2). In the

meantime the educated believe to have a better chance of surviving independent of the control

variables used.


  Figure 5: Estimated distribution of probability beliefs gi  p  of surviving from age 50 to
                                             age 80




                                               31
Finally let us take a look at the estimated distribution of probability beliefs (second order

probability distribution, gi  p  ) of HRS respondents. Based on the MRH model without

covariates (Table A2) we computed the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th quantiles of belief precision

 n  and the scale parameter of the survival function (  0 ) for the cohort of age 50. These numbers
can be found in Table A3. Figure 5 shows the corresponding probability belief distributions of the

probability of surviving from age 50 to age 80. As we can see, there is an enormous heterogeneity

in probability beliefs. The median responder in HRS (3rd row and 3rd column of Figure 5) has a

belief distribution that is single peaked but wide, having significant probability mass for any

possible probability values between zero and one. It means that although the median responder’s

best guess for the probability of surviving from age 50 to age 80 is roughly 50 percent, she is

quite unsure about this probability. People with even less precise beliefs are very unsure. For

example, already at the 25th percentile of belief precision (where n  1.58 ) everyone provides a

focal response of either 0, 50 or 100. At the 10th percentile (where n  0.4 ) everyone has U-

shaped beliefs and, thus, responds with an epistemic 50%.19 As we increase belief precision to the

75th percentile, the second order probability belief distribution becomes quite tight, having most

of its mass in the neighborhood of the mean probability. It means that at least 25 percent of the

respondents have very precise beliefs about their own survival chances.




19
  Note, however, that the particular shape of the distribution of beliefs is only identified from the
lognormal functional form in the region where n is below 1. Because there are many focal responses in the
HRS data, the model estimates many uncertain responses where n  1. It is hard to know, however, what
the distribution of n looks like, conditional on being below 1. The log-normality assumption might or
might not describe this conditional distribution well. It is possible, for example, that no-one has U-shaped
beliefs, but all epistemic 50 responses come from a uniform distribution. If that is the case, then the log-
normality assumption of n is inappropriate.


                                                     32
Table 3: Predictors of uncertainty in the MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                                                        ln(n)
                                        [1]              [2]     [3]
 Demographics
 Education                          0.056***       0.051***     0.053***
 Female                            -0.139***      -0.156***    -0.157***
 Black                                 0.053          0.041         0.02
 Hispanic                             0.188*          0.155        0.132
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition                                            0.021        0.027
 Vocabulary                                           0.008        0.009
 Depression                                        0.067***       0.043*
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own age
 Same sex, sp1                                      -0.493*      -0.493*
 Same sex, sp2                                        0.467          0.5
 Same sex lives                                      -0.064       -0.071
 Opp. sex, sp1                                       -0.122       -0.117
 Opp. sex, sp2                                        0.528        0.522
 Opp. sex lives                                       0.026        0.032
 Health related behavior
 Exercises                                            0.015         0.02
 Ever smoked                                        -0.091*      -0.091*
 Smokes now                                           0.007        0.006
 Ever drinks                                       0.174***     0.177***
 # of days drinks                                    -0.014       -0.015
 # of drinks                                         -0.035       -0.033
 Subjective health in 2000/2002
 Excel./excel.                                                      ref.
 Excel./good                                                    -0.172**
 Excel./poor                                                       0.122
 Good/excel.                                                      -0.092
 Good/good                                                         -0.05
 Good/poor                                                        -0.059
 Poor/excel.                                                      -0.106
 Poor/good                                                        -0.042
 Poor/poor                                                       0.177**
 Age and time horizon of the HRS question; variables divided by 100
 Age                                 -2.513*          -2.26       -2.333
 Horizon                              -7.503         -9.823     -10.037*
 Age X Horizon                      25.438**      27.698***     27.82***
 Constant                             1.572*         1.845*      1.882**
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level



                                                   33
Determinants of belief precision appear in Table 3 and the last columns of Table B1, B5 and B9

in Online Appendix B. Positive coefficients mean tighter, more precise beliefs. As we can see

more educated people have more certain beliefs. This is consistent with our hypothesis, discussed

in Section 3, that more educated people may have a broader knowledge of evidence about

mortality and its causes. We can also see that the deterioration of health, especially from

previously excellent levels, leads to more uncertainty about survival chances, perhaps because of

uncertainty about the future course of a new disease. Those who were in poor health both in 2000

and in 2002, however, hold the most certain and pessimistic beliefs about their survival chances.


The effect of age and the time horizon of the survival question in HRS have complicated relations

to uncertainty. For a fixed time horizon, the net effect of age on uncertainty is negative, because

the interaction term dominates for any time horizon values used in HRS (from 11 years to 26

years). Thus, older people seem to have more precise beliefs about their survival chances which

might reflect learning. For a fixed age, the net effect of the time horizon on uncertainty is also

negative, because the interaction term dominates again. This means that people hold more precise

views about their long run than their short run survival chances.


The two splines measuring same sex parental mortality in Table B5 and B9 shows a “V” shape. It

means that people are the most unsure about their survival chances when they are around the age

when their same sex parent died. We can also see that active smokers and those who have already

quit have less precise survival expectations compared to those who never smoked; infrequent

alcohol consumption leads to more precise beliefs; women are less sure than men and depressed

people are relatively more certain about their otherwise poor survival expectations.



Conclusion
The modal response hypothesis is used in this paper as the foundation for an econometric model

that is intended to provide a mapping between survey responses to probability questions and the


                                                34
underlying subjective probability beliefs of individuals about their chances of surviving to a

target age. In this paper, we have presented the MRH as a hypothesis designed to capture the

kinds of “gut response” to such questions that would be made after about 15 seconds of

consideration by persons who vary in the amount of information they have about actuarial risks to

health, about their own health-related circumstances and in their capacity to process such

information into subjective beliefs. We argued in Section 3 that reporting the mode is relatively

easier from a cognitive point of view than the mean or the median; the mode is equal to a very

simple rule-of-thumb estimator for the probability in question; and that the mode often provides a

good approximation to the expected probability that is called for in SEU theory.


Our empirical findings suggest that there is considerable heterogeneity in subjective survival

risks, some of it associated with age, sex, race, education, health related behavioral factors,

parental mortality and cognitive capacity. We have shown that subjective survival expectations

line up with actual mortality very well when the objective probabilities are moderate. The

subjective survival probabilities, however, become overly optimistic at old ages when the true

survival probabilities are relatively low. We have shown that the MRH model does a better job

compared to a standard mean model in reducing this bias as the MRH models focal answers in an

explicit way. It remains for future research to learn whether the overly optimistic subjective

expectations are biases in individuals’ head, potentially having behavioral consequences, or they

are a result of survey measurement error, potentially being related to uncertain beliefs.


In the empirical section of this paper, we have also found substantial uncertainty about mortality

risks which is manifested by considerable spread in the estimated distribution of subjective

survival probabilities for a typical respondent. In addition, we found significant variation in

uncertainty, holding expected survival risk constant.    It remains for future work to explore the

explanation of these findings more deeply and to see whether survival risk and uncertainty about

this risk play a role in decisions made by HRS respondents.

                                                 35
References
Bommier, Antoine and Bertrand Villeneuve (2012), "Risk Aversion and the Value of Risk to
Life," Journal of Risk & Insurance, The American Risk and Insurance Association, vol. 79, pp.
77-104.

Bruine de Bruin, Wändi and Katherine G. Carman (2012), “Measuring Risk Perceptions - What
Does the Excessive Use of 50% Mean?,” Medical Decision Making, vol. 32, pp. 232-236.

Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Baruch Fischhoff, Bonnie L. Halpern-Felsher and Susan G. Millstein
(2000), “Expressing Epistemic Uncertainty: It’s a Fifty-Fifty Chance,” Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, vol. 81, pp. 115-131.

Crimmins, Eileen M., Jung Ki Kim, Kenneth M. Langa and David R. Weir (2011), “Assessment
of cognition using surveys and neuropsychological assessment: the health and retirement study
and the aging, demographics, and memory study,” Journals of Gerontology, Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66B(S1), pp. i162–i171.

Ellsberg, Daniel (1961), “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 75, pp. 643-669.

Fischhoff, Baruch and Wändi Bruine de Bruin (1999), “Fifty-Fifty = 50%?,” Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, vol. 12, pp. 149-163.

Fisher, Gwenith, Halimah Hassan, Willard L. Rodgers and David R. Weir (2012), “Health and
Retirement Study - Imputation of Cognitive Functioning Measures: 1992 – 2010 Early Release,”
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/xyear/cogimp/desc/COGIMPdd.pdf, last updated on
Fabruary 24, 2012.

Gan, Li, Michael D. Hurd and Daniel McFadden (2005), “Individual Subjective Survival
Curves,” in David Wise, ed. Analyses in the Economics of Aging . University of Chicago Press.,
pp. 377-412.

Gilboa, Itzhak and Massimo Marinacci (2011), "Ambiguity and the Bayesian Paradigm,"
Working Papers 379, IGIER (Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Research), Bocconi
University.

Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer (1984), “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of
Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,” Econometrica, vol. 52,
pp. 271-320.

Hill, Daniel, Michael Perry and Robert J. Willis (2004), “Estimating Knightian Uncertainty from
Survival Probability Questions on the HRS,” mimeo

Hurd, Michael D., and Kathleen McGarry (1995), “Evaluation of the Subjective Probabilities of
Survival in the Health and Retirement Study,” Journal of Human Resources, vol. 30, pp. 268-292.

Hurd, Michael D., and Kathleen McGarry (2002), “The Predictive Validity of Subjective
Probabilities of Survival,” The Economic Journal, vol. 112, pp. 966-985.

                                              36
Hurd, Michael D., Susann Rohwedder, and Joachim Winter (2008) “Subjective Probabilities of
Survival: An International Comparison,” CeMMAP Workshop on “Novel measurement methods
for understanding economic behaviour” IFS, London, 3 July, 2008.

Knight, Frank H. (1921), “Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit,” Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx;
Houghton Mifflin Company.

Lillard, Lee A. and Robert J. Willis (2001), “Cognition and Wealth: The Importance of
Probabilistic Thinking,” Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper, UM00-04.

Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon (2012), “Wall Street vs. Main Street: A
Comparison of Views,” unpublished manuscript.

Manski, Charles F. (2004), “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, vol. 72, pp. 1329-1376.

Manski, Charles F. and Francesca Molinari (2010), "Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in
Surveys," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, vol. 28, pp. 219-231.

Ofstedal, Mary Beth; Fisher McAuley, Gwenith Fisher McAuley and Herzog, A. Regula (2005),
“Documentation of Cognitive Functioning Measures in the Health and Retirement Study,” Report
Last Updated: March 2005.

Paté-Cornell, M. Elisabeth (1996), “Uncertainties in risk analysis: Six levels of treatment,”
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 54, pp. 95-111.

Picone, Gabriel, Frank Sloan and Donald Taylor. (2004) “Effects of Risk and Time Preference
and Expected Longevity on Demand for Medical Tests,” The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
vol. 28, pp. 39–53.

Savage, Leonard J. (1954), “The Foundations of Statistics,” New York, Wiley.

Smith, Vincent K., Donald H. Taylor and Frank A. Sloan, (2001) “Longevity Expectations and
Death: Can People Predict Their Own Demise?,” The American Economic Review, vol. 91, pp.
1126-1134.

Vaupel, James W. (1979) “The Impact of Heterogeneity in Individual Frailty on the Dynamics of
Mortality,” Demography, vol. 16, pp. 439-454.

Vaupel, James W. (1997) “Trajectories of Mortality at Advanced Ages,” in Kenneth W. Wachter
and Caleb E. Finch, ed. Between Zeus and the Salmon, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.

Willis, Robert J. (2005) “Discussion of Li Gan, Michael Hurd and Daniel McFadden, ‘Individual
Subjective Survival Curves’,” in David Wise, ed. Analyses in the Economics of Aging.
University of Chicago Press.




                                              37
Appendix A: Tables and figures
                      Table A1: Descriptive statistics, HRS-2002
                                                            mean      sd
         Alive in 2010                                       0.77    0.42
         Subjective survival probability to target age      48.40   32.13
         Age                                                68.15    8.69
         Target age less actual age                         15.97    4.17
         Female                                              0.59    0.49
         Black                                               0.12    0.33
         Hispanic                                            0.06    0.24
         Years of education                                 12.54    3.00
         Mother is alive                                     0.16    0.37
         Mother's age of death/100 or current age            0.76    0.15
         Father is alive                                     0.05    0.23
         Father's age of death/100 or current age            0.72    0.14
         Exercises at least 3 times a week                   0.43    0.49
         Ever smoked                                         0.59    0.49
         Smokes now                                          0.14    0.34
         Ever drinks alcohol                                 0.48    0.50
         # of days a week when drinks alcohol                1.10    2.08
         # of days a week when drinks alcohol if positive    3.42    2.34
         # of drinks when drinks alcohol                     0.61    1.18
         # of drinks when drinks alcohol if positive         1.92    1.36
         Health excellent / very good, 2002                  0.43    0.49
         Health good, 2002                                   0.32    0.47
         Health fair / poor, 2002                            0.25    0.43
         Health excellent / very good, 2000                  0.47    0.50
         Health good, 2000                                   0.31    0.46
         Health fair / poor, 2000                            0.22    0.42
         Cognition score, std.                               0.08    1.01
         Vocabulary score, std.                              0.11    0.97
         CESD depression score, std.                        -0.04    1.04
         N                                                  13038




                                           38
Table A2: Actual survival until 2010 and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival
                         expectations, models without covariates
                           Actual survival    Mean model         MRH
      ln(γ0)                   -8.404
                               [0.21]***
          50
      ln(θ )                                           -11.174             -8.827
                                                       [0.150]***          [0.169]***
      ln(n)                                                                1.978
                                                                           [0.040]***
      ln(γ1)                   2.277                   2.73                2.397
                               [0.024]***              [0.012]***          [0.020]***
      ln(k)                                            -0.656              0.121
                                                       [0.011]***          [0.025]***
      ln(sd(n))                                                            0.814
                                                                           [0.025]***
      N                        13038                   13038               13038
      Log-likelihood                                   -57961.459          -47058.606
       *, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent



Table A3: Quantiles of belief precision ( n ) and probabilities of surviving from age 50 to age
80

                      quantiles       n              γ0             S(50,80)
                      10              0.40           0.000022       0.87
                      25              1.58           0.000054       0.71
                      50              7.23           0.000120       0.47
                      75              33.12          0.000229       0.23
                      90              130.31         0.000370       0.10




                                                  39
Online Appendix (not to shown in the paper)

Appendix B: Supplemental Tables

Table B1: Outputs of the ML estimation models with demographic variables; actual
survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                      Actual
                     survival    Mean               MRH
                         ln(γ0)        ln(θ50)         ln(θ50)   ln(n)
Demographics
Education             -0.048       -0.13        -0.089         0.056
                   [0.006]*** [0.007]*** [0.005]*** [0.009]***
Female                -0.343      -0.193        -0.209        -0.139
                   [0.033]*** [0.037]*** [0.027]*** [0.051]***
Black                  0.037      -0.007        -0.151         0.053
                     [0.055]      [0.053]     [0.038]***      [0.076]
Hispanic              -0.157       0.329         0.198         0.188
                    [0.079]** [0.083]*** [0.062]*** [0.110]*
Age and time horizon of the HRS question; variables divided by 100
Age                                                           -2.513
                                                             [1.478]*
Horizon                                                       -7.503
                                                              [6.314]
Age X Horizon                                                 25.438
                                                            [10.693]**
Constant              -7.538      -9.358        -7.234         1.572
                   [0.223]*** [0.190]*** [0.181]*** [0.946]*
Other parameters
ln(γ1)                   2.268      2.719      2.358
                      [0.024]*** [0.012]*** [0.020]***
ln(k)                              -0.629      0.158
                                 [0.011]*** [0.025]***
ln(sd(n))                                      0.808
                                            [0.025]***
N                       13038      13038      13038
Log-likelihood                    -57714.3   -46739.4
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                  40
Table B2: Average partial effects of surviving 8 more years in three models with
demographic variables: actual survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective
survival expectations
                      Actual
                     survival      Mean         MRH
 Demographics
 Education             0.008       0.011         0.012
                   [0.001]*** [0.002]*** [0.002]***
 Female                0.061       0.017         0.027
                   [0.006]*** [0.004]*** [0.006]***
 Black                -0.007       0.001          0.02
                      [0.010]     [0.005]    [0.006]***
 Hispanic              0.028      -0.028        -0.026
                    [0.014]** [0.008]*** [0.009]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level


Table B3: Average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to 75 in three models with
demographic variables: actual survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective
survival expectations
                      Actual
                     survival      Mean         MRH
 Demographics
 Education              0.01       0.023         0.021
                   [0.001]*** [0.004]*** [0.004]***
 Female                0.074       0.035         0.048
                   [0.008]*** [0.008]*** [0.010]***
 Black                -0.008       0.001         0.035
                      [0.012]     [0.009]    [0.011]***
 Hispanic              0.034      -0.059        -0.046
                    [0.017]** [0.017]*** [0.016]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                   41
Table B4: Average partial effects of surviving from age 75 to 95 in three models with
demographic variables: actual survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective
survival expectations
                      Actual
                     survival      Mean         MRH
 Demographics
 Education             0.013       0.007         0.011
                   [0.002]*** [0.001]*** [0.002]***
 Female                0.093       0.011         0.025
                   [0.010]*** [0.003]*** [0.007]***
 Black                 -0.01         0           0.018
                      [0.015]     [0.003]    [0.006]***
 Hispanic              0.042      -0.019        -0.024
                    [0.022]** [0.006]*** [0.009]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level


Table B5: Outputs of the ML estimation models with demographic, personality and
personal information variables; actual survival and the mean and MRH models of
subjective survival expectations
                     Actual
                    survival     Mean                MRH
                       ln(γ0)        ln(θ50)       ln(θ50)       ln(n)
 Demographics
 Education             0.015        -0.053        -0.037         0.051
                    [0.006]** [0.008]*** [0.005]*** [0.010]***
 Female                -0.34        -0.198        -0.215        -0.156
                   [0.037]*** [0.039]*** [0.029]*** [0.055]***
 Black                -0.201        -0.177        -0.297         0.041
                   [0.055]*** [0.053]*** [0.038]***             [0.076]
 Hispanic             -0.254         0.297         0.171         0.155
                   [0.078]*** [0.081]*** [0.060]***             [0.106]
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition            -0.254        -0.115        -0.079         0.021
                   [0.020]*** [0.021]*** [0.015]***             [0.029]
 Vocabulary           -0.013        -0.017         0.013         0.008
                     [0.019]       [0.021]       [0.015]        [0.028]
 Depression            0.142         0.303         0.253         0.067
                   [0.015]*** [0.020]*** [0.015]*** [0.025]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own age
 Same sex, sp1        -0.121        -0.386         0.205        -0.493
                     [0.153]       [0.292]       [0.184]       [0.291]*
 Same sex, sp2        -0.733        -1.784        -1.766         0.467
                   [0.279]*** [0.214]*** [0.161]***             [0.342]

                                                   42
Same sex lives      -0.049      -0.003        -0.025        -0.064
                   [0.119]      [0.059]      [0.044]        [0.100]
Opp. sex, sp1       -0.177      -1.058        -0.664        -0.122
                   [0.156]    [0.297]*** [0.190]***         [0.292]
Opp. sex, sp2       -0.667      -0.553        -0.494         0.528
                  [0.282]** [0.210]*** [0.155]***           [0.340]
Opp. sex lives      -0.131      -0.037        -0.031         0.026
                   [0.120]      [0.061]      [0.045]        [0.107]
Health related behavior
Exercises           -0.445      -0.309        -0.258         0.015
                 [0.038]*** [0.035]*** [0.025]***           [0.051]
Ever smoked          0.352       0.113         0.063        -0.091
                 [0.038]*** [0.038]*** [0.027]**           [0.054]*
Smokes now           0.447       0.337         0.257         0.007
                 [0.050]*** [0.053]*** [0.039]***           [0.076]
Ever drinks         -0.259       -0.25        -0.141         0.174
                 [0.044]*** [0.043]*** [0.031]*** [0.062]***
# of days
drinks              -0.033      -0.021        -0.019        -0.014
                 [0.011]*** [0.011]*        [0.008]**       [0.016]
# of drinks          0.056       0.049         0.033        -0.035
                 [0.019]*** [0.019]** [0.014]**             [0.028]
Age and time horizon of the HRS question; variables divided by 100
Age                                                          -2.26
                                                            [1.471]
Horizon                                                     -9.823
                                                            [6.149]
Age X Horizon                                               27.698
                                                         [10.367]***
Constant            -6.712      -8.595        -5.796         1.845
                 [0.288]*** [0.239]*** [0.202]***          [0.946]*
Other parameters
ln(γ1)                2.104      2.684      2.179
                   [0.041]*** [0.014]*** [0.029]***
ln(k)                           -0.573      0.296
                              [0.011]*** [0.026]***
ln(sd(n))                                   0.773
                                         [0.026]***
N                    13038      13038      13038
Log-likelihood                 -57265.8   -46196.4
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                  43
Table B6: Average partial effects of surviving 8 more years in three models with
demographic, personality and personal information variables: actual survival and the mean
and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean          MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.003         0.005          0.005
                      [0.001]** [0.001]*** [0.001]***
 Female                  0.058         0.017          0.029
                     [0.006]*** [0.004]*** [0.007]***
 Black                   0.034         0.015          0.039
                     [0.009]*** [0.005]*** [0.010]***
 Hispanic                0.043        -0.025         -0.023
                     [0.013]*** [0.008]*** [0.009]**
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition               0.043          0.01          0.011
                     [0.003]*** [0.002]*** [0.003]***
 Vocabulary              0.002         0.001         -0.002
                        [0.003]       [0.002]       [0.002]
 Depression             -0.024        -0.026         -0.034
                     [0.003]*** [0.004]*** [0.007]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1            0.02         0.033         -0.027
                        [0.026]       [0.024]       [0.027]
 Same sex, sp2           0.124         0.152          0.234
                     [0.047]*** [0.032]*** [0.059]***
 Same sex lives          0.008           0            0.003
                        [0.020]       [0.005]       [0.006]
 Opp. sex, sp1            0.03          0.09          0.088
                        [0.026]     [0.026]*** [0.026]***
 Opp. sex, sp2           0.113         0.047          0.065
                      [0.048]** [0.020]** [0.028]**
 Opp. sex lives          0.022         0.003          0.004
                        [0.020]       [0.005]       [0.006]
 Health related behavior
 Exercises               0.075         0.026          0.034
                     [0.007]*** [0.005]*** [0.008]***
 Ever smoked             -0.06         -0.01         -0.008
                     [0.007]*** [0.004]*** [0.004]**
 Smokes now             -0.076        -0.029         -0.034
                     [0.009]*** [0.006]*** [0.009]***
 Ever drinks             0.044         0.021          0.019


                                           44
                       [0.008]*** [0.005]*** [0.006]***
 # of days drinks         0.006      0.002       0.003
                       [0.002]*** [0.001]*    [0.001]**
 # of drinks             -0.009     -0.004      -0.004
                       [0.003]*** [0.002]** [0.002]**
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level



Table B7: Average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to 75 in three models with
demographic, personality and personal information variables: actual survival and the mean
and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean          MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.003         0.009          0.009
                      [0.001]** [0.002]*** [0.002]***
 Female                  0.073         0.035          0.051
                     [0.009]*** [0.009]*** [0.012]***
 Black                   0.043         0.031           0.07
                     [0.012]*** [0.011]*** [0.017]***
 Hispanic                0.055        -0.052          -0.04
                     [0.017]*** [0.016]*** [0.016]**
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition               0.055          0.02          0.019
                     [0.005]*** [0.005]*** [0.005]***
 Vocabulary              0.003         0.003         -0.003
                        [0.004]       [0.004]       [0.004]
 Depression             -0.031        -0.053          -0.06
                     [0.004]*** [0.009]*** [0.013]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1           0.026         0.068         -0.048
                        [0.033]       [0.050]       [0.047]
 Same sex, sp2           0.159         0.314          0.415
                     [0.060]*** [0.067]*** [0.100]***
 Same sex lives          0.011         0.001          0.006
                        [0.026]       [0.010]       [0.010]
 Opp. sex, sp1           0.038         0.186          0.156
                        [0.034]     [0.054]*** [0.046]***
 Opp. sex, sp2           0.144         0.097          0.116
                      [0.060]** [0.042]** [0.048]**
 Opp. sex lives          0.028         0.007          0.007
                        [0.026]       [0.011]       [0.011]

                                                   45
 Health related behavior
 Exercises              0.096            0.054      0.061
                    [0.009]***       [0.011]*** [0.014]***
 Ever smoked           -0.076            -0.02     -0.015
                    [0.009]***       [0.007]*** [0.007]**
 Smokes now            -0.097           -0.059      -0.06
                    [0.012]***       [0.013]*** [0.015]***
 Ever drinks            0.056            0.044      0.033
                    [0.010]***       [0.010]*** [0.010]***
 # of days drinks       0.007            0.004      0.005
                    [0.002]***         [0.002]*  [0.002]**
 # of drinks           -0.012           -0.009     -0.008
                    [0.004]***        [0.004]** [0.004]**
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level



Table B8: Average partial effects of surviving from age 75 to 95 in three models with
demographic, personality and personal information variables: actual survival and the mean
and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean          MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.004         0.003          0.005
                      [0.002]** [0.001]*** [0.002]***
 Female                  0.097         0.012          0.029
                     [0.012]*** [0.003]*** [0.009]***
 Black                   0.058         0.011           0.04
                     [0.016]*** [0.004]*** [0.012]***
 Hispanic                0.073        -0.019         -0.023
                     [0.023]*** [0.006]*** [0.010]**
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition               0.073         0.007          0.011
                     [0.008]*** [0.002]*** [0.004]***
 Vocabulary              0.004         0.001         -0.002
                        [0.005]       [0.001]       [0.002]
 Depression             -0.041        -0.019         -0.034
                     [0.005]*** [0.004]*** [0.009]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1           0.035         0.024         -0.028
                        [0.043]       [0.018]       [0.028]
 Same sex, sp2            0.21         0.112          0.239
                      [0.086]** [0.027]*** [0.071]***

                                                   46
 Same sex lives         0.014             0        0.003
                      [0.034]          [0.004]    [0.006]
 Opp. sex, sp1          0.051           0.066       0.09
                      [0.044]        [0.020]*** [0.029]***
 Opp. sex, sp2          0.191           0.035      0.067
                     [0.086]**        [0.016]** [0.030]**
 Opp. sex lives         0.038           0.002      0.004
                      [0.035]          [0.004]    [0.006]
 Health related behavior
 Exercises              0.128            0.019      0.035
                    [0.013]***       [0.004]*** [0.010]***
 Ever smoked           -0.101           -0.007     -0.008
                    [0.012]***       [0.003]*** [0.004]**
 Smokes now            -0.128           -0.021     -0.035
                    [0.015]***       [0.005]*** [0.010]***
 Ever drinks            0.074            0.016      0.019
                    [0.013]***       [0.004]*** [0.006]***
 # of days drinks        0.01            0.001      0.003
                    [0.003]***         [0.001]*  [0.001]**
 # of drinks           -0.016           -0.003     -0.004
                    [0.006]***        [0.001]** [0.002]**
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                   47
Table B9: Outputs of the ML estimation models with demographic, personality, personal
information and subjective health variables; actual survival and the mean and MRH
models of subjective survival expectations
                    Actual
                   survival      Mean                MRH
                    ln(γ0)       ln(θ50)       ln(θ50)        ln(n)
Demographics
Education             0.026        -0.037        -0.019         0.053
                  [0.006]*** [0.007]*** [0.005]*** [0.010]***
Female                -0.31        -0.152        -0.169        -0.157
                  [0.036]*** [0.038]*** [0.027]*** [0.054]***
Black                 -0.24        -0.264        -0.369          0.02
                  [0.053]*** [0.052]*** [0.036]***             [0.075]
Hispanic             -0.332         0.229         0.083         0.132
                  [0.077]*** [0.078]***         [0.056]        [0.105]
Cognition and personality, standardized scores
Cognition            -0.231        -0.052        -0.035         0.027
                  [0.019]*** [0.020]** [0.015]**               [0.028]
Vocabulary           -0.011        -0.018         0.011         0.009
                     [0.018]       [0.020]      [0.014]        [0.028]
Depression            0.043         0.148         0.131         0.043
                  [0.016]*** [0.020]*** [0.014]***            [0.026]*
Parents' age of death, linear splines with cut-off at own age
Same sex, sp1         -0.09          -0.6         0.094        -0.493
                     [0.154]     [0.281]**      [0.172]       [0.287]*
Same sex, sp2        -0.567        -1.552        -1.608           0.5
                   [0.272]** [0.207]*** [0.153]***             [0.337]
Same sex lives       -0.051         0.006        -0.007        -0.071
                     [0.114]       [0.057]      [0.042]        [0.099]
Opp. sex, sp1        -0.203        -1.193        -0.663        -0.117
                     [0.156]    [0.285]*** [0.177]***          [0.287]
Opp. sex, sp2        -0.434        -0.353        -0.427         0.522
                     [0.274]      [0.205]* [0.148]***          [0.336]
Opp. sex lives       -0.191        -0.032        -0.014         0.032
                    [0.116]*       [0.059]      [0.043]        [0.105]
Health related behavior
Exercises            -0.309        -0.146         -0.13          0.02
                  [0.038]*** [0.034]*** [0.024]***             [0.051]
Ever smoked            0.31         0.031         0.009        -0.091
                  [0.038]***       [0.036]      [0.026]       [0.053]*
Smokes now            0.436         0.308         0.239         0.006
                  [0.049]*** [0.051]*** [0.037]***             [0.075]
Ever drinks          -0.211        -0.119        -0.054         0.177

                                              48
                   [0.043]*** [0.042]***         [0.030]*        [0.061]***
# of days
drinks               -0.024     -0.012        -0.011        -0.015
                   [0.011]**    [0.011]      [0.008]        [0.016]
# of drinks           0.045      0.05          0.029        -0.033
                   [0.019]** [0.019]*** [0.014]**           [0.028]
Subjective health in 2000/2002
Excel./excel.          ref.       ref.          ref.          ref.
Excel./good           0.442      0.363         0.306        -0.172
                  [0.065]*** [0.055]*** [0.040]*** [0.084]**
Excel./poor           0.827      0.682         0.585         0.122
                  [0.091]*** [0.121]*** [0.085]***          [0.157]
Good/excel.           0.231      0.29          0.237        -0.092
                  [0.079]*** [0.061]*** [0.044]***          [0.095]
Good/good             0.445      0.562         0.483         -0.05
                  [0.059]*** [0.050]*** [0.035]***          [0.074]
Good/poor             0.894      0.983          0.74        -0.059
                  [0.065]*** [0.087]*** [0.061]***          [0.104]
Poor/excel.           0.579      0.582         0.461        -0.106
                  [0.119]*** [0.156]*** [0.106]***          [0.196]
Poor/good              0.66      0.805         0.624        -0.042
                  [0.075]*** [0.088]*** [0.063]***          [0.116]
Poor/poor             0.973      1.372         1.126         0.177
                  [0.057]*** [0.070]*** [0.052]*** [0.085]**
Age and time horizon of the HRS question; variables divided by 100
Age                                                         -2.333
                                                            [1.449]
Horizon                                                    -10.037
                                                           [6.053]*
Age X Horizon                                                27.82
                                                         [10.204]***
Constant             -7.288     -9.366        -6.379         1.882
                  [0.293]*** [0.233]*** [0.197]*** [0.933]**
Other parameters
ln(γ1)                2.088      2.686      2.149
                   [0.041]*** [0.013]*** [0.029]***
ln(k)                            -0.54      0.377
                              [0.011]*** [0.026]***
ln(sd(n))                                   0.758
                                         [0.026]***
N                    13038      13038      13038
Log-likelihood                 -56994.3   -45850.0
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level

                                                  49
Table B10: Average partial effects of surviving 8 more years in three models with
demographic, personality, personal information and subjective health variables: actual
survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean          MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.004          0.003         0.003
                     [0.001]*** [0.001]*** [0.001]***
 Female                  0.052          0.013         0.023
                     [0.006]*** [0.004]*** [0.006]***
 Black                    0.04          0.023          0.05
                     [0.009]*** [0.006]*** [0.012]***
 Hispanic                0.056          -0.02        -0.011
                     [0.013]*** [0.007]***          [0.008]
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition               0.039          0.004         0.005
                     [0.003]*** [0.002]** [0.002]**
 Vocabulary              0.002          0.002        -0.002
                        [0.003]       [0.002]       [0.002]
 Depression             -0.007         -0.013        -0.018
                     [0.003]*** [0.003]*** [0.004]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1           0.015          0.052        -0.013
                        [0.026]      [0.024]**      [0.024]
 Same sex, sp2           0.095          0.134         0.217
                      [0.046]** [0.029]*** [0.055]***
 Same sex lives          0.009         -0.001         0.001
                        [0.019]       [0.005]       [0.006]
 Opp. sex, sp1           0.034          0.103          0.09
                        [0.026]     [0.027]*** [0.025]***
 Opp. sex, sp2           0.073           0.03         0.058
                        [0.046]       [0.019]      [0.026]**
 Opp. sex lives          0.032          0.003         0.002
                       [0.020]*       [0.005]       [0.006]
 Health related behavior
 Exercises               0.052          0.013         0.018
                     [0.006]*** [0.004]*** [0.005]***
 Ever smoked            -0.052         -0.003        -0.001
                     [0.006]***       [0.003]       [0.004]
 Smokes now             -0.073         -0.027        -0.032
                     [0.008]*** [0.006]*** [0.008]***
 Ever drinks             0.035           0.01         0.007


                                            50
                      [0.007]***     [0.004]***      [0.004]*
 # of days drinks         0.004          0.001         0.001
                       [0.002]**       [0.001]        [0.001]
 # of drinks             -0.008         -0.004        -0.004
                       [0.003]**      [0.002]**      [0.002]*
 Subjective health in 2000/2002
 Excel./excel.             ref.          ref.          ref.
 Excel./good             -0.074        -0.031        -0.041
                      [0.011]***     [0.007]***    [0.010]***
 Excel./poor             -0.139        -0.059        -0.079
                      [0.016]***     [0.014]***    [0.020]***
 Good/excel.             -0.039        -0.025        -0.032
                      [0.013]***     [0.007]***    [0.009]***
 Good/good               -0.075        -0.048        -0.065
                      [0.010]***     [0.009]***    [0.015]***
 Good/poor                -0.15        -0.085          -0.1
                      [0.012]***     [0.015]***    [0.023]***
 Poor/excel.             -0.097         -0.05        -0.062
                      [0.020]***     [0.015]***    [0.020]***
 Poor/good               -0.111        -0.069        -0.084
                      [0.013]***     [0.013]***    [0.020]***
 Poor/poor               -0.163        -0.118        -0.152
                      [0.010]***     [0.020]***    [0.033]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                   51
Table B11: Average partial effects of surviving from age 55 to 75 in three models with
demographic, personality, personal information and subjective health variables: actual
survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean          MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.006          0.006         0.004
                     [0.001]*** [0.002]*** [0.001]***
 Female                  0.067          0.026         0.039
                     [0.008]*** [0.008]*** [0.010]***
 Black                   0.051          0.046         0.086
                     [0.012]*** [0.012]*** [0.020]***
 Hispanic                0.071          -0.04        -0.019
                     [0.017]*** [0.015]***          [0.013]
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition                0.05          0.009         0.008
                     [0.004]*** [0.004]** [0.004]**
 Vocabulary              0.002          0.003        -0.003
                        [0.004]       [0.003]       [0.003]
 Depression             -0.009         -0.026        -0.031
                     [0.003]*** [0.005]*** [0.007]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1           0.019          0.104        -0.022
                        [0.033]      [0.048]**      [0.042]
 Same sex, sp2           0.122          0.268         0.375
                      [0.058]** [0.059]*** [0.090]***
 Same sex lives          0.011         -0.001         0.002
                        [0.024]       [0.010]       [0.010]
 Opp. sex, sp1           0.043          0.206         0.155
                        [0.034]     [0.053]*** [0.043]***
 Opp. sex, sp2           0.093          0.061           0.1
                        [0.058]       [0.038]      [0.044]**
 Opp. sex lives          0.041          0.006         0.003
                        [0.025]       [0.010]       [0.010]
 Health related behavior
 Exercises               0.066          0.025          0.03
                     [0.008]*** [0.007]*** [0.008]***
 Ever smoked            -0.067         -0.005        -0.002
                     [0.009]***       [0.006]       [0.006]
 Smokes now             -0.093         -0.053        -0.056
                     [0.012]*** [0.012]*** [0.014]***
 Ever drinks             0.045          0.021         0.013


                                            52
                      [0.010]***     [0.008]***      [0.007]*
 # of days drinks         0.005          0.002         0.003
                       [0.002]**       [0.002]        [0.002]
 # of drinks              -0.01         -0.009        -0.007
                       [0.004]**      [0.004]**     [0.003]**
 Subjective health in 2000/2002
 Excel./excel.             ref.          ref.          ref.
 Excel./good             -0.095        -0.063        -0.071
                      [0.015]***     [0.014]***    [0.017]***
 Excel./poor             -0.177        -0.118        -0.137
                      [0.021]***     [0.028]***    [0.034]***
 Good/excel.              -0.05         -0.05        -0.055
                      [0.017]***     [0.013]***    [0.015]***
 Good/good               -0.095        -0.097        -0.113
                      [0.013]***     [0.017]***    [0.024]***
 Good/poor               -0.192         -0.17        -0.173
                      [0.016]***     [0.031]***    [0.038]***
 Poor/excel.             -0.124          -0.1        -0.108
                      [0.026]***     [0.031]***    [0.033]***
 Poor/good               -0.142        -0.139        -0.146
                      [0.017]***     [0.027]***    [0.033]***
 Poor/poor               -0.209        -0.237        -0.263
                      [0.015]***     [0.039]***    [0.054]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                   53
Table B12: Average partial effects of surviving from age 75 to 95 in three models with
demographic, personality, personal information and subjective health variables: actual
survival and the mean and MRH models of subjective survival expectations
                        Actual
                       survival        Mean           MRH
 Demographics
 Education              -0.007          0.003         0.003
                     [0.002]*** [0.001]*** [0.001]***
 Female                  0.086           0.01         0.024
                     [0.011]*** [0.003]*** [0.007]***
 Black                   0.067          0.018         0.053
                     [0.015]*** [0.005]*** [0.015]***
 Hispanic                0.092         -0.016        -0.012
                     [0.022]*** [0.006]**            [0.009]
 Cognition and personality, standardized scores
 Cognition               0.064          0.004         0.005
                     [0.007]*** [0.002]**           [0.003]*
 Vocabulary              0.003          0.001        -0.002
                        [0.005]       [0.001]        [0.002]
 Depression             -0.012          -0.01        -0.019
                     [0.004]*** [0.002]*** [0.005]***
 Parents' age at death, linear splines with cut-off at own
 age
 Same sex, sp1           0.025          0.041        -0.014
                        [0.042]      [0.019]**       [0.026]
 Same sex, sp2           0.157          0.105         0.231
                      [0.080]** [0.026]*** [0.068]***
 Same sex lives          0.014            0           0.001
                        [0.032]       [0.004]        [0.006]
 Opp. sex, sp1           0.056          0.081         0.095
                        [0.042]     [0.022]*** [0.029]***
 Opp. sex, sp2            0.12          0.024         0.061
                        [0.079]       [0.015]      [0.029]**
 Opp. sex lives          0.053          0.002         0.002
                        [0.032]       [0.004]        [0.006]
 Health related behavior
 Exercises               0.086           0.01         0.019
                     [0.012]*** [0.003]*** [0.006]***
 Ever smoked            -0.086         -0.002        -0.001
                     [0.012]***       [0.003]        [0.004]
 Smokes now             -0.121         -0.021        -0.034
                     [0.015]*** [0.005]*** [0.010]***
 Ever drinks             0.059          0.008         0.008


                                            54
                      [0.012]***      [0.003]**      [0.005]*
 # of days drinks         0.007          0.001         0.002
                       [0.003]**       [0.001]        [0.001]
 # of drinks             -0.013         -0.003        -0.004
                       [0.005]**      [0.001]**      [0.002]*
 Subjective health in 2000/2002
 Excel./excel.             ref.          ref.          ref.
 Excel./good             -0.123        -0.025        -0.044
                      [0.020]***     [0.006]***    [0.013]***
 Excel./poor              -0.23        -0.046        -0.084
                      [0.029]***     [0.012]***    [0.025]***
 Good/excel.             -0.064         -0.02        -0.034
                      [0.022]***     [0.006]***    [0.011]***
 Good/good               -0.124        -0.038        -0.069
                      [0.018]***     [0.008]***    [0.019]***
 Good/poor               -0.248        -0.067        -0.106
                      [0.024]***     [0.014]***    [0.029]***
 Poor/excel.             -0.161         -0.04        -0.066
                      [0.035]***     [0.013]***    [0.023]***
 Poor/good               -0.183        -0.055         -0.09
                      [0.024]***     [0.012]***    [0.025]***
 Poor/poor                -0.27        -0.093        -0.162
                      [0.023]***     [0.019]***    [0.042]***
*, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent level




                                                   55
Appendix C: Derivations

C.1. Effect of individual survival heterogeneity on sample selection
In our model there is individual heterogeneity in survival chances. One consequence of this is that

fit individuals will be overrepresented in the sample over time as frail individuals are more likely

to die. This sample selection can be conveniently modeled in our framework. Let k a and  a

denote the shape and scale parameters in cohort a . As Vaupel (1979) shows the following is true

for any cohorts


                                                k a  k r and                                   (15)

                                                           1
                                 a                                             ,              (15)
                                         1
                                               exp   1a   exp   1r  
                                        r
where r is a reference cohort. As we can see, older and younger cohorts share the same shape

parameter k a , but older cohorts have lower scale parameter  a (lower frailty) than younger

cohorts.


C.2. Proof of equation (10)
The density function of the gamma distribution is

                                   1                 x                          x
                    f  x               x k 1exp     c  k ,  x k 1exp    .
                                 k  k
                                                                               
It is well known that expected value of the gamma function is

                                              x                            x
            E  x    xc  k ,  x k 1exp    dx   c  k ,  x k exp    dx  k .
                       0
                                                       0
                                                                               
The expected value of a scaled gamma function is also gamma and its expected value is

                                               E  cx   ck .
The expected value of the negative exponentiated gamma function is




                                                      56
                                                                      x
              E  exp   x     exp   x  c  k ,  x k 1exp    dx
                                    

                                   0
                                                                      
                                                                                         
                                             x                                    x  
                    c  k ,   x k 1exp    x  dx   c  k ,   x k 1exp        dx  *
                 0
                                                         0
                                                                                   
                                                                                        
                                                                                     1 
Note that this is very similar to the expected value formula of the gamma function, thus
                                                                                            k
                                                                                
                                                                     k  1 
                        k  1       c  k ,          k  1               1 
                  *                                                                    *
                           1                            1          k  k
                                  c  k  1,
                                               1 
Note that   k    k  1   k  1 and thus

                                          k 1  k
                                                 k 
                                                    1     1    .
                                                           k         k
                                     *
                                          k 1 
Thus if 0i ~   k ,  then


                                                                                                        
                                                                                                               k
  E  Si  a, T   E exp 0i exp  1T   exp  1a    1   exp  1T   exp  1a             .
                                                                


C.3. Details about the use of the Delta method to derive average partial effects
The goal is to derive point estimates and standard errors of the partial effects of any covariate x j

on the survival probability from age a to age T


                                                             S  a , a  
                                     APE j  a1 , a2   Ex  i 1 2  .                                        (15)
                                                               x j      



The point estimates are.



                                              
                                          1   a exp   T   exp   a  
                                                                                           
                                                                                       k
                                                                              
                   APE j  a, T   Ex                                                      *
                                                             1            1

                                                            x j                           
                                                                                           
Let us denote e  a, a   exp  1a  exp  1a  . Then




                                                       57
                     e T , a             
                                             k

             1                           
             exp    xi   e  a, r   
    *  Ex                                       
                       x j                      
                                                 
                                                 
                     e T , a           
                                              k 1
                                                      e T , a  exp    xi   j 
     Ex  k 1                                                                        
           exp    xi   e  a, r                                            
                                                                                         2
                                                     exp       xi   e  a , r      
                                                                                           
     Ex  k  exp    xi   e T , r               exp    x   e  a, r             e T , a  exp    xi   j  .
                                                  k 1                                      k 1

                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                   
By substituting the estimated coefficients into this formula we have a point estimate for the

average partial effect of x j on the survival probability from age a to age T . The standard errors

can be computed with the delta method. For any differentiable transformation g    and


variance-covariance matrix  , the variance covariance matrix of g                                     is  g    g  .
                                                                                                                        T




Thus, we only need to compute the first derivatives of g . Let us see them one-by-one.



APE j  a, T 
                    I  j  l  
         l
Ex  k  exp    xi   e T , r    exp    xi   e  a, r   e T , a  exp    xi  
                                          k 1                               k 1

                                                                                                         
 Ex  k  k  1  exp    xi   e T , r           exp   xi   e  a, r   e T , a  exp  2 xi   j xil 
                                                    k 2                                k 1

     
 Ex  k  k  1  exp    xi   e T , r    exp    xi   e  a, r   e T , a  exp  2  xi   j xil 
                                                    k 1                                k 2

                                                                                                                             
 Ex  k  exp    xi   e T , r    exp    xi   e  a, r   e T , a  exp    xi   j xil  .
                                          k 1                               k 1

                                                                                                               



APE j  a, T 
                     Ex  exp    xi   e T ,50                    exp   x   e  a,50  
                                                                                                  e T , a  exp    xi   j 
                                                                    k 1                                        k 1

      k                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                 
 Ex  k  exp    xi   e T , r    exp    xi   e  a, r   e T , a  exp    xi  
                                          k 1                           k 1

     
                                            
 j ln  exp    xi   e T ,50     Ex ln  exp    xi   e  a,50    .
                                          




                                                                 58
APE j  a, T 
                   Texp  1T   50exp  1 50   
         1

     
 Ex  k  k  1  exp    xi   e T ,50  
     
                                                        k 2
                                                                 exp   x   e  a,50  
                                                                               i
                                                                                                 k 1
                                                                                                        e T , a  exp    xi   j 
                                                                                                                                       
 Ex  k  k  1  exp    xi   e T ,50  
     
                                                      k 1
                                                               exp   x   e  a,50  
                                                                           i
                                                                                               k 2

                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      e T , a  exp    xi   j  .

By substituting the estimated coefficients into these formulas we have an estimator for the

variance covariance matrix of the average partial effects.


C.4. The likelihood function of the mean model


The likelihood function can be written as


                                                      
                                          li  Pr pi  Si  a, t   pi ,                                                      (15)



where pi and pi denote the lower and upper bound probabilities that would be rounded to the

survey response. For example, if the rounding function rounds to the closest 1 percent and the

survey response is 27 percent, then pi  0.265 and pi  0.275 . If the rounding function rounds

to the closest 5 percent, then the corresponding probabilities would be pi  0.225 and

 pi  0.275 .20 The likelihood function, thus, is


                          
                  li  Pr 
                                     ln pi              0i 
                                                                           ln  pi             
                                                                                                 ,                             (15)
                            exp  1t   exp  1a            exp  1t   exp  1a   
                          


20
  As we can see, a response that is not a multiple of 5 percent cannot be a rounded version of a true latent
probability when we round to the closest 5 percent. The rounding model we have in mind is one where
agents only identify bins (e.g. 0%-2.5%, 2.5%-7.5%, …, 97.5%-100%) and any response in a particular bin
only tells the econometrician that the true latent probability is also in the same bin. An alternative model
would be that of Manski and Molinari (2010) where they identify individuals’ rounding practices across
many probability questions and use different rounding functions for each individual.


                                                                 59
which can be easily computed from the c.d.f. of the gamma distribution in with parameters k and

i .


C.5. The likelihood function of the modal response model


The estimation of the MRH can be carried out by maximum simulated likelihood (MSL). MSL

computes the likelihood function by drawing many values from the distribution of one (or

several) random variables and computing the average conditional likelihood, conditioning on

those values. In our case, it is worth simulating values from the distribution of uni . A standard

version of the simulated likelihood would look like the following.21


                                                      1 S
                                               li 
                                                      S s 1
                                                               
                                                         li unis ,                                        (15)



where S is the number of simulation draws. The problem with this approach is that our model is

full of discontinuities that make this approach infeasible. Let us take a look at the MRH formula

                                                                                    1              1
by rewriting (5) with our new variables, i and ni . Let us denote ni                 and ni  1  . The
                                                                                    ni             ni

MRH model assumes that the survey response is




21
     Note that in case the simulated values are drawn from the distribution of uni , we do not need to weight
the terms in Error! Reference source not found. by the density of the draw as the simulation itself already
weights the data.


                                                         60
                                                  i ni  1 
                                           round                    if    ni  i  ni
                                                  ni  2 
                                           
                                 pimrh    1                          if    i  ni , ni .                        (15)
                                           0                          if    i  ni , ni
                                           
                                           0.5                       if    ni  i  ni



As we can see, whenever ni  1 an answer can only be 50 percent. Whenever ni  2 , an answer

can only be 0, 50 or 100 percent. These discontinuities make the simulation model in

Error! Reference source not found. hard for the following reason. Imagine that during the

maximization of the likelihood function we get into a region where the precision of beliefs ni is

always below 2 for each simulation draw. This could happen if zi'  k n                           2 and  n2,k is small,

where k indexes the actual guesses for the parameters. In this case, the likelihood function would

be undefined and the numerical maximization would fail. As a remedy, we recommend drawing

separate simulation values from each region of ni ; this assures that the likelihood is well-defined

in each iteration of the maximization.22 The likelihood function, thus, is written


                   1 S1                                    1    S2
            li       
                   S1 s 1
                                             
                           li unis , ni  1 Pr  ni  1 
                                                           S2
                                                                 l u i
                                                                            s
                                                                            ni              
                                                                                 ,1  ni  2 Pr 1  ni  2 
                                                                s 1
                                                                                                                   (15)
             1 S3
                                         
              li unis , 2  ni Pr  2  ni  .
             S3 s 1



Now, whenever zi'  k n          2 and  n2,k is small in a particular iteration for a non-focal answer, the

likelihood is a well-defined, extremely small number.



22
  Hill, Perry and Willis (2004) did not use this trick when they estimated a very similar model. The
consequence was that they had to make restrictions on their model to be able to carry out the numerical
estimation. It turned out that our model is identified and estimable in practice under mild conditions once
these discontinuities are properly taken care of.


                                                          61
The probabilities of the different regions of ni are trivial since ni is assumed to have a log-

normal distribution. Whenever ni  1 an answer can only be fifty and thus the conditional

likelihood is


                                                      1 if pihrs  50
                                                   
                                   li unis , ni  1                  ,                               (15)
                                                      0 otherwise



where pihrs represents the survey response to the HRS mortality question. When 1  ni  2 , it is

assured that ni  ni and thus



                                                
                                         Pr ni  Si  a, t   ni
                                         
                                                                         if pihrs  50

                                        
                   li unis ,1  ni  2        
                                         Pr S  a, t   ni
                                                 i                       if pihrs  0
                                                                                            .          (15)
                                          Pr  Si  a, t   ni         if phrs
                                                                              i      100
                                          
                                          0                              otherwise



These probabilities can be computed analogously to the mean model derived in Section 5.1.


The most complicated, although still very straightforward, case is the conditional likelihood in the

region where ni  2 . In this region ni  ni . The only complication is that a 0 and a 100 answer

can now be either a focal answer or an exact rounded answer. 50 answers in this region cannot be

focal answers as ni  2 and thus either  i or  i is larger than one. The conditional likelihood is


                                                        Si  a, t  ni  1       
                              Pr  Si  a, t   ni OR                       p i  if pihrs  0
                                                             ni  2              
                              
                                                        S  a, t  ni  1        
                         
          li unis , ni  2  Pr  Si  a, t   ni OR i
                                                               ni  2
                                                                              p i  if pihrs  100.   (15)
                                                                                 
                               
                              Pr  p  Si  a, t  ni  1  p                     otherwise
                               i              ni  2
                                                                i
                                                                  

                                                        62
After straightforward algebra the conditional likelihood becomes


                                                   p  n  2   1  
                           Pr  Si  a, t   max  i i                      , ni          if pihrs  0
                                                               ni                  
                                                                                  
                           
                                     p  ni  2   1                          
                      
       li unis , ni  2  Pr  min  i                       , n i   Si  a , t          if pihrs  100,   (15)
                                           ni                  
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                           
                            p i  ni  2   1                         p i  ni  2   1 
                           Pr                       S i  a , t                        otherwise
                                                                                            
                                        ni                                    n  i       



and again these probabilities can be computed analogously to the mean model derived in Section

C4.




                                                        63
