NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLUSTERS, CONVERGENCE, AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
Mercedes Delgado
Michael E. Porter
Scott Stern
Working Paper 18250
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18250

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

This paper has benefited greatly from the sustained research by Richard Bryden and Weifeng Weng
in assembling the US Cluster Mapping Project dataset. Ben Jones, Jim Davis, Juan Alcacer, Bill Kerr,
Matthew Kahn, Jim Dana, Wayne Gray, Megan MacGarvie, Anita McGahan, Alex Bryson, Iain Cockburn,
Ram Mudambi, and Christian Ketels contributed helpful suggestions. We are particularly grateful
for many insightful comments by participants in the NBER Productivity Lunch Series, the Research
Seminar at IESE Business School, the NBER Summer Institute (IPE group), and the North American
Regional Science Association International meetings. Mercedes Delgado gratefully acknowledges
support from the Kauffman Foundation and the Innovation Policy group at the NBER. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed
to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The authors at various times have made compensated
presentations at meetings that focused on issues of clusters and economic performance, using the data
and results presented in the enclosed paper. This research was supported in part by the Institute for
Strategy and Competitiveness at Harvard Business School.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Mercedes Delgado, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Clusters, Convergence, and Economic Performance
Mercedes Delgado, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 18250
July 2012
JEL No. L26,R11,R30
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the role of regional cluster composition in the economic performance of industries,
clusters and regions. On the one hand, diminishing returns to specialization in a location can result
in a convergence effect: the growth rate of an industry within a region may be declining in the level
of activity of that industry. At the same time, positive spillovers across complementary economic
activities provide an impetus for agglomeration: the growth rate of an industry within a region may
be increasing in the size and “strength” (i.e., relative presence) of related economic sectors. Building
on Porter (1998, 2003), we develop a systematic empirical framework to identify the role of regional
clusters – groups of closely related and complementary industries operating within a particular region
– in regional economic performance. We exploit newly available data from the US Cluster Mapping
Project to disentangle the impact of convergence at the region-industry level from agglomeration within
clusters. We find that, after controlling for the impact of convergence at the narrowest unit of analysis,
there is strong evidence for cluster-driven agglomeration. Industries participating in a strong cluster
register higher employment growth as well as higher growth of wages, number of establishments,
and patenting. Industry and cluster level growth also increases with the strength of related clusters
in the region and with the strength of similar clusters in adjacent regions. Importantly, we find evidence
that new regional industries emerge where there is a strong cluster environment. Our analysis also
suggests that the presence of strong clusters in a region enhances growth opportunities in other industries
and clusters. Overall, these findings highlight the important role of cluster-based agglomeration in
regional economic performance.

Mercedes Delgado
Temple University and ISC
Fox School of Business
Alter Hall 542
1801 Liacouras Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19122
mdelgado@temple.edu
Michael E. Porter
Harvard University
Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness
Ludcke House
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
mporter@hbs.edu

Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sstern@mit.edu

1.

Introduction
A striking feature of the US economy is significant variation in regional economic

performance. For example, using the Bureau of Economic Analysis Economic Areas (EAs) as
the unit of analysis, Porter (2003) documents large cross-EA differences in employment and
wage growth during the 1990s, even when one conditions on the initial level of EA employment
and wages (see Figure 1). Numerous theories have been proposed to explain why some regions
achieve significantly higher growth rates than others, with particular emphasis on the role of
initial conditions, the potential for innovation and knowledge spillovers, and the composition of
economic activity (among others, Porter, 1990; Glaeser et al., 1992; Barro and Sala-i-Martin,
1995; Venables, 1996; Henderson, 1997; Fujita, Krugman, and Venables, 1999). Policymakers
and researchers have focused considerable attention on areas such as Silicon Valley which seem
to have achieved strong economic performance through the presence of innovative clusters of
related companies and industries (Porter, 1990, 1998; Saxenian, 1994; Swann, 1998; Bresnahan
and Gambardella, 2004).

However, there is a surprisingly small literature examining the

empirical impact of cluster composition on regional economic performance (Feldman and
Audretsch, 1999; Porter, 2003; Glaeser and Kerr 2009; Delgado, Porter and Stern, 2010).
Any empirical investigations of regional performance must account for two central, yet
potentially competing, economic forces: convergence and agglomeration. Convergence arises
when the potential for growth is declining in the level of economic activity as a result of
diminishing returns (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992). While many studies of convergence focus
on diminishing returns at the regional level, (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1995), convergence may
also arise at narrower units such as the region-industry (Henderson et al., 1995; Dumais et al.,
2002; Duranto, 2007). In this case, the region-industry growth rate (in terms of employment or
other performance dimensions) will be declining in the initial level of economic activity.
Agglomeration exerts a countervailing force on regional performance. In the presence of
agglomeration economies, growth is increasing in the level of economic activity (Glaeser et al.,
1992), which can increase inequality across regions over time (Dumais et al., 2002).
Agglomeration arises from interdependencies across complementary economic activities that
give rise to increasing returns. The literature has tended to contrast two potential types of
agglomerating forces: localization (increasing returns to activities within a single industry) and
urbanization (increasing returns to diversity at the overall regional level). Distinguishing the

2

impact of any of these types of agglomeration effects has been hindered because of the influence
of convergence on regional growth. If both convergence and agglomeration effects are present,
regional economic performance growth will reflect a balancing of the two effects, making it
difficult to identify either effect in isolation (Henderson et al., 1995).
This paper moves beyond this impasse by focusing on the impact of clusters – groups of
related industries operating in a given location – on economic performance. Our key insight is
that while convergence is likely to be most salient at the industry level (or at relatively narrow
levels of industry aggregation), strong agglomeration forces operate across industries within a
cluster (or across closely related clusters).
Our focus on clusters allows three related contributions. First we are able to move
beyond the traditional dichotomy between the localization of individual industries and
urbanization arising from the overall diversity of regional economic activity (see, e.g., Glaeser et
al., 1992; Henderson et al., 1995; Henderson, 1997, 2003). Instead, building on Porter (1990,
1998, 2001), we examine the agglomeration forces arising among closely related and
complementary industries. By sharing common technologies, knowledge, inputs and clusterspecific institutions, industries within a cluster benefit from complementarities.
Other relevant studies (Ellison and Glaeser, 1997; Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr, 2010)
examine some forms of interdependency among manufacturing industries, notably input-output
linkages, technology linkages, and occupational labor requirements. However, these studies do
not address the broader array of interdependencies associated with clusters of related industries,
nor do they include service industries, nor measure the impact of clusters on region-industry
performance.

Instead they focus on explaining industry localization and co-agglomeration

patterns of industries.1
Second, our empirical methodology allows examination of the impact of agglomeration
among related industries while simultaneously accounting for convergence within a given
industry (or within a narrow unit of economic analysis). Our methodology exploits the fact that
conditional convergence operating at narrower economic units (e.g., within a single industry) can
1

Recently, Glaeser and Kerr (2009) carefully test for the impact of specific Marshallian economies of agglomeration
on the entry of new manufacturing firms in a region-industry. While their analysis does not specifically evaluate the
impact of regional clusters, they provide complementary evidence that various types of externalities matter for
business creation. This is consistent with Porter’s (2003) cluster framework that focuses on a broad set of linkages
among regional industries.

3

coexist with agglomeration across related economic units (e.g., across industries within a
cluster).

Hence we can test our main hypothesis:

after controlling for the impact of

convergence, the growth rate of an industry within a region is increasing in the strength of the
regional cluster environment within which that industry operates. Finally, we evaluate the
impact of clusters on multiple dimensions of regional economic performance, including growth
in employment, wages, business creation and innovation.

While theoretical models offer

equilibrium predictions for the relationship between particular agglomeration forces and specific
facets of economic performance (Krugman, 1991; Duranton and Puga, 2004; Moretti 2004), our
framework allows us to examine a variety of performance dimensions that are related to theory
and have implications for policy.2
We investigate these ideas utilizing a novel panel dataset developed by the US Cluster
Mapping Project (CMP). This database, drawing on the County Business Patterns data, provides
a systematic classification system for mapping clusters within the US economy. Clusters are
defined as groups of industries with high levels of co-location in terms of employment. The
CMP identifies 41 “traded” clusters incorporating 589 “traded” industries. Traded industries and
clusters are those which concentrate in particular regions and sell products or services across
regions and countries, in contrast to local industries serving primarily the local market whose
employment is evenly distributed across regions.3
The database includes numerous attributes of cluster composition and economic
performance at the region-cluster-industry level between 1990 and 2005, covering 177 mutually
exclusive Economic Areas (EAs) in the contiguous United States. We explore several measures
of the cluster environment surrounding each region-industry, including a measure based on the
strength of each cluster, a measure of the strength within the region of related clusters, and a
measure that captures the strength of similar clusters in neighboring regions. For example, motor
vehicles and car bodies (SIC 3711) is one of 15 industries in the automotive cluster in which a
2

A number of prior studies examine the theoretical interactions among firms and their responses to specific
agglomeration forces (see Duranton and Puga (2004) and Rosenthal and Strange (2004) for a review). A few
studies focus on the relationship between plant productivity and specific spillover forces (e.g., see Henderson, 2003;
Moretti 2004; Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2008). Relatedly, other work evaluates wages and labor pooling
forces (e.g., Krugman 1991; Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon, 2008). Other studies examine the theoretical
underpinning for business creation and firm expansion in agglomerated areas (e.g., see Duraton and Puga (2001),
Klepper (2007) and Rosenthal and Strange, (2009)). Overall, these studies show that there are multiple spillover
forces and mechanisms that could influence firm location and performance, consistent with the cluster framework
developed in Porter (1998, 2003).
3
See Porter (2003), and the discussion in Section 4.

4

region may have strength. The automotive cluster can also be linked to as many as 6 related
clusters (such as metal manufacturing) that may be present in the region, and to automotive
clusters in geographically adjacent regions (see Table A2).
Our empirical strategy simultaneously accommodates convergence and agglomeration. A
major identification challenge is to account for bias from unobserved factors, such as the size of
the region or policies that might be associated with certain types of regions or clusters, that may
be correlated with a region’s cluster composition and subsequent economic performance. While
we explore several alternatives, our core specifications incorporate region and industry fixed
effects in the context of a region-industry growth regression. As a result of the inclusion of these
detailed fixed effects, our empirical findings will be based exclusively on variation arising from
the relative initial size of a cluster within a given region. By accounting for the potential for
spurious correlation between cluster size and the overall growth rate of a given region and/or
industry, we are able to isolate the dynamic impact of clusters on economic performance
Our findings provide strong support for the simultaneous yet distinct influences of
convergence and cluster-based agglomeration. We find that the rate of growth of employment at
the region-industry level is declining in the initial level of employment at the region-industry
level, consistent with the impact of convergence at the narrowest economic unit. At the same
time, the growth of region-industry employment is increasing in the size and strength of the
regional cluster to which that industry belongs, the size and strength of related clusters, and the
size and strength of common clusters in neighboring regions. We also find that a strong regional
cluster facilitates the creation of industries within that cluster.
The same overall pattern holds at the region-cluster level. While employment growth at
the region-cluster level is declining in the initial (relative) size of that regional cluster, the cluster
grows faster in the presence of strong related and neighboring clusters. The magnitude and
statistical significance of these findings are similar to those in the region-industry model.
Finally, the employment growth of a region (outside of its strong clusters) increases with the
presence of strong clusters in the region, suggesting that strong clusters enhance opportunities for
job creation in other activities in the region.
While the primary focus of this paper is on employment growth (a particularly salient
performance dimension, both in terms of theory and policy), cluster strength affects related
performance dimensions, such as productivity and innovation, in subtle ways (e.g., see Bostic,

5

Gans and Stern, 1997; Cingano and Schivardi, 2004; Duranton and Puga, 2004). It is possible
that positive employment growth in regional clusters could also be associated with a reduction in
marginal productivity, a low rate of innovation, and a deterioration of average wages. To clarify
the role of clusters in region-industry performance, we therefore examine additional dimensions
of economic performance: we find a positive impact of the cluster strength on the growth rate of
average wages and the growth rate of establishments. We also find a positive influence on the
growth rate of patenting, a measure of innovation. In a related paper, Delgado, Porter and Stern
(2010) find evidence for the positive impact of clusters on the growth rate of entrepreneurship.
Our findings thus suggest that the positive impact of clusters on employment growth does not
come at the expense of wages, investment, or innovation.
Our findings generalize and extend the striking conclusions of more qualitative studies of
cluster dynamics (Porter, 1990, 1998; Swann, 1992; Bresnahan and Gambardella, 2004; Bönte,
2004; Cortright, 2006). Prior studies (such as Feldman and Audretsch (1999)) have usefully
demonstrated the impact of science-based related industries on region-industry innovation
performance, but our analysis suggests that the impact of complementarities across related
industries is far more pervasive. Rather than being confined to particular types of industries
(manufacturing or high-tech) or operating through particular channels (such as the universityindustry linkages), our results suggest that the effect of spillovers across related economic
activity is a fundamental driver of growth and job creation across a broad range of industries and
regions.
These findings suggest a number of policy implications, many of which diverge from the
received wisdom among some practitioners.

First, regional policies that harness

complementarities across related economic activity are likely to be much more effective than
those that prioritize high-wage or high-tech clusters where there is little pre-existing strength
within the region. Hence policy makers should pursue policies that leverage a region’s cluster
strengths (Porter, 1990, 1998, 2003; Cortright, 2006; Rodríguez-Clare, 2005, 2007; Ketels and
Memedovic, 2008). Our evidence thus reinforces the view that policy action should focus on
building upon pre-existing comparative advantage (Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003; Rodrik 2004).4

4

For example, Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) and Rodrik (2004) argue that policy action should focus on innovative
projects that can generate new knowledge about the relatedness among existing and potential new products. We
think that these types of information externalities may be facilitated in clusters of related and supporting industries.

6

Second, regional economic performance depends crucially on the composition of
economic activity rather than the vagaries of political boundaries. The spillovers arising from
related economic activity typically span multiple jurisdictions (and even states). Policies aimed
at shifting the location of activity within narrow areas will be less effective than those which
operate to harness complementarities across jurisdictions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We begin by describing the role of
clusters in intra-regional and inter-regional spillovers and develop the main hypotheses. Section
3 presents the empirical framework. Section 4 explains the data, and Section 5 discusses the
main empirical findings. A final section concludes.
2.

Clusters and Economic Geography
The agglomeration of related economic activity is a central feature of economic

geography (Marshall, 1920; Porter, 1990; Krugman, 1991; Ciccone and Hall, 1996; Ellison and
Glaeser, 1997), but its prominence and role has been a puzzle. In a given location, limitations on
resources can result in diminishing returns. This can lead to convergence in economic activity
(employment, income, productivity) across regions over time (Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1991,
1995; Higgins et al., 2006). However, the striking geographic concentration of related economic
activity, with copious examples ranging from textiles in northern Italy to financial services in
New York City, reveals the powerful role of agglomeration. Starting with Marshall (1920),
economists have highlighted at least three distinct drivers of agglomeration: input-output
linkages, labor market pooling, and knowledge spillovers. Though conceptually distinct, each of
these mechanisms is associated with cost or productivity advantages to firms that result in
increasing returns to geographically proximate economic activity.

Over time, an extensive

literature has incorporated additional agglomeration drivers, including local demand, specialized
institutions and the structure of regional business and social networks (Porter 1990, 1998;
Saxenian 1994; Markusen 1996).
As suggested by Glaeser et al. (1992), the relationship between the current structure of
economic activity within a region and subsequent economic performance is subtle. Differing
scopes of agglomeration forces may be at work. Agglomeration may arise from the specialization
of a region in a particular industry where firms share common inputs or knowledge (so called

7

localization economies). At the other extreme agglomeration may be the result of exploiting the
overall diversity of industries in an entire regional economy (so called urbanization economies).5
Empirical identification of these effects has been hampered because of the role of
convergence (mean reversion) on regional growth patterns. As a result, the prior empirical
literature has focused on identifying the balance of these two forces. Consider the relationship
between the growth of economic activity and the initial level of economic activity within a
region-industry. At the industry level of analysis, both convergence and agglomeration effects
may be present. Region-industries may be subject to convergence effects (i.e., the coefficient on
the initial level of economic activity is negative), either as the result of diminishing returns or a
form of mean-reversion.6 For example, the returns to economic activity can be diminishing in
the level due to cost-based competition and congestion costs. A large presence of firms in an
industry relative to the size of the region can intensify local competition for inputs, dampening
incentives for entry and business expansion. For example, if the price of specialized (labor or
capital) inputs is increasing in the number of local firms, there could be diminishing returns as a
result of congestion costs (Sorenson and Audia, 2000; Swann, 1998; Duranton, 2007).7 An
alternative interpretation of a negative relationship between the growth rate of employment and
the initial level of employment is mean-reversion, where a region-industry with a relatively high
5

The empirical findings of the papers testing for localization and urbanization economies are mixed, and depend on
the unit of analysis (region, industry or plant level) and the performance indicator. Some studies find evidence that
supports the role of industry diversity in region-industry employment growth (Glaeser et al., 1992; Combes, 2000).
In contrast, other studies find support for localization economies in region-industry productivity growth (Cingano
and Schivardi, 2004) and in plant-level productivity (Henderson, 2003; Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2008).
Notably, Frenken et al. (2007) focus on related (within sectors - i.e., within broadly defined industry codes) and unrelated diversity (across sectors); and find that related diversity enhances regional employment growth. For further
analysis on the respective influence of regional specialization and diversity see Glaeser et al. (1992) and the review
of Rosenthal and Strange’s (2004), among others.
6
We draw on the convergence concept used by the cross-sectional growth literature to study economic activity
across countries, regions and regional industries (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1991; Henderson et al., 1995; Bostic et
al., 1997; Higgins et al, 2006; Geppert and Stephan, 2008; see also the review by Magrini (2004)). Other studies
examine whether the distribution of industrial activity across regions is stable or diverging over time (Dumais et al.,
2002). This paper focuses on (conditional) convergence to a steady state, meaning that growth is declining in the
level of economic activity conditioning on differences across economies in their underlying fundamentals.
7
Indeed, a number of prior studies find that convergence effects at the region-industry level may be sufficiently
large to compensate the localization economies that take place within industries (Henderson et al., 1995; Dumais et
al., 2002; Cingano and Schivardi, 2004; Klepper, 2007; Duranton, 2007; Findeisen and Südekum, 2008). The extent
of agglomeration and convergence forces may vary by firm type (new entrants versus established; see e.g., Dumais
et al., 2002), by industry type (mature versus new high-tech; see Henderson et al., 1995; Duranton and Puga, 2001);
and across regions (depending on the degree of labor and capital mobility and other factors affecting the diffusion of
advanced technologies; see e.g., Benhabib and Spiegel, 1994). Additionally, the convergence forces resulting from
crowding out of demand may be lower for firms, industries and regions that are more traded-oriented (i.e., with
substantial demand outside the region). For most of the analysis, we do not explore the sources of these differences,
but simply control for industry, cluster and region heterogeneity using fixed effects.

8

level of economic activity at t0 (compared to the average size of the industry in other similar
regions) will likely have a lower, stochastically determined, growth rate between t0 and t1 (Barro
and Sala-i-Martin, 1991; Quah, 1996).
However, region-industries may also be subject to agglomeration effects. There may be
externalities across firms within individual industries in learning, innovation, and spawning
entrepreneurs (Audretsch, 1995; Henderson, 2003; Gompers et al., 2005; Greenstone, Hornbeck,
and Moretti, 2008; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009; Delgado, Porter and Stern, 2010). The empirical
relationship between regional industry specialization and the growth of employment in that
industry will be ambiguous, and will depend on the precise nature of competition (cost-based or
innovation-based) and the pattern of strategic interaction among firms.
While the relationship between the growth rate of employment within a region-industry
and its initial level may be ambiguous, it is possible to examine the potential for agglomeration
as a distinct driver by considering the role of the cluster environment that surrounds a particular
region-industry. The presence of complementary economic activity – e.g., specialized suppliers,
a large or advanced local customer base, producers of complementary products and services,
specialized institutions – increases the pool of available inputs in a location while giving rise to
externalities of various sorts. This, in turn, enhances the incentives and resources available for
entrepreneurship, innovation, and firm growth (Porter, 1990, 1998; Feldman and Audretsch,
1999; Delgado, Porter and Stern, 2010).

Whereas prior work has emphasized individual

channels through which particularly types of complementarities are realized (e.g., examining the
relationship between scientific knowledge base in a region and industry innovation performance
(Feldman and Audretsch, 1999), we focus on the broader role of complementarities by
considering the overall impact of clusters on the performance of industries within a cluster.
Our main hypothesis concerns the role of clusters in regional performance.

After

controlling for the convergence effect at the region-industry level, the growth of employment in
an industry within a region will be increasing in the strength of the regional cluster environment
within which that industry operates. While convergence effects may prevail at the narrower
industry level, an industry participating in a strong cluster should grow employment faster than

9

the same industry in a region with limited presence of the cluster.8 This hypothesis holds for any
measure of cluster strength, such as based on employment, number of establishments, wages, or
patenting in the regional cluster. A strong cluster will enable greater agglomeration economies,
including larger pools of skilled employees, specialized suppliers, related industries,
sophisticated buyers, and intense local competition. Proximity of related economic activity can
also reduce transaction costs, enhance knowledge transfers and the flow of information, and
induce the growth of specialized local institutions such as educational programs, trade groups,
and quality or certification organizations that reinforce the complementarities across related
industries. Thus, a strong cluster environment surrounding a particular region-industry should
enhance growth at the region-industry level through increasing efficiency, driving productivity
and job creation, and increasing returns to expansion, investment, and innovation (see, e.g.,
Porter, 1990, 1998, 2003; Saxenian, 1994; Feldman and Audretsch, 1999; Bresnahan and
Gambardella, 2004; Bönte, 2004; Delgado, 2007; Cortright, 2006). In our empirical work, we
examine several facets of the regional cluster environment, including the strength of the region in
other related industries that constitute the cluster and the strength in related clusters.
Entrepreneurship and new business formation by established firms are also particularly
important channels for cluster-driven agglomeration (Saxenian, 1994; Porter, 1998; Feldman,
2001; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009; Feser et al., 2008; Wennberg and Lindqvist, 2008; Delgado,
Porter, and Stern, 2010). Clusters facilitate new business formation and growth by lowering the
costs of entry, enhancing market and innovation opportunities, and allowing firms to leverage
local resources to expand businesses more rapidly.
As stated in our main hypothesis, we expect that the industry growth rate will increase
with the strength of the region in other complementary industries that constitute the cluster, as
well as its specialization in related clusters.

To illustrate this consider the following two

Economic Areas in North Carolina, Raleigh-Durham-Cary and Greenville, both highly
specialized in the pharmaceutical preparations industry (SIC 2834) in 1990. The Raleigh EA is
highly specialized in other complementary industries within the biopharmaceutical cluster and in
related clusters such as medical devices and education and knowledge creation. The Greenville
EA, in contrast, has a weak regional cluster environment.

As expected, we find that

8

There could be convergence forces taking place at the cluster-level as well. The size of the regional cluster can
generate congestion costs in related labour/inputs markets, but we expect the agglomeration forces will prevail at the
cluster level.

10

pharmaceutical industry employment growth over 1990-2005 was significantly higher in
Raleigh-Durham-Cary compared to Greenville (53% vs. -2%).9
Finally, there can be spillovers between a regional industry and the presence of strong
clusters in nearby regions. While regional studies have often focused on regional units in
isolation from other regions, economic geography theory suggests that neighboring regions can
play an important role in shaping opportunities for growth. (Fujita, Krugman and Venables,
1999; Neary, 2001; Fujita and Thisse, 2002; Baldwin et al., 2003; Henderson, 2005; Duranton
and Overman, 2005). Indeed, some studies find that economies of agglomeration attenuate with
distance (see, e.g., Rosenthal and Strange 2003, Henderson, 2003), and others find relevant
spatial interactions among cities (Dobkins and Ioannides, 2001).
In this paper, we consider the impact of the presence of similar clusters in neighboring
regions on industry and cluster growth in a region. The presence of a strong cluster in a
neighboring region can be a source of locational competition, particularly for constrained inputs
and demand. However, industries and clusters that are co-located in nearby regions may benefit
from inter-regional spillovers, which lower the costs and risk of entrepreneurship and business
expansion (e.g., by providing access to suppliers and customers, by allowing firms to leverage
proximate inputs, technology, institutions, etc). There is likely to be asymmetry in the type and
the extent of inter-regional spillovers among neighboring clusters depending on the depth and
breadth of clusters in a region. For example, inter-regional spillovers may be lower for large
versus small regions, and lower for leading national clusters versus smaller clusters.10 Our
second hypothesis is that the impact of cluster strength in neighboring regions will have an
ambiguous effect on the growth of employment in regional industries and clusters, depending on
the relative salience of inter-regional spillovers versus locational competition.
While our empirical analysis focuses on employment growth, the cluster mechanisms
described above simultaneously affect other dimensions of economic performance, such as
productivity, wages, innovation, and entrepreneurship.

These performance indicators may

9

Raleigh-Durham-Cary employment in pharmaceutical preparations increased from 3,110 to 5,277 by 2005, while
Greenville EA’s employment declined from 1,760 to 1,728 employees (based on CBP data). See Cortright and
Mayer (2002) for an informative discussion of US biotechnology clusters.
10
The co-location of a similar cluster in nearby regions may be driven by several mechanisms, such as input-output
linkages; human capital composition; and the contribution of a leading cluster to the development of nearby clusters.
We abstract from identifying the mechanism that generates the inter-regional spillovers, instead focusing on the
impact of neighboring regions’ cluster composition on the economic performance of individual industries and
clusters.

11

respond differently to agglomeration forces (Bostic, Gans and Stern, 1997; Cingano and
Schivardi, 2004; Rosenthal and Strange, 2004). For example there could be some trade-offs
between employment and productivity gains in clusters.

In some cases, firm productivity

benefits may be larger than profitability benefits (Greenstone et al. 2008), resulting in lower
employment gains.11 Improvements in productivity may even result in employment decline in
industries with large substitution between labor and capital. In other cases, firm decisions to
locate in clusters could be motivated by demand-side factors and cost reductions that translate
into high profitability and employment gains with low productivity gains (e.g., Caves 1996;
Alcacer, 2006).12 In our empirical analysis, we explore whether a strong cluster environment
results in better overall region-industry performance, or whether greater employment growth
comes at the expense of lower wages, lower business creation, or reduced innovation. However,
since the theoretical relationship between clusters, productivity (wages), innovation and
employment is subtle, a full and simultaneous assessment of the role of clusters on multiple
dimensions of economic performance is left to a companion paper.
In general, our framework suggests that the impact of convergence will be more salient
for narrower economic units, and cluster composition may be a key driver of regional
agglomeration. While convergence effects in industry employment growth may occur at the
industry level, the most powerful agglomeration forces arise at a more aggregated level: the
cluster, among related clusters, and among similar clusters in nearby regions. We can also use
our framework to evaluate a number of related, ancillary hypotheses. We can test whether the
employment growth rate of a cluster is increasing in the strength of related clusters in the region
(i.e., clusters which are likely complementary to each other) or the strength of similar clusters in
geographically adjacent regions. This type of analysis is valuable to test whether our core insight
concerning the impact of complementary economic activity is robust across different levels of
data aggregation.

Additionally, we can examine whether the presence of a strong cluster

environment spurs regional growth more generally.

Specifically, we evaluate how the

11

Greenstone et al. (2008) find that the productivity of incumbent plants increases with the location in the region of
large (multi-million) plants, and the benefits are higher if the incumbents and entrants share skills and technology.
However, entry of plants also increases labor costs so that profit gains are smaller than productivity gains.
12
Alcacer (2006) finds that (multinational) firm motivation and types of benefits from locating in a cluster can be
different across the value chain (manufacturing, R&D, and sales and distribution).

12

employment growth rate of a region (outside the strong clusters in that region) depends on the
presence of strong clusters within the region.13
3.

Model
Industry Growth Model. To examine region-industry growth we draw on studies of

conditional convergence (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1991, 1995; Combes, 2000; Dumais et
al., 2002; Higgins et al., 2006) that examine economic growth as function of the level of
economic activity and observable attributes of the region. While convergence forces may prevail
at the region-industry level, we argue that the important agglomeration forces are due to the
presence of clusters of related industries (Porter, 1990, 1998; Swann, 1998; Feldman and
Audretsch, 1999; Paci and Usai, 2000; among others).
We test these ideas utilizing a dataset that examines region-industry growth between
1990 and 2005 for 177 regions and up to 589 traded industries, totaling 55083 region-industries
in which we observe positive employment in 1990. To separate convergence and agglomeration
forces in regional industry growth, we distinguish between the level of regional specialization in
a particular industry and the strength of the cluster environment around that region-industry.
Once we control for the average growth of the industry and the region, and after conditioning out
the effect of the (relative) size of the industry, we are able to disentangle the effect of the cluster
environment on region-industry growth. Following the conditional convergence literature, our
core econometric specification is:
 Employicr,2005 
ln 
   0   ln(Industry Specicr,1990 )
 Employ
icr,1990


outside i
outside c
 1 ln(Cluster Specicr,1990
)   2 ln(Related Clusters Speccr,1990
)

(1)

 3 ln(Cluster Spec in Neighborscr,1990 ) + i   r   icr .

Our primary dependent variable is employment growth of the (4-digit SIC) industry i in
cluster c in region (EA) r over the period 1990-2005; and the (employment-based) explanatory
variables are specified at 1990. Our approach is cross-sectional in nature; we compare the
growth rates of individual EA-industries between 1990 and 2005, accounting for fixed
13

Porter (2003) suggests that regional prosperity may be driven by the relative performance of the strong clusters in
the region. The ability of a region to perform well in whichever clusters with meaningful position seems more
important for regional economic performance than the region’s efforts to specialize in nationally high-wage clusters.

13

differences in the overall growth of the EA and the industry. A complementary approach would
be to focus specifically on the time-series dynamics; this would allow us to take advantage of the
more detailed growth patterns within each EA-industry over the time period of the dataset but
would also require a quite different time-series econometric framework (such as an appropriately
specified ARMA model). See, for example, Henderson (1997) and De la Fuenta (2002) for
further discussion.
To capture the balance of the convergence and agglomeration forces at the industry level,
we specify an EA-industry growth model that includes regional specialization in the industry
(Industry Spec).

We also include several measures of the relative strength of the cluster

environment surrounding that region-industry (see Section 4 for a precise definition of these
measures): Cluster Spec (a measure of cluster strength in the set of closely related industries
constituting the cluster), Related Clusters Spec (a measure of the strength of related clusters in
the region), and Cluster Spec in Neighbors (a measure of cluster strength in adjacent geographic
regions).14
We include industry (αi) and region fixed effects (αr) to control for other differences
across regions and industries that affect employment growth. Thus, this specification examines
the impact of the level of industry specialization and the strength of the cluster environment,
fully controlling for differences in the average growth of a region or the average growth of a
particular industry. Our analysis thus accounts for unobserved factors (such as the size of the
industry, the size of the region (urbanization economies), regional policies, resource
endowments, etc.) that might be correlated both with our explanatory variables and regionindustry employment growth. In other words, we isolate the impact of clusters on economic
performance by conditioning out the potential sources of spurious correlation between initial
cluster size and the overall growth rate of a given region and/or industry.
The key coefficients to test our main hypotheses are δ and β. Our prediction concerning
the coefficient on the initial (relative) size of an industry in the region (Industry Spec) is
ambiguous, depending on the relative salience of convergence and agglomeration forces at the
14

To illustrate the unit of observation, consider the pharmaceutical preparations industry (SIC-2834) in the
biopharmaceutical cluster in the Raleigh-Durham-Cary (NC) region. For this region-industry observation we look at
the specialization of the region in the industry; the specialization of the region in biopharmaceuticals (excluding
industry SIC-2834); the presence in the region of other related clusters (such as medical devices, chemical products,
and education and knowledge creation); and the surrounding regions’ specialization in biopharmaceuticals
(including the focal industry).

14

region-industry level. For the role of the cluster environment, our framework offers sharper
predictions. After controlling for the convergence effect, we expect industries co-located with
industries in the same cluster, or in regions with strong related clusters, to perform better than
industries in regions lacking cluster strength (β1 > 0 and β2 > 0).
Importantly, we test whether this relationship is driven by industry complementarities
within clusters or simply results from random aggregation of industries.

Specifically, we

implement a Monte Carlo falsification test in which, for each round of the Monte Carlo, we
construct “random” clusters by randomly assigning the 589 traded industries into 41 clusters (see
Section 5 for a more detailed description of our procedure). By constructing “random” clusters,
we are able to evaluate whether our results are simply an artifact arising from the inclusion of
any sets of industries or whether they depend on clusters constructed based on
complementarities.
To account for correlation of the error terms across industries within a regional cluster,
the standard errors are clustered by region-cluster.

Finally, since nearby regions tend to

specialize in like clusters, there might be unobserved spatial autocorrelation (Anselin, 1988). We
account for this in two ways, by including in our main specifications the strength of similar
clusters in neighboring regions and region fixed effects, and by directly testing for spatial
correlation using spatial econometric techniques.15
Cluster Growth Model. To examine the relationship between a cluster’s employment
growth and the regional cluster environment, we specify the following model:
 Employcr,2005 
ln 
   0   ln(Cluster Speccr,1990 )
 Employ
cr,1990 

Outside c
 1 ln(Related Clusters Speccr,1990
)   2 ln(Cluster Spec in Neighborscr,1990 ) (2)
  c   r   cr .

The dependent variable is the employment growth of cluster c in region r over the period 19902005, with the explanatory variables specified in 1990. We expect that the region-cluster growth
rate will be ambiguous in the initial size of the cluster (Cluster Spec), depending on the relative
15

Following Anselin (1988) and the extensions and implementation developed by LeSage (1999, p. 171), we test for
spatial autocorrelation using a first-order spatial autoregressive (FAR) model. We first implement a fixed effects
OLS specification (e.g., equation (1)) and then estimate the following FAR model: ˆicr   Wˆicr  icr , where ˆ are
the residuals from the OLS estimation, and W is an NxN matrix (where N is the total number of region-industries)
with elements equal to 1 for adjacent regions and 0 otherwise. Under the null hypothesis of no spatial
autocorrelation if ρ=0.
LeSage and collaborators generously provide MATLAB software for the FAR test,
available at http://www.spatial-econometrics.com.

15

impact of convergence and agglomeration. Conditioning on cluster specialization, we also test
for agglomeration forces involving related clusters (Related Clusters Spec) and similar clusters in
neighboring regions (Cluster Spec in Neighbors).
Region Growth Model. Finally, we specify a region-level model to test whether the set of
strong traded clusters in a region (traded clusters highly over-represented in the region)
contribute to the employment growth of other clusters in the region. To test this relationship, we
specify the following model:
Outside

Outside
 Employ r,2005 strong clusters
clusters
ln 
  0   ln(Reg Employstrong
)   Reg Cluster Strength r,1990

r,1990
 Employ

r,1990 

clusters
+  National Employ Growth Strong
  Census Region   r .
r,1990  05

(3)

The dependent variable is the growth in regional employment outside its strong clusters,
over the period 1990-2005. Convergence forces that could prevail at the regional level are
captured by including the level of regional employment outside its strong clusters. Cluster
agglomeration forces are measured by the presence of the strong clusters in the region (Reg
Cluster Strength). We expect that the set of strong clusters (and their linkages) in the region will
contribute to growth of other activities in the region (β > 0). The model controls for national
shocks affecting the region’s strong clusters (National Employment Growth) because these
shocks might be correlated to subsequent technological and demand shocks in the region,
affecting regional performance growth and cluster composition. Finally, the model also controls
for broader regional differences by including six broad Census-region dummies (e.g., Northeast,
South Atlantic, etc.).
4.

Data
Data from the County Business Patterns (CBP) dataset is coded with cluster definitions

drawn from the US Cluster Mapping Project (CMP; see Porter, 2001, 2003). Before turning to
the precise variable definitions, it is useful to provide an overview of the data sources. The CPB
dataset is a publicly available database that provides annual county-level measures of private
sector non-agricultural employment, establishments and payroll at the level of four-digit SIC
codes (which we refer to as industries).16 This data is aggregated to the region-industry level and
16

CBP data is made available at the county, state and US level. One problem of the CBP data is cell suppression to
protect the confidentiality of firms in certain geography-industry with small presence of firms. When employment

16

the region-cluster level, using four-digit SIC codes as the primary industry unit, and economic
areas (EAs as defined by the Bureau of Economic Analysis) as the geographic unit. The analysis
focuses on the 1990-2005 period.17
The cluster definitions and relationships among clusters are drawn from the US Cluster
Mapping Project (Porter, 2001, 2003). Directly measuring complementarity in economic activity
in a consistent and unbiased manner represents a considerable challenge.18 The CMP uses an
indirect methodology for grouping four-digit (and some three-digit) SIC codes into clusters and
related clusters.19 The methodology first distinguishes three types of industries with different
patterns of competition and locational drivers: traded, local, and natural resource-dependent.
Local industries are those that serve primarily the local markets (e.g., utilities) whose
employment is roughly evenly distributed across regions. Resource-dependent industries are
those whose location is tied to local resource availability (e.g., logging). Traded industries are

data is suppressed, a range is reported. We utilize the mid-point in the range in our data. For payroll data, no
information is provided when data is suppressed. Given this limitation, we use the unsuppressed Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD) of the Census Bureau for the wage analysis reported in Table 5. We also use the LBD
data to replicate the employment growth analysis reported in Table 3, and the results only change trivially.
17

There are 179 EAs covering the entirety of the United States. To minimize concerns about differences in
transportation costs and the definition of neighboring regions, we exclude the Alaska and Hawaii EAs. The
boundaries of EAs are drawn to reflect meaningful economic regions, ensure comprehensive regional coverage and
have been highly stable over time (Johnson and Kort, 2004). EA include both rural and urban areas, facilitating the
mapping of clusters that span urban and proximate rural areas (Porter et al., 2004).
18

A small literature considers alternative measures of relatedness among industries. Ellison and Glaeser (1997)
study the extent of coagglomeration of pairs of manufacturing industries, building an index that reflects “excess”
concentration. In a related paper, Ellison et al., (2010) test various mechanisms (input-output, knowledge, labor
pooling) inducing the coagglomeration of pairs of manufacturing industries, and conclude that they all seem to
matter. This finding shows that there are many types of industry complementarities (see also Forni and Paba, 2002),
and is consistent with the clustering methodology developed in Porter (2001, 2003). In contrast, other studies focus
on specific types of linkages in terms of input-output (Feser and Bergman, 2000), and technological and/or market
proximity (Scherer, 1982; Jaffe, Trajtemberg and Henderson, 1993; Feldman and Audretsch, 1999; Bloom et al.,
2005; Hausman and Klinger, 2006).
While the studies mentioned examine interdependencies among
(manufacturing) industries, only a few studies group industries into clusters, including Porter (2001, 2003), Feldman
and Audretsch (1999) for science-based clusters and Feser and Bergman (2000) for input-output-based clusters.
Finally, other studies focus on characterizing specific clusters (versus mapping clusters of related industries) by
examining the types of firms participating in the cluster (foreign/domestic, small/large, buyers/suppliers, etc.) and
the types of networks among these firms (see e.g., Saxenian, 1994; Boschma, 2005; Beugelsdijk, McCann, and
Mudambi, 2010).
19

In order to use EA-industry data back to 1990, the analysis employs SIC system rather than the more refined
NAICS systems, which was introduced in 1997 (and modified in a significant way in 2003). By construction, recent
NAICS-based data can be translated (with some noise) into the older SIC system. The use of NAICS or SIC
definitions has no meaningful impact on our core empirical results.

17

those that tend to be geographically concentrated and produce goods and services that are sold
across regions and countries.20
Traded industries are the focus of our analysis. To measure the relatedness between any
pair of traded industries, the CMP computes the pairwise correlations of industry employment
across locations (referred as “locational correlation”). Using the locational correlation, the CMP
groups each of the 589 traded industries to one of 41 mutually exclusive traded clusters (referred
to as “narrow cluster” definitions). This empirical approach is based on revealed co-location
patterns, and captures any type of externalities present across industries (e.g. technology, skills,
demand, or others) rather than focusing on any one type.21

Examples of clusters include

automotive, apparel, biopharmaceuticals, and information technology. Within a cluster such as
information technology, for example, there are 9 4-digit SIC code industries, including electronic
computers (SIC 3571) and software (SIC 7372), reflecting the fact that location of employment
in computer hardware and software are highly correlated (Appendix A provides a comprehensive
list of the 41 traded clusters and some key attributes).
The CMP also develops “broad” cluster definitions in which a given industry may be
associated with multiple clusters (as inferred through the locational correlation of employment
patterns), identifying a broader set of related industries for each focal industry. While the narrow
cluster definitions form our key measures of complementary industries, we use the broader
clusters to identify related clusters and to develop a measure of the strength of related clusters
surrounding a given region-cluster. Additionally, in the sensitivity analysis we compute broad
measures of related industries for each focal industry (versus the cluster and related clusters)
considering all traded industries with positive locational correlation or with positive input-output
flows with the focal industry.
20

Traded industries account for 30% of US employment and over 87% of US patents. See Porter (2003) for
additional detail on the methodology to define these 3 industry groups.
21
Porter (2003) describes the methodology and classification system in detail. The primary classifications are based
on empirical patterns of employment co-location among industries as captured by the locational correlation of
employment. Using this method, clusters may contain service and manufacturing industries as well as industries
from different parts of the SIC system. This contrasts with prior studies that focus on interdependencies among
manufacturing industries (Ellison and Glaeser, 1997; Ellison et al., 2010). It is possible that industries with high
employment co-location may have little economic relationship. Two adjustments are made in the CMP to the
cluster definitions to eliminate spurious correlations. First, the SIC industry definitions and list of included products
and services are used to reveal logical links. Second, the National Input-Output accounts are used to identify
meaningful cross-industry flows. In a recent paper, Delgado et al. (2012) test that the CMP cluster definitions group
industries that are highly related based on multiple types of linkages, including input-output, labor occupation
requirements, and patenting linkages.

18

Other Sources of Data. In addition to employment growth in a given EA-industry, we
also examine the growth in the number of establishments, average wages and patenting. The
establishment data is drawn from the CBP dataset. Wage indicators are obtained from the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of the Census Bureau, which provides annual
observations of the universe of US establishments with payroll.22 The EA-industry patent data is
drawn from the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). This dataset includes
detailed information about all USPTO utility patents, including inventor location and technology
classification. Constructing patenting measures is complicated, both because USPTO patents are
assigned to patent classes but are not directly matched to SIC codes, and because the multiple
inventors of a given patent may be located in different regions. We utilize a patent-SIC code
concordance algorithm developed by Silverman (1999), in which USPTO patents are assigned,
on a fractional basis, to four-digit SIC codes in a consistent (albeit somewhat noisy) manner.23
Each patent is then assigned, on a fractional basis, among the locations of the inventors.
Sample Description and Dependent Variable Definitions
Our main measure of economic performance is employment growth in a given EAindustry over the period 1990-2005.

We also examine other dimensions of economic

performance, such as the growth in the number of establishments in the EA-industry, where an
increase in the growth rate would reflect an increase in entry of new establishments, the rate of
survival, or both; the growth in average wages; and the growth in patenting (see Table 1 and
Appendix B, Table B2).
The most straightforward approach to evaluating growth, taking ln(Employi,r,2005/
Employi,r,1990), must account for the fact that there are many EA-industries in which there is a
zero level of employment. We need to either exclude those observations or impose a positive
22

For detailed information on the LBD data see Jarmin and Miranda (2002) and Delgado, Porter and Stern (2010).
For the wage analysis, we omit establishments with zero employment and with very low wages (below half of the
minimum wage) or very high wages (above $2 million USD) to avoid part time employment and potential
measurement error.
23

The Silverman algorithm cleverly exploits the simultaneous assignment of patent classes and industry codes in the
Canadian patent system. It (a) links each USPTO patent to Canadian patent classes (using each patent’s IPC classes),
(b) links each Canadian patent class to the Canadian SIC scheme according to the historical propensity for patents
from each IPC class to be associated with particular Canadian SIC codes, and (c) links the Canadian SIC and US
SIC classification systems according to a separate concordance developed by Industry Canada and the US
Department of Commerce. For a detailed exposition of this procedure, see Silverman (1999).

19

lower bound on the level of employment.24 Since the empirical analysis focuses on explaining
the growth of existing regional industries, the core sample uses EA-industries that have a
positive level of employment in 1990 (55083 observations). To include EA-industries where we
observe subsequent zero employment in 2005 (6162 observations), we set employment equal to
one for these observations. We implement numerous sensitivity analyses involving alternative
approaches to deal with the zeros. We use the sample of regional industries that have positive
employment in both the base and the terminal period (i.e., “non-zeros” sample of 48921
observations); vary the base and terminal periods; (1990-1996 and 1997-2005 versus 19902005); and use the whole sample (including EA-industries with zero employment in 1990; see
Appendix B). Our main findings remain essentially unchanged.
Additionally, we examine the creation of new to the region industries, by using the
sample of EA-industries with zero measured employment in 1990 (48430 observations). The
dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if there is a positive level of employment as
of 2005 (Any Positive Employment2005 variable; with a mean of 0.29 and a standard deviation of
0.45). These analyses include probit specifications of the probability of having industries new to
the region as of 2005 as a function of the initial cluster environment.
Explanatory Variables: Industry and Cluster-Level Models
To examine the impact of the industry strength and different aspects of cluster strength on
the growth of regional industries, we need measures of industry and cluster specialization as well
as measures of the strength of related and neighboring clusters. We draw on a body of prior
work which uses location quotients (LQ) as a primary measure of regional specialization
(Glaeser et al. 1992, Feldman and Audretsch 1999, Porter 2003, among others). Employmentbased industry specialization in the base year (1990) is measured by the share of regional
employment in the regional industry as compared to the share of US employment in the national
industry: INDUSTRY SPECEmploy,i,r,90 

employi,r employr
employi,US employ US

, where r and i indicate the region (EA)

and the industry, respectively. This indicator captures the degree to which the industry is “overrepresented” (in terms of employment) in the EA. In our sample, the industry specialization of
24

Since we are using narrow regional units and individual industries (mainly four-digit SIC), there are numerous
regional industries with zero employment. Most zeros concentrate in small EAs and small national industries and
clusters (e.g., Tobacco and Footwear related industries).

20

regions has a mean of 2.34 and a standard deviation of 7.21 (Table 1). As noted earlier, we
include EA and industry fixed effects in the regional industry model (equation 1), and so, the
independent variation in our main empirical specifications is driven exclusively by variation in
employment in the EA-industry.
Cluster Specialization.

We use a similar procedure to develop a measure for cluster

specialization. For a particular EA-industry the specialization of the EA in cluster c is measured
by the share of regional employment in the regional cluster (outside the industry) as compared to
the

share

of

US

employment

CLUSTER SPECEmploy,icr,90 

in

the

i
employoutside
employr
c,r
i
employoutside
employ US
c,US

national
.

cluster

(outside

the

industry):

In our sample, the average employment-

based Cluster Spec is 1.31 (and the standard deviation is 2.20; Table 1). The correlation between
the Industry Spec and Cluster Spec variable is only 0.20 (Table B1). These two variables, while
related, are capturing different agglomeration forces -- those that take place within the focal
industry versus those that take place within the cluster of related industries.
Analogously, in the EA-cluster level models, cluster specialization is measured using an
employment-based location quotient, but including all the industries that constitute a given
cluster: CLUSTER SPECEmploy,cr,90 

employc,r employr
employc,US employ US

.

Since cluster specialization is measured relative to the overall size of the region, a region
may exhibit specialization within a particular cluster even though that region only holds a small
share of the overall national employment of that cluster. While it is not surprising that leading
regions in the automotive cluster include Detroit-Warren-Flint (MI) and Cleveland-Akron-Elyria
(OH), there are pockets of automotive cluster strength in smaller regions, such as LexingtonFayette-Frankfort-Richmond (KY) and Louisville-Elizabethtown-Scottsburg (KY-IN) (see Table
A3 and Figure A1.1 in the Appendix). Thus, our analysis includes both large and small regional
clusters.
Finally, it is useful to note that, in the EA-industry models the inclusion of region and
industry fixed effects, means that the independent variation utilized in the regressions comes
exclusively from the employment within a given cluster (outside the industry). Similarly, in the
EA-cluster models (with region and cluster fixed effects), the variation in cluster specialization
comes from differences across clusters in the initial level of employment.
21

Strong Clusters in a Region. To identify the set of strong clusters in a given EA in 1990
we use the magnitude of cluster specialization (Cluster Speccr), based on the distribution of this
variable across EAs for each of the 41 clusters. We define as strong clusters those in EAs with
the top 20% of specialization (i.e., above the 80th percentile value of Cluster Speccr; see Table
A3).

Even after controlling for cluster differences, there are small EAs with very low

employment that hit the location quotient threshold. To address these cases, the high cluster
specialization criterion is supplemented with a minimum share of national cluster employment
and number of establishments.25 The strong clusters in an EA are those that satisfy these three
criteria (REG STRONG CLUSTERS). On average, EAs have 6.91 strong clusters (Table 1).26
Strength of Related Clusters.

The measures of the strength of related clusters are

developed using the “broad” cluster definitions in Porter (2003). We identify as clusters related
to a given cluster c those broad clusters that have at least one of cluster c’s narrow industries in
common. For example, in the case of automotive, related clusters include production technology
and metal manufacturing, among others (see Table A2). 27 Having identified the set of clusters
related to a given cluster (C*), we then measure the degree of overlap between each pair of
clusters (c, b) using the average proportion of narrow industries that are shared in each direction:
 shared industriesc,b shared industriesc,b  28
ωc,b =Avg 
,
 . The strength of a region in clusters related to
total industriesb 
 total industriesc

cluster c is then defined by a weighted sum of the location quotients associated with each
(narrowly defined) related cluster:
C*

RELATED CLUSTERS SPECEmploy, cr 

 (ω

bC*c

c,b

C*

 (ω

bC*c

c,b

* employb,r )
/

* employ b,US )

employr
.
employ US

25

The threshold values are selected by cluster, using the employment and establishment values that correspond to
the 20th percentile.
26
Using these criteria, all the EAs prove to have at least one strong cluster. Some regions have numerous strong
clusters (e.g., San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA) while others have only one or two (e.g., Lewiston, ID-WA).
27
The set of related clusters selected using this method will be the most relevant ones for each given cluster c.
Clusters related with many other traded clusters include analytical instruments and communications equipment,
among others; and clusters with few connections to other clusters include tobacco and footwear.
28
For example, automotive has 5 narrow industries (out of 15) in common with production technology, while
production technology shares 7 narrow industries (out of 23) with automotives. The degree of overlap between these
two clusters is then c,b  0.32 .

22

For instance, based on this weighting which emphasizes the degree of overlap between clusters,
our measure of the strength of related clusters for industries within the automotive cluster
weights the presence of the metal manufacturing cluster more heavily than the presence of the
furniture cluster (Table A2).
Specialization in Related Industries. We also compute a broad measures of the presence
of related industries for the focal industry i using any other traded industry j related to industry i.
We use two different measures of pairwise industry relatedness (wij): locational correlation
(Porter, 2003) or input-output flows (see e.g., Ellison et al. 2010).29 We then compute the LQbased related industries specialization variable:
RELATED INDUSTRIES SPECEmploy, ir 

 (ω

* employ j,r )

 (ω

* employ j,US )

i, j

j i

j i

i, j

/

employ r
.
employ US

These variables draw in recent studies that allow for interdependencies among all
(manufacturing) industries (e.g., Glaeser and Kerr, 2009; and Alcacer and Chung, 2010). While
the cluster and related clusters provide our main measures of complementary industries, we
expect that broader measures of the presence of related industries will also be positively
associated with region-industry growth.
Strength in Neighboring Clusters. Specialization in a particular cluster tends to be
spatially correlated across neighboring regions – for example, the historical strength of the
automotive cluster near Detroit is likely reinforced by cluster specialization in automotives in
neighboring EAs such as Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland (MI), Toledo-Fremont (OH) and
Fort Wayne-Huntington-Auburn (IN) (see Figure A1.1).30

We develop a measure of the

presence of similar clusters in neighboring EAs (CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS variable) to
explore the role of neighboring clusters in employment growth in a region-industry. The
inclusion of this variable allows us to control for the fact that the geographical boundaries of
29

We use two measures of the relatedness between a pair of industries (wij). First we normalize the locational
correlation (LCij) of employment into 0-to-1 weights by replacing negative correlation coefficients with a zero
weight. Second, following Ellison et al. (2010), we construct a symmetric input-output link between a pair of
industries based on the maximum unidirectional link of the input and output flows:
. See Table B3 in the Appendix.
30
Service-oriented clusters, such as Financial Services, also tend to co-locate in nearby regions (see Fig. A1.2).
More generally, Table B1 shows that the specialization of a region in a given cluster is significantly correlated to the
average specialization of neighbors in the same cluster (correlation coefficient of 0.50).

23

clusters may expand across regions.31 We compute the (average) specialization of adjacent EAs
in the cluster (including the focal industry). In other words, the strength of neighboring clusters
is measured by the average (employment-based) LQ of a cluster in adjacent regions.
Explanatory Variables: Region-level Model
In the region growth model specified in equation 3, the measure of cluster-driven
agglomeration is regional cluster strength (REG CLUSTER STRENGTH), defined as the share
of regional traded employment accounted for the set of strong clusters in the region:

REG CLUSTER STRENGTH Employ 



cStrong Clustersr

employc,r

Traded regional employr

.

As mentioned earlier, the strong clusters in a region are those with high cluster specialization
(relative to like clusters in other regions). Thus, the regional cluster strength variable captures
benefits of having an array of clusters highly over-represented in the region. Regional cluster
strength will be higher if there are a few strong clusters that account for much of the regional
traded employment (e.g., automotive related clusters in Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI), or if there are
numerous strong clusters (e.g., South Bend-Mishawaka, IN-MI).
Since a region with strength in clusters that are rapidly growing nationally (e.g., some
areas of high-tech and services) is likely to experience distinct technological and demand shocks,
we include the average national employment growth (outside the region) of the region’s strong
clusters as a control (NATIONAL EMPLOY GROWTH of STRONG CLUSTERS, Table 1).
Finally, in the region-level model we cannot include EA fixed effects since we are using
a cross section.

Instead, we use six broad Census regions (West Pacific, West Mountain,

Midwest, South Central, Northeast, and South Atlantic) to control for differences in growth rates
and cluster structure across broader regions of the US.32

31

Other studies use spatial density analysis to identify the geographical boundaries of individual industries rather
than using administrative regional units (e.g., see Duranton and Overman, 2005).
32
For example, the Northeast area is specialized in clusters that have been growing nationally, such as business
services, education and knowledge creation, and medical devices. In contrast, strong clusters in the South Atlantic
region include textiles, apparel, and furniture.

24

5.

Results
We now turn to the key empirical findings. Table 2 provides a simple analysis of how

the growth rate of EA-industry employment varies with the initial level of industry specialization
and cluster specialization (i.e., initial industry and cluster strength in an EA). The 55,083 EAindustries are divided into four categories based on whether they have low or high (below or
above the median) employment-based industry and cluster specialization for their industry in
1990. For each of these four groups of EA-industries, we compute the average annualized
percentage employment change between 1990 and 2005. We find that there is a significant
decrease in the average employment growth rate when one moves from an EA-industry with low
initial industry specialization to one with high industry specialization, consistent with the
convergence effect (e.g., for EA-industries with low initial cluster specialization, the annual
growth rate decreases from 13% to 0%). Regardless of the initial level of industry specialization,
however, there is a significant increase in the growth of employment when one moves from an
EA-industry with a low cluster specialization to one with high cluster specialization (e.g., for
EA-industries with low initial industry specialization, the annual growth rate increases from 13%
to 20%).

In other words, regional industries that are located in relatively strong clusters

experience much higher growth rates in employment.
A more systematic regression analysis is shown in Table 3. We begin in (3-1) with a
simple model relating EA-industry employment growth to the level of industry specialization.
The estimated coefficient is negative, suggesting that convergence dominates the impact of
agglomeration at the narrowest unit of analysis. In (3-2), we introduce a second variable, Cluster
Spec. While the coefficient on Industry Spec continues to be negative (and roughly of the same
magnitude), the coefficient on Cluster Spec is positive.33
There could be alternative factors, such as region or industry effects, driving our findings.
Therefore, in (3-3), we introduce a comprehensive set of industry and EA fixed effects. This is
our core specification, relying exclusively on variation in the (relative) strength of the cluster
environment, conditioning on the overall growth rate for the region and industry. The results are
33

In our sample of EA-industries with positive employment in 1990, there are observations with zero employment
in the cluster (outside the industry), in related clusters or in neighboring clusters. To be able to use these
observations, we replace ln(variable) with its minimum value in the sample. To control for unobserved attributes of
these types of observations we add across all models a dummy equal to 1 if the particular variable was not corrected.
For example, model (3-3) includes a dummy equal to 1 if an EA-industry has any employment in 1990 in the cluster
(outside the industry). All our findings across Tables 3-6 only change trivially when dropping these dummies.

25

essentially unchanged: there is a large negative impact of industry specialization, and a large
positive impact of cluster specialization. For example, using the coefficients from (3-3), the
annual rate of convergence in region-industry employment is 3.5%.34 Prior work has found
similar level of convergence. For example, Henderson et al. (1995) find ~4% annual rate of
convergence in city-sector employment.
At the same time, a one standard-deviation increase in cluster specialization (2.20) is
associated with a 2.9 percentage point increase in the expected annual employment growth. For
example, the annual growth rate will increase from an average of -2% (in our sample) to a
growth rate of 0.9%. In other words, the suggestive evidence from Table 2 is not simply the
result of spurious correlation or an artifact of particular high-growth industries or regions;
instead, our findings reflect a systematic and precise relationship between the cluster
environment and the potential for growth at the region-industry level.35
Table 3 includes a number of robustness checks. We re-estimate the specification (3-3)
using a sample of all EA-industries, including both traded and local clusters (3-4). The estimates
are essentially unchanged, suggesting that cluster-driven agglomerations benefit both local and
traded industries. We then turn in (3-5) to a Monte Carlo falsification test in which we construct
“random” clusters by randomly assigning the 589 traded industries into 41 traded clusters
(without replacement). We repeat this process 2000 times to create 2000 simulated cluster
definitions, and select the 200 cluster definitions that have the closest distribution to our original
cluster definitions (where closest is defined in terms of the distribution of size of regionclusters).

For each of the 200 random cluster definitions, we estimate the exact same

specification as (3-3); (3-5) reports the average coefficient from this exercise (with the standard
errors based on the empirical distribution from the simulation exercise). While the impact of
Industry Spec continues to be negative (and of the same magnitude), the coefficient associated
with the random cluster specialization measures are essentially zero and statistically
insignificant.

In other words, cluster-driven agglomeration depends critically on grouping

34

The annual convergence rate is 100*(ln(δ+1))/-15) following Barro and Sala i Martin (1991).
To further clarify our findings, in the sensitivity analysis we also study whether the positive cluster effect depends
on the relative size of EA-industries (i.e., high versus low industry specialization). To do so, we include in model
(3-3) the interaction of the cluster strength measure (Cluster Spec) with a High Industry Spec dummy variable (i.e., a
variable equal to one for EA-industries with specialization above the median value for the industry in 1990). We
find that strong clusters matter for regional industries with high and low specialization (and size), and this result is
robust to the exclusion of EA and/or industry fixed effects.
35

26

industries into meaningful groups of related activities (consistent with Porter (2003)), and does
not simply reflect random industry groupings.
Finally, we examine an alternative measure of complementary economic activity drawn
solely from the SIC system itself. In (3-6), we define related industries as all four-digit SIC code
(traded) industries within a two-digit SIC code (i.e., industries that are related based on their list
of products/services; variable SIC2 Spec). This mechanical use of SIC codes captures some
forms of relatedness, but fails to capture complementarities among service and manufacturing
industries or among four-digit industries not included in the same two-digit SIC code. Despite
these limitations, the relationship between SIC2 Spec and EA-industry growth rate is also
positive and significant, consistent with our earlier findings.36
In (3-7) and (3-8) we examine the impact of strength in related clusters and the presence
of strong clusters in neighboring regions. To do so, we introduce two new measures: Related
Cluster Spec and Cluster Spec in Neighbors. The only difference between (3-7) and (3-8) is the
exclusion or inclusion of industry and region fixed effects. Across both specifications, the
estimated impact of industry specialization continues to be negative (consistent with a
convergence effect), but we find separate and positive impacts for each of the three measures of
the cluster environment surrounding a particular region-industry.37 Moreover, the estimated
impact is large: using the estimates from (3-8), a one standard-deviation increase in each of the
aspects of the cluster environment is associated with a 3.7 percentage point (2.2%, 0.6% and
0.9%, respectively) increase in the expected annual employment growth. For example, the
annual growth rate will increase from an average of -2% (in our sample) to a growth rate of
1.7%. Overall, the EA-industries with the highest predicted average employment growth are
those with low industry specialization in regions with high cluster specialization (i.e., small
36

The findings in Tables 3 are robust to a number of additional sensitivity checks, such as using the non-zero
sample (i.e., EA-industries with positive employment in both 1990 and 2005), using alternative regional units (e.g.,
MSAs), dropping the 5% smallest and largest EAs, and dropping small regional clusters that may consist mostly of
sales and distribution offices of clusters based elsewhere (i.e., for every cluster, we drop those regional clusters in
the bottom 20% of the distribution of employment). As described in Section 3, we also test for spatial correlation
running a first order spatial autoregressive (FAR) model on the residuals of our core fixed effects models (3-3 and 38), under the null hypothesis of no spatial autocorrelation if ρ=0. We cannot reject the null hypothesis. In both
specifications, the R-squared of the FAR models are zero, the coefficients of ρ are around -.004, and the standard
deviation of ρ is large (1.77).
37
Importantly, the inter-regional spillover effects are robust to using alternative weighting schemes for adjacent
regions (e.g., weighting more the neighboring clusters with higher levels of employment versus using the unweighted average). Furthermore, the inter-regional spillovers are higher when neighbors specialize in the same
cluster than when neighbors specialize in related clusters.

27

regional industries within larger clusters). Their average predicted employment growth rate over
1990-2005 is 16% (using the estimates from model (3-8)).
Finally, we use two broader measures of the presence of related industries (Related
Industries Spec) that take into account the interdependencies between the focal industry i and any
other traded industry. The relatedness between a pair of industries is based on the locational
employment correlation across EAs (Porter, 2003) or based on unidirectional input-output
linkages (see e.g., Ellison et al. 2010). Table B3 in the Appendix shows that both measures of
the strength of related industries are positively associated with region-industry growth, but the
effect is larger when using locational correlation versus input-output flows to measure pairwise
industry relatedness.38 These findings further validate that the presence of related industries
surrounding a given region-industry matters for the regional industry growth.
Creation of New Regional Industries. A limitation of the analysis to this point is that the
sample excludes those region-industries with zero employment in the initial period. In other
words, the analysis has examined the impact of the cluster environment on the growth rate of
existing region-industries. However, the distribution of zeros may not be random, and instead be
influenced by the cluster environment in the region. We take into account non-existing regional
industries in two ways. First, we estimate our main specification (models 3-3 and 3-8) using the
whole sample (See Table B3), and find that our main results are robust.
Second, we also examine the impact of the initial cluster environment on the creation of
new EA-industries in Table 4. The sample is composed of EA-industries with zero employment
as of 1990. The dependent variable in the probit equations in Table 4 is a dummy variable equal
to one if there is a positive level of employment as of 2005. The results are striking. A higher
level of Cluster Spec, Related Cluster Spec and Cluster Spec in Neighbors is associated with a
significantly higher probability of new industry creation. This result holds with the inclusion or
exclusion of region and industry fixed effects, and the estimated magnitudes are large. For
example, in (4-3), the estimated probability of new industry emergence in a region is 0.22 at the
mean of the explanatory variables and increases to 0.32 (45% increase) if the cluster
environment variables are valued at the mean plus one-standard-deviation.
38

One standard deviation increase in Related Industries Spec (based on locational correlation) is associated with a
4.4% increase in the expected annual EA-industry employment growth, while the estimated effect is 2.19% using
Related Industries Spec (based on input-output flows).

28

These findings suggest that cluster strength facilitates the creation of related new
industries in a region, hence playing an important role in the diversification of regional
economies. Note that this paper does not examine what types of firms enter into these new
regional industries. New establishments of existing firms, startup firms, and (in some cases)
existing establishments switching to the new industry could contribute to the creation of new
regional industries within clusters. The types of firms and networks that drive the creation and
growth of regional industries and clusters will be examined in a related paper.
When Do Clusters Matter More? While our findings highlight the strong average
impact of the local cluster environment on regional economic performance, prior theoretical
work suggests that the impact of agglomeration forces can vary across types of clusters and
regions. For example, while our cluster measures are constructed in terms of the relative size of
the cluster (relative to the region and the national cluster), some of the externalities and
complementarities harnessed by strong clusters may be subject to economies of scale and scope.
Thus, the absolute size of the local region can matter.
We investigate the relationship between cluster driven agglomeration and region size in
(5-1), introducing a set of interaction effects between industry and cluster specialization and a
dummy variable (EA SIZE) which is equal to one for regions above the median employment
size. The main findings hold for both large and small regions, though there are important
differences. Notably, the impact of cluster composition on performance is greater in larger
regions (for both Cluster Spec and Related Cluster Spec). Also, and perhaps not surprisingly, the
impact of neighboring clusters is significantly greater for industries and clusters in smaller
regions.39 A greater importance of spillovers with neighbors for smaller regions is consistent
with the idea that larger EAs enhance the opportunities for cluster development in adjacent
regions, as some cluster activities are outsourced nearby and the large region provides access to
demand and skills.
We investigate the degree of heterogeneity across regions and clusters more
systematically by estimating a separate industry and cluster specialization coefficient for each of
the 177 EAs and for each of the 41 clusters. Taking advantage of the fact that each industry (and
cluster) is present in multiple locations, we are able to estimate a model similar to (3-3) but allow
39

The findings are robust to alternative samples and specifications.

29

for cluster-specific coefficients. The results are presented in Figure 2A and Table 7. In Figure
2A, we simply plot the empirical distribution of these coefficients. The cluster-specific industry
specialization coefficient is always negative, while the cluster-specific cluster specialization
coefficient is almost always positive. Moreover, both of these distributions are single-peaked
and relatively tight. This finding is reinforced when we examine the coefficients by clusters in
detail in Table 7. The industrial specialization coefficient is always negative (and statistically
significant) and, except for two cases (distribution services and entertainment), the cluster
specialization coefficient is positive (and statistically significant). Moreover, certain serviceoriented clusters such as Business Services and Financial Services are estimated to have
relatively high industry and cluster specialization coefficients (in absolute value), while the
impact of cluster specialization is muted in some other clusters (such as Tobacco or Footwear,
which are highly mature clusters).40
Finally, in Figure 2B, we plot the distribution of coefficients from a specification where
we allow for EA-specific industry specialization and cluster specialization coefficients. As
before, the results strongly suggest that our overall findings – convergence at the level of the
industry, dynamic agglomeration at the level of the cluster – are not simply the result of a small
number of “outlier” EAs but represent a robust and central tendency in the data.
Our industry level findings suggest that industries within larger regional clusters have
greater opportunities for economic growth. This relationship could be correlated with regioncluster specific policies and initiatives such as the presence of local institutions or policies that
support the growth of a particular regional cluster, or lower tax rates for the smaller industries
within a larger cluster.41
Performance at the Cluster Level. So far we have focused on employment growth at the
region-industry level. We have found that convergence forces dominate at the narrowest unit
(i.e., at the EA-industry), and dynamic agglomeration forces arise among complementary
economic activity. The same logic should also apply to employment growth at the region-cluster

40

Industries with high (low) convergence effects tend to have high (low) within-cluster effect. The correlation
between the industry spec and cluster spec coefficients is -0.17. Though the relationship is somewhat noisy, this
negative correlation suggests that those clusters with particularly salient complementarities among industries tend to
be subject to a high level of diminishing returns within industries.
41
We plan to investigate the specific role of regional cluster policies in shaping the impact of clusters on economic
performance in future work.

30

level. Here, we examine this using a cross-sectional dataset of 6694 EA-clusters with positive
employment in 1990, spanning 41 traded clusters and up to 177 EAs.
In Table 7, we specify cluster employment growth as a function of the strength of that
cluster, related clusters, and common neighboring clusters, with (7-2) or without (7-1) EA and
cluster fixed effects. The cluster growth models reveal convergence in employment at the EAcluster level. Regional clusters with higher initial employment levels tend to experience lower
employment growth (the annual convergence rate in employment is 3.4% based on model 7-2).
While cluster specialization in a region displays convergence, employment growth of a cluster is
positively influenced by the presence of strong related clusters in the region and by the
specialization of neighboring regions in the same cluster.42 A one standard deviation increase in
these variables is associated with a 2% increase in the annual EA-cluster employment growth
(relative to the mean annual EA-cluster growth of 0.5%).43
Performance at the Region level. Finally, we test for the role of a region’s cluster
strength in the employment growth of other traded and local clusters in the region using the
cross-section of 177 EAs. In Table 8, we first specify regional employment growth outside a
region’s strong clusters over 1990-2005 as a function of regional cluster strength in 1990 (8-1);
we then implement our core specification (8-2). The results shown in (8-1) and (8-2) suggest
that regions with high (relative) cluster strength (i.e., a high share of total traded employment in
the region is accounted for by the strong clusters) are associated with higher employment growth
outside the strong clusters. In other words, regional cluster strength matters for employment
creation in other traded and local activities in the region.44 For example, one standard deviation
increase (0.15) in the cluster strength in a region is associated with an increase of 0.25

42

These findings are robust to multiple sensitivity analyses. The results change only marginally when we condition
on EA-clusters with positive employment in both 1990 and 2005; drop the 5% smallest and largest EAs; use MSAs
instead of EAs; and exclude small regional clusters. As described in Section 3, we also test for spatial correlation
running a FAR model on the residuals of model (7-2), under the null hypothesis of no spatial autocorrelation if ρ=0.
We cannot reject the null hypothesis. The R-squared of the FAR model is zero, the coefficient of ρ is -.004, and the
standard deviation of ρ is very large (.66).
43
Similarly to the industry-level model findings, the cluster-level model finds greater inter-regional agglomeration
benefits for smaller EAs (not reported).
44
These findings also hold when we use alternative indicators of regional cluster strength such as the number of
strong clusters in the region, the level of employment in strong clusters, cluster strength weighting by the overlap
among the strong clusters, or, alternatively, weighting each strong cluster by its degree of overlap with other traded
clusters. The findings are also robust to dropping the 5% smallest and 5% largest EAs.

31

percentage points in the annual employment growth in the region.45 There is also a convergence
effect at the region-level as captured by the negative coefficient of the regional employment
(outside strong clusters). However, the magnitude of the convergence effect is small (the annual
convergence rate is 0.1%).
Overall, the findings suggest that the (relative and absolute) presence of strong traded
clusters in a region will generate job opportunities for other (probably related) traded and local
activities in the region. The ways and extent to which the traded clusters interact with local
clusters will be the subject of related research.
6.

The Impact of Clusters on Wages, Patenting and New Establishment Creation
The analysis thus far has focused on employment growth, a particularly salient

performance dimension in terms of theory and policy. However, these findings may be tempered
by the impact of clusters on related dimensions of economic performance, such as wages,
investment, or innovation.

Productivity (and wage) growth can result in a decrease in

employment depending on the substitutability between labor and capital. Relatedly, there could
be some trade-offs between innovation and employment growth. While innovations offer new
markets and investment opportunities that may result in greater job creation, innovations could
also contribute to a reduction in the use of (low skill) labor.
In Table 9 we evaluate several facets of economic performance to test whether greater
employment growth comes at the expense of lower wages, reduced innovation, or lower business
creation. Here we examine the influence of industry and cluster specialization on the growth rate
of average wages, patenting, and the number of establishments in regional traded industries. For
each of these dimensions of performance we estimate fixed effect models similar to (3-3) and (38), but with the dependent and explanatory variables constructed using measures specific to that
performance dimension (see Table B2 for the descriptive statistics and data sources).
In the wage growth model (9-1), the explanatory variables are the 1990 level of average
wages within the EA-industry and the level of average wages within the cluster to which that
EA-industry belongs.46

The results are striking.

The growth rate of wages is declining

significantly in the initial level of EA-industry average wages. Large convergence effects in
45

For example, the annual regional growth rate will increase from an average of 1.9% (in our sample) to a growth
rate of 2.2%.
46
We use real wages in 2002 $US. Average wages are computed dividing payroll by the number of employees.

32

region-industry wages (and productivity) have been documented in other studies (see e.g.,
Henderson et al. 1995; Cingano and Schivardi, 2004). However, the growth rate of wages is
simultaneously increasing in the average wage of the cluster (excluding the EA-industry). In (92) we find that wage growth is also positively associated with the average wage of clusters in
neighboring regions. These large and robust effects are present despite the inclusion of industry
and EA fixed effects. In other words, the positive effect of cluster strength on wage growth is
not simply reflecting the fact that wage growth in certain types of industries and regions was
more rapid than others. Instead, these results suggest a systematic and positive relationship
between the growth rate in region-industry wages and the initial cluster environment.
We also examine in Table 9 the role of clusters in patenting (models 9-3 and 9-4), and
our main industry growth results hold. We find that higher initial levels of (patent-based)
industry specialization within the EA-industry is associated with a reduction in the growth rate in
the number of granted patents. However, an initially stronger cluster environment (based on
patenting) is associated with an increase in the growth rate of patenting.47 These results are
consistent with the wage findings. Indeed, regional clusters with higher patenting may be those
with higher wages, and region-industry patenting growth is likely to be associated with higher
wage jobs.
Finally, we evaluate the growth in the count of establishments (an investment and
entrepreneurship-related performance dimension). Prior studies find that a large component of
employment growth is explained by the opening of new establishments (e.g., see Haltiwanger,
Jarmin, and Miranda, 2009). The observed positive relationship between strong clusters and
employment growth could then be partially attributed to an increase in the number of new
businesses. Indeed, we find that after conditioning for convergence at the EA-industry level, a
stronger surrounding cluster environment is associated with an increase in business formation (95 and 9-6).
These findings suggest that clusters matter not only for job creation but for wages, new
business formation and innovation. The particular types of externalities driving growth may
differ across these dimensions (e.g., see Bostic, Gans and Stern, 1997; Cingano and Schivardi,
2004; Henderson, 2003). Input-output linkages, demand conditions, institutional strength, skills,
47

We need to be cautious about the patenting analysis because the patents granted in an EA-industry and EA-cluster
in a given year is a flow variable and may not necessarily capture the innovative activity of that specific year due to
the delay between patent application and patent granted.

33

and competition may matter differently for employment and productivity growth.

Further

research is needed on the complex relationship between clusters, productivity, innovation and
employment. A simultaneous assessment of the role of clusters on multiple dimensions of
economic performance will be an important subject for future research.
7.

Conclusions
In this paper we investigate the role of agglomeration in regional economic performance.

Our core empirical finding is the co-existence of convergence within narrow economic units with
agglomeration across complementary economic units captured by clusters. Industries located
within a strong cluster are associated with higher employment growth, a finding which is robust
across different clusters and regions. Industry employment growth is increasing in the strength
of related clusters in the region as well as the strength of the cluster in geographically adjacent
regions.

Strong clusters also foster growth in wages, the number of establishments, and

patenting. Importantly, these findings are conditioned on the average growth rate of individual
industries and regions; our empirical methodology allows us to disentangle the impact of clusters
from alternative drivers of regional economic performance.
We find that the cluster and related clusters surrounding a region-industry matters not
only for the growth of existing industries but also for the creation of new industries in a region.
In other words, new regional industries are born out of strong regional clusters. These findings
suggest that clusters play a crucial role in the path of regional economic development (Porter
1990, 1998, 2003; Swann, 1992).
These findings, taken together, have a number of implications. First, the traditional
distinction between industry specialization and regional diversity is misplaced. This dichotomy
overlooks the powerful role played by complementary economic activity in shaping economic
growth, and the central role of clusters as the manifestation of complementarity.

Narrow

regional specialization in an industry is likely to result in diminishing returns, and the presence
of unrelated economic activity is unlikely to significantly enhance opportunities for growth but
may increase congestion. However, the presence of complementary activity via clusters is a
strong driver of growth through allowing firms ready access to key inputs, better interactions
with customers, and facilitating experimentation and innovation.

34

Second, prior studies

have focused on

individual channels

through which

complementarities might operate. Building on Feldman and Audretsch (1999), for example,
numerous studies have emphasized the role of the local scientific knowledge base and the
potential for knowledge spillovers in shaping opportunities for innovation and entrepreneurship.
While our results are consistent with such findings, the impact of related economic activity on
economic performance is far broader. The presence of clusters, which arise out of multiple types
of complementarities, seems to be a primary driver of growth in employment (and in other
performance dimensions) across essentially all regions and clusters.
Our findings also inform the theoretical understanding of the main drivers of
agglomeration and the role of clusters in agglomeration.

While most theoretical work on

agglomeration emphasizes the potential for cost efficiencies, risk mitigation, or geographically
localized knowledge spillovers, the pervasive impact of clusters and related clusters suggests that
the underpinnings of agglomeration may be far broader. For example, clusters may not simply
reduce the cost of production but the cost of exchange, by enhancing trading relationships and
the transparency of local input and output markets.

The impact of local knowledge spillovers

likely does not simply accrue to a single firm in an isolated way; rather, related local discoveries
may simultaneously enhance the knowledge base of multiple local firms. In addition, qualitative
studies of clusters emphasize the central role of specialized local institutions (from training
facilities to infrastructure investments) in allowing potential complementarities to be realized
(Porter and Emmons, 2003; Sölvell et al., 2006). While the precise design, role, and operation of
such institutions varies widely by circumstance, little theoretical or empirical research has
examined the impact of these localized institutions in shaping regional economic performance.
Our findings suggest that the highest return policies, from the standpoint of local
employment growth and other performance metrics, are likely to be those that prioritize
complementarities across related economic activities. Such policies appear to be more effective
than those that seek to attract a particular type of investment, offer incentives to benefit a small
number of firms, or favor particular high-technology fields such as biotechnology or software if
the region has little strength in those areas. Instead the focus should be on how to leverage a
region’s strong clusters (Porter, 1990, 1998, 2003; Rodríguez-Clare, 2005, 2007; Cortright,
2006; Ketels and Memedovic, 2008). New industries will grow out of the most successful
existing clusters.

35

Our results suggest that regional economic performance depends crucially on the cluster
composition across nearby regions rather than within narrow political boundaries. The benefits
arising from clusters often span multiple jurisdictions (and even states). Policies that enhance
complementarities across jurisdictions, such as supporting infrastructure and institutions that
facilitate access to demand, skills or suppliers in neighboring clusters, may be important tools for
regional development. More research is needed to assess the role of specific state and Federallevel policies in catalyzing cluster growth.
Our analysis also proposes several directions for future research. While the current
analysis takes the initial state of the cluster environment as a given, and holds cluster definitions
constant, cluster structure can evolve over time. For example, whereas electronic computers
(SIC 3571) may have been the central industry within the information technology cluster on an
historical basis, it is possible that software (SIC 7372) may be the core industry within that
cluster going forward. However, few studies have examined how the co-location patterns of
industries change over time, or the role of the historical composition of industries in a region in
shaping new industry growth. Understanding the drivers of the evolution of clusters is a crucial
direction for future research.

36

8.

References

Alcacer, J., 2006, “Location Choices across the Value Chain: How Activity and Capability
Influence Collocation,” Management Science 52 (10), pp. 1457-1471.
Alcacer, J. and W. Chung, 2010, “Location Strategies for Agglomeration Economies,” Harvard
Business School Working Paper, No. 10-064.
Anselin, L., 1988, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models, Dorddrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Audretsch, D.B., 1995, Innovation and Industry Evolution, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Baldwin R., R. Forslid, P. Martin, G. Ottaviano and F. Robert-Nicoud, 2003, Public Policies and
Economic Geography, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1991, “Convergence across States and Regions,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 107-182.
Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1992, “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, University
of Chicago Press, 100 (2), pp. 223-51.
Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bresnahan, T., A. Gambardella (eds.), 2004, Building High-Tech Clusters. Silicon Valley and
Beyond. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Benhabib, J. and M. Spiegel, 1994, “The Role of Human Capital in Economic Development:
Evidence from Aggregate Cross-Country Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34, pp.
143-173.
Beugelsdijk, S., P. McCann, R. Mudambi, 2010, “Place, Space and Organization -- Economic
Geography and the Multinational Enterprise,” Journal of Economic Geography, 10 (4),
pp., 485-493.
Bönte, W, 2004, “Innovation and Employment Growth in Industrial Clusters: Evidence from
Aeronautical Firms in Germany.” International Journal of the Economics and Business,
11 (3), pp. 259-278.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman and J. Van Reenen, 2005, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and
Product Market Rivalry,” CEP Discussion Paper, 675.
Boschma, R., 2005, “Proximity and Innovation: A Critical Assessment,” Regional Studies, 39,
pp. 61-74.
Bostic, R.W., J.S. Gans, and S. Stern, 1997, “Urban Productivity and Factor Growth in the Late
Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Urban Economics, 41(1), pp. 38-55.
Caves, R.E., 1996, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University.
Ciccone, A. and R. Hall, 1996, “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,” American
Economic Review, 86(1), pp. 54-70.
Cingano F. and F. Schivardi, 2004, “Identifying the Sources of Local Productivity Growth,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2 (4), pp. 720-742.

37

Combes, P.P., G. Duranton, and L. Gobillon, 2008, “Spatial Wage Disparities: Sorting Matters!,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 63 (2), pp. 2723-742.
Combes, P.P., 2000, “Economic Structure and Local Growth: France, 1984-1993,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 47, pp. 329-355.
Cortright, J., 2006, “Making Sense of Clusters: Regional Competitiveness and Economic
Development,” The Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program,
http://www.brookings.edu/reports/2006/03cities_cortright.aspx.
Cortright J.and H. Mayer, 2002, “Signs of Life: The Growth of Biotechnology Centers in the
U.S.,” The Brookings Institution.
De la Fuente, A., 2002, “On the Sources of Convergence: A Close Look at the Spanish Regions,”
European Economic Review, 46 (3), pp. 569-599.
Delgado, M., 2007, “Do Clusters Really Matter for Companies’ Competitive Strategies?
Evidence at the Country Level,” Manuscript.
Delgado, M., M.E. Porter and S. Stern, 2012, “Defining Clusters of Related Industries,” Mimeo.
Delgado M., M.E. Porter and S. Stern, 2010, “Clusters and Entrepreneurship,” Journal of
Economic Geography, 10 (4), pp. 495-518.
Dobkins, L.H. and Y.M. Ioannides 2001, “Spatial Interactions Among U.S. Cities: 1900-1990,”
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31, pp. 701-731.
Dumais, G., G. Ellison, E.L. Glaeser, 2002, “Geographic Concentration as a Dynamic Process,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (2), pp. 193-204.
Duranton, G., 2007, “Urban Evolutions: The Fast, the Slow, and the Still,” American Economic
Review, 97(1), pp. 197-221.
Duranton, G. and H.G. Overman, 2005, “Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 72 (4), pp. 1077-1106
Duranton, G. and Puga, D., 2001, “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the
Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review, 91(5), pp. 1454-1477.
Ellison, G. and E. Glaeser, 1997, “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries:
A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, pp. 889-927.
Ellison, G. and E. Glaeser, W. Kerr, 2010, “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
from Coagglomeration Patterns,” The American Economic Review, 100, pp. 1195-1213.
Feldman, M.P. and Audretsch, D., 1999, “Innovation in cities: Science-based diversity,
specialization and localized competition,” European Economic Review, 43, pp. 409-429.
Feldman, M.P., 2001, “The Entrepreneurial Event Revisited: An Examination of New Firm
Formation in the Regional Context,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 10, pp. 861-891.
Feser, E., H. Renski, H. Goldstein, 2008, “Clusters and Economic Development Outcomes,”
Economic Development Quarterly, 22 (4), pp. 324-344.
Feser, E.J. and E.M. Bergman, 2000, “National Industry Cluster Templates: A Framework for
Applied Regional Cluster Analysis,” Regional Studies, 34 (1), pp. 1-19.
Findeisen, S. and J. Südekum, 2008, “Industry Churning and the Evolution of Cities: Evidence
for Germany,” Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2), pp. 326-339.
38

Forni, M and S. Paba, 2002, “Spillovers and the Growth of Local Industries,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 50, pp. 151-171.
Frenken, K., F.G. van Oort and T. Verburg, 2007, “Related Variety, Unrelated Variety and
Regional Economic Growth,” Regional Studies, 41 (5), pp. 685-697.
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A.J. Venables, 1999, The Spatial Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Fujita, M. and J.F. Thisse, 2002, Economics of Agglomeration: Cities, Industrial Location and
Regional Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Geppert, K. and A. Stephan, 2008. “Regional Disparities in the European Union: Convergence
and Agglomeration,” Papers in Regional Science, 87(2), pp. 193-217.
Glaeser, E.L., H.D. Kallal, J.A. Scheinkman, and A. Shleifer, 1992, “Growth in Cities,” Journal
of Political Economy 100(6), pp. 1126-1152.
Glaeser, E.L., and W.R. Kerr, 2009, “Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How
Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?” Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, 18(3), pp. 623-663.
Greenstone M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti, 2008, “Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
Evidence from Million Dollar Plants,” NBER Working Paper No. 13833.
Haltiwanger, J., R.S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda, 2009, “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young,” Working Paper.
Hausmann R. and B. Klinger, 2006, “Structural Transformation and Patterns of Comparative
Advantage in the Product Space,” CID Working Paper No. 128.
Hausmann, R. and D. Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” Journal of
Development Economics, 72, pp. 603-633.
Henderson, J.V., 2005,“Urbanization and Growth,” at P. Aghion
Handbook of Economic Growth, P., North Holland.

and S. Durlauf (eds.),

Henderson, J.V., 2003, “Marshall's Scale Economies,” Journal of Urban Economics, 53, pp. 128.
Henderson, J.V., 1997, “Externalities and Industrial Development,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 42(3), pp. 449-470.
Henderson, J.V., A. Kuncoro and M. Turner, 1995, “Industrial Development in Cities,” Journal
of Political Economy, 103, pp. 1067-1090.
Higgins, M.J., D. Levy, and AT Young, 2006, “Growth and Convergence across the United
States: Evidence from County‐Level Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4),
pp. 671‐681.
Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg, R. Henderson. 1993. Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. Quarterly J. Econ., 108, pp. 577-598.
Jarmin, R, and J Miranda, 2002, “The Longitudinal Business Database,” CES Working Paper.
Johnson K.P. and J.R. Kort, 2004, “2004 Redefinition of the BEA Economic Areas,” at
http://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2004/11November/1104Econ-Areas.pdf.
39

Ketels, C. and O. Memedovic, “From Clusters to Cluster‐Based Economic Development,”
International Journal of Technological Learning, Innovation, and Development, 1, pp.
375-392
Klepper, S., 2007, “The Geography of Organizational Knowledge,” manuscript.
Krugman, P., 1991, ‘Increasing Returns and Economic Geography’, Journal of Political
Economy, 99(3), pp. 483-499.
LeSage, J.P. (1999), “The Theory and Practice of Spatial Econometrics,” Econometrics Toolbox
Functions for Matlab, at http://www.spatial-econometrics.com.
Magrini, S., 2004, “Regional (Di)Convergence,” in J. V. Henderson and J. F. Thisse (eds.)
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier North‐Holland,
pp. 2243‐2292.
Markusen, A., 1996, “Sticky Places in Slippery Space: A Typology of Industrial Districts,”
Economic Geography 72(3), pp. 293-313.
Marshall, A., 1920, Principles of Economics. London: MacMillan.
Moretti, E. 2004. “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
Production Functions.” American Economic Review 94, pp. 656-690.
Neary, P., 2001, “Of Hype and Hyperbolas: Introducing the New Economic Geography,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 39 (2), pp. 536–561.
Paci R. and S Usai, 2000, “The Role of Specialization and Diversity Externalities in the
Agglomeration of Innovative Activity,” Rivista Italiana degli Economisti, 2(2), pp. 237268.
Porter, M.E., 1990, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, Free Press, New York.
Porter, M.E., 1998, “Clusters and Competition: New Agendas for Companies, Governments, and
Institutions.” In M.E. Porter (ed.). On Competition. Harvard Business School Press,
Boston, pp. 197-299.
Porter, M.E., 2001, “Regions and the New Economics of Competition,” in A.J. Scott (ed.),
Global City-Regions. Trends, Theory, and Policy, New York: Oxford University Press,
pp. 145-151.
Porter, M.E., 2003, “The Economic Performance of Regions,” Regional Studies, 37, pp. 549-578.
Porter, M.E. and W. Emmons, 2003, “Institutions for Collaboration: Overview,” Harvard
Business School Note 703-436.
Porter, M.E., et al., 2004, “Competitiveness in Rural U.S. Regions: Learning and Research
Agenda,” Economic Development Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Quah, D.T., 1996, “Empirics for Economic Growth and Convergence,” European Economic
Review 40 (6), pp. 1353-1375.
Rodriguez-Clare, A., 2005, “Microeconomic Interventions after the Washington Consensus,”
Working Paper Series 524, Research Department, Inter-American Development Bank.

40

Rodríguez-Clare, A., 2007, “Clusters and Comparative Advantage: Implications for Industrial
Policy,” Journal of Development Economics, 82, pp. 43-57.
Rodrik, D., 2004, “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” manuscript prepared for
UNIDO.
Rosenthal, S.S and W. Strange, 2009, “Small Establishments/Big Effects: Agglomeration,
Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship,” in The Economics of Agglomeration,
Edward Glaeser (ed), National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago
Press, 277-302.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange, 2003, “Geography, Industrial Organization, and
Agglomeration,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (2), pp. 377-393.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange, 2004, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
Economies,” in J.V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics, vol. 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.
Saxenian, A., 1994, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route
128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Scherer, F. M., 1982, “Inter-industry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 64(4), pp. 627-634.
Silverman, B.S., 1999, “Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate
Diversification,” Management Science, 45(8), pp. 1109-1124.
Sölvell, Ö., G. Lindqvist, and C. Ketels, 2006, “Cluster Initiatives in Developing and Transition
Economies.”
Report,
Ivory Tower
AB,
Stockholm,
http://www.clusterresearch.org/dldevtra.htm.
Sorenson, O. and P.G. Audia, 2000, “The Social Structure of Entrepreneurial Activity:
Geographic Concentration of Footwear Production in the United States, 1940-1989,”
Amer. J. Sociology, 106 (2), pp. 424-62.
Swann, P., 1992, The Dynamics of Industrial Clusters, Oxford.
Swann, P., 1998, “Clusters in the US Computing Industry,” in Swann, P., M. Prevezer and D.
Stout (eds.), 1998, The Dynamics of Industrial Clustering: International Comparisons in
Computing and Biotechnology, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 76-105.
Venables, A.J., 1996, “Equilibrium Locations of Vertically Linked Industries,” International
Economic Review, 37 (2), pp. 341-360.
Wennberg, K. and G. Lindqvist, 2008, “The Effect of Clusters on the Survival and Performance
of New Firms,” Small Business Economics, 34 (3), pp. 221-241.

41

Table 1: Variables’ Definitions and Descriptive Statistics
Variables

Definition

EAIndustry
N=55083

PERCENTAGE EMPLOYMENT
CHANGE1990-05
EMPLOYMENT GROWTH1990-05

(employ05-employ90)/employ90

REG EMPLOYMENT GROWTH
(Outside Strong Clusters)
EMPLOYMENT1990

Regional (total) employment
growth excluding strong clusters
Employment level

INDUSTRY SPEC1990

Industry employment-based
Location Quotient

ln(employ2005/employ1990)

LQi,r 

CLUSTER SPEC*1990

employi,r employr
employi,US employUS

Cluster employment-based LQ

LINKED CLUSTERS SPEC1990

1.26
(7.92)
-.32
(1.69)

EARegion (EA)
Cluster
N=177
N=6694
Mean (Std Dev)
.08
(1.03)

576.45
(2545.35)
2.34
(7.21)

4750.64
(15044.92)

1.31
(2.20)
1.15
(1.04)

1.29
(2.53)
1.14
(1.34)

Related clusters’ employmentbased LQ (weighted by cluster
overlap)
CLUSTER SPEC in
Neighboring clusters’ average
1.28
NEIGHBORS1990
employment-based LQ
(1.28)
SIC2 SPEC1990
Two-digit SIC code employment1.31
based LQ
(1.95)
REG STRONG CLUSTERS1990
Number of strong clusters in a
region (i.e., clusters with top 20%
Cluster Spec by cluster)
REG EMPLOYMENT 1990
Regional (total) employment
(Outside strong clusters)
(outside the strong clusters)
REG CLUSTER STRENGTH1990
Share of regional traded employ
in the region’s strong clusters
Notes: These indicators are based on the CBP data.
*
In the EA-industry models Cluster Specialization is measured outside the industry.

.29
(.15)

1.23
(1.40)
6.91
(3.28)
435015.3
(810172.5)
.47
(.15)

Table 2: Average EA-Industry Annualized Employment Growth over 1990-2005 by Level
of Industry and Cluster Strength (N=55083)
INDUSTRY SPEC1990

CLUSTER SPEC1990
(Outside the industry)

Low
High

Low

High

∆EMPLOYi,r= 0.13

∆EMPLOYi,r= 0.00

N= 16,732

N=10,978

∆EMPLOYi,r= 0.20

∆EMPLOYi,r= 0.01

N= 10,964

N= 16,409

Notes: ∆EMPLOY is the average EA-industry annualized employment percentage change (1/15*(employ05employ90)/employ90). Low and High are based on the median of the variable for each industry. All the averages are
significantly different from each other at 1% level.

42

Table 3: EA-Industry Employment Growth over 1990-2005 (N=55083)

Ln INDUSTRY SPEC
Ln CLUSTER SPEC
(Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS
SPEC
Ln CLUSTER SPEC in
NEIGHBORS
Ln SIC2 SPEC
(Outside the industry)
EA Fixed Effects
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
R-Squared

INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT GROWTH

3-1

3-2

-.397
(.006)

-.437
(.006)
.187
(.011)

No
No
.113

No
No
.125

3-3

-.395
(.006)
.200
(.008)

Yes
Yes
.156

3-4

All
Industries
N=99047

-.414
(.003)
.216
(.008)

Yes
Yes
.159

3-5

Random
Clusters

-.355
(.000)
-.001
(.011)

Yes
Yes

3-6

3-7

3-8

-.388
(.006)

-.442
(.007)
.160
(.013)
.042
(.021)
.050
(.018)

-.405
(.006)
.149
(.009)
.091
(.013)
.104
(.012)

No
No
.126

Yes
Yes
.159

SIC2

.197
(.008)
Yes
Yes
.154

Notes: Bold and Bold-Italic numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% and 5% levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered by EA-Cluster. Model (3-5) uses random cluster definition and reports the bootstrapped standard
errors. In (3-6) traded industries are grouped by 2-digit SIC code and the standard errors are clustered by EA-SIC2. All
the models (but 3-1) include a dummy equal to 1 if any employment in 1990 in the cluster (outside the industry); and
models (3-7) and (3-8) also include dummies equal to 1 if any initial employment in the related clusters or in the
neighboring clusters (not reported). Our findings only change trivially when dropping these dummies.

Table 4: Creation of New EA-industries over 1990-2005 (Probit Models; N=48430)
Ln CLUSTER SPEC
(Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC

ANY POSITIVE EMPLOYMENT2005
4-1
4-2
.016
.033
(.002)
(.002)

Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS
EA Fixed Effects
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
(Pseudo) R-Squared

No
No
.008

Yes
Yes
.304

4-3
.026
(.002)
.015
(.004)
.021
(.003)
Yes
Yes
.306

Notes: Bold numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% level. The sample conditions on EA-industries with zero
employment in 1990. The reported coefficients are the marginal effects of the estimated probit model. Standard errors
are clustered by EA-Cluster. All explanatory variables are in logs. In addition to the reported explanatory variables, all
the models include a dummy equal to 1 if any employment in 1990 in the cluster (outside the industry); and model (43) also includes dummies equal to 1 if any employment in the related clusters or in the neighboring clusters. Our
findings only change trivially when dropping these dummies.

43

Table 5: EA-Industry Employment Growth by Region Size (N=55083)
Ln INDUSTRY SPEC
Ln CLUSTER SPEC (Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC
Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS
EA SIZE*Ln INDUSTRY SPEC
EA SIZE*Ln CLUSTER SPEC
EA SIZE*Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC
EA SIZE*Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS
EA Fixed Effects
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
R-Squared

INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT GROWTH
-.352
-.365
(.010)
(.010)
.166
.113
(.011)
(.013)
.051
(.018)
.151
(.019)
-.068
-.065
(.012)
(.012)
.063
.065
(.013)
(.015)
.078
(.024)
-.082
(.024)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
.157
.161

Notes: Bold numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1%. EA SIZE is a dummy variable equal to 1 for large EAs.
All specifications include EA and Industry fixed effects.

44

Table 6: Estimated Coefficients of Industry and Cluster Specialization by Cluster: EAIndustry Employment Growth (model 3-3, Table 3)
Cluster
Type
Industry Spec Cluster Spec
Business Services
Service
-0.753
0.361
Financial Services
Service
-0.598
0.307
Metal Manufacturing
Other
-0.383
0.304
Analytical Instruments
High-tech
-0.562
0.291
Production Technology
Other
-0.368
0.291
Processed Food
Other
-0.230
0.284
Heavy Construction Services
Service
-0.348
0.254
Plastics
Other
-0.384
0.253
Communications Equipment
High-tech
-0.557
0.252
Automotive
Other
-0.270
0.237
Hospitality and Tourism
Service
-0.497
0.226
Medical Devices
High-tech
-0.363
0.221
Apparel
Other
-0.665
0.218
Agricultural Products
Other
-0.260
0.208
Oil and Gas Products and Services
Service
-0.162
0.206
Heavy Machinery
Other
-0.346
0.199
Aerospace Vehicles and Defense
High-tech
-0.294
0.188
Fishing and Fishing Products
Other
-0.147
0.185
Information Technology
High-tech
-0.544
0.183
Publishing and Printing
Other
-0.501
0.174
Textiles
Other
-0.409
0.170
Building Fixtures, Equipment and Services
Other
-0.486
0.170
Prefabricated Enclosures
Other
-0.174
0.160
Biopharmaceuticals
High-tech
-0.393
0.160
Motor Driven Products
Other
-0.287
0.158
Sporting, Recreational and Children's Goods
Other
-0.640
0.157
Chemical Products
High-tech
-0.273
0.154
Transportation and Logistics
Service
-0.355
0.153
Jewelry and Precious Metals
Other
-0.353
0.144
Forest Products
Other
-0.222
0.119
Furniture
Other
-0.409
0.112
Leather and Related Products
Other
-0.504
0.108
Education and Knowledge Creation
Service
-0.422
0.107
Construction Materials
Other
-0.328
0.106
Lighting and Electrical Equipment
Other
-0.285
0.105
Tobacco
Other
-0.352
0.104
Aerospace Engines
High-tech
-0.213
0.102
Footwear
Other
-0.582
0.077
Power Generation and Transmission
Service
-0.483
0.076
Entertainment
Service
0.057
-0.540
Distribution Services
Service
-0.013
-0.403
Note: Bold and Bold-Italic numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Table 7: EA-Cluster Employment Growth over 1990-2005 (N=6694)
Ln CLUSTER SPEC
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC
Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS
EA Fixed Effects
CLUSTER Fixed Effects
R-Squared

CLUSTER EMPLOY GROWTH
-.348
-.403
(.017)
(.016)
.075
.095
(.022)
(.019)
.150
.129
(.020)
(.019)
No
Yes
No
Yes
.147
.367

Note: Bold numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% level. Standard errors clustered by EA.

45

Table 8: Regional Employment Growth Outside the Strong Clusters (N=177)
REG CLUSTER STRENGTH
Ln REG EMPLOYMENT
(Outside strong clusters)
NATIONAL EMPLOY GROWTH of
STRONG CLUSTERS (Outside the EA)
CENSUS REGION Fixed Effects
R-Squared

REG EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (Outside Strong Clusters)
.192
.251
(.081)
(.065)
-.017
(.007)
.056
(.048)
No
Yes
.038
.414

Note: Bold numbers refer to coefficients significant at 5%. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 9: EA-Industry Growth in Wages, Patenting and Establishments (1990-2005)
∆WAGE

Ln INDUSTRY WAGE
Ln CLUSTER WAGE
(Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS WAGE

N=45843
1
2

-.798
(.006)
.076
(.009)

Ln CLUSTER WAGE in NEIGHBORS
Ln INDUSTRY SPECPatent

∆ PATENT

-.799
(.006)
.069
(.010)
.005
(.009)
.077
(.017)

Ln CLUSTER SPECPatent
(Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPECPatent

N=40266
3

-.780
(.009)
.136
(.013)

Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORSPatent
Ln INDUSTRY SPECEstab

∆ ESTABLISHMENT

4

-.787
(.009)
.080
(.015)
.159
(.025)
.154
(.021)

Ln CLUSTER SPECEstab
(Outside the industry)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPECEstab

N=40266
5

-.393
(.005)
.167
(.007)

Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORSEstab
EA Fixed Effects
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
R-Squared

Yes
Yes
.464

Yes
Yes
.465

Yes
Yes
.498

Yes
Yes
.502

Yes
Yes
.215

6

-.399
(.005)
.132
(.009)
.142
(.011)
.028
(.010)
Yes
Yes
.220

Note: Bold numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% level. Standard errors are clustered by EA-cluster. All
models include EA-industry with positive economic activity (wages, patents or establishments) in both 1990 and 2005.
All specifications include EA and Industry fixed effects.

46

Figure 1: Employment Growth across US Economic Areas (1990-2003)

Note:

Adapted from Porter (2003). Based on County Business Patterns dataset.

Figure 2a: EA-Industry Employment Growth: Convergence and Cluster Effects by Cluster
Distribution of Coef. of Industry Spec by cluster
(Mean=-.40 Std. Dev=.14; 41 clusters)

Distribution of Coef. of Cluster Spec by cluster
(Mean=.18 Std. Dev=.08; 41 clusters)

Figure 2b: EA-Industry Employment Growth: Convergence and Cluster Effects by EA
Distribution of Coef. of Industry Spec by EA
(Mean= -.38 Std. Dev=.10; 177 EAs)

Distribution of Coef. of Cluster Spec by EA
(Mean=.19 Std. Dev=.09; 177 EAs)

Note: The graphs plot the Kernel density of the estimated coefficients, which are obtained by estimating model 3-3
(Table 3) allowing the Industry Spec and Cluster Spec coefficients to vary by cluster (Figure 2a) or by EA (Figure 2b).

47

Appendix A
Table A1: Attributes of Traded Clusters in the US Economy, 2005.
Name (41 traded clusters)
Aerospace Engines
Aerospace Vehicles & Defense
Analytical Instruments
Biopharmaceuticals
Chemical Products
Communications Equipment
Information Technology
Medical Devices
Business Services
Distribution Services
Education & Knowledge Creation
Entertainment
Financial Services
Heavy Construction Services
Hospitality & Tourism
Oil & Gas Products & Services
Power Generation & Transmission
Transportation & Logistics
Agricultural Products
Apparel
Automotive
Building Fixtures, Equip. & Services
Construction Materials
Fishing & Fishing Products
Footwear
Forest Products
Furniture
Heavy Machinery
Jewelry & Precious Metals
Leather & Related Products
Lighting & Electrical Equipment
Metal Manufacturing
Motor Driven Products
Plastics
Prefabricated Enclosures
Processed Food
Production Technology
Publishing & Printing
Sporting, Recreational & Children's
Goods
Textiles
Tobacco
Totals
Average
Notes:

Type
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
High-tech
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.
Other Mfg.

Narrow Clusters
Broad Clusters
2005
2005
Employ
Patents
#Industries
#Industries
(1000)
(1000)
total
svc.
82.669
0.084
2
0
23
319.800
0.393
6
0
28
578.593
9.654
10
0
27
278.582
2.201
4
0
26
359.703
2.853
21
0
40
245.582
9.911
9
0
35
644.532
12.390
9
3
27
375.063
2.765
8
0
29
4748.123
0.177
21
21
26
1803.523
0.052
19
19
23
2779.839
0.367
10
9
38
1174.900
1.482
13
9
20
3212.496
0.016
21
21
32
1752.938
0.767
19
6
30
2671.877
0.239
22
19
34
415.732
0.487
12
6
24
267.663
0.503
6
1
16
1580.522
0.194
17
16
29
279.265
0.100
20
6
46
289.520
0.166
27
0
34
1164.530
4.033
15
0
32
25
2
57
665.425
0.849
174.402
0.470
11
0
23
44.402
0.068
3
0
4
22.926
0.066
5
0
7
361.999
0.521
8
0
21
280.577
0.153
10
0
26
354.144
1.177
10
2
26
101.919
0.024
7
1
11
120.546
0.394
13
0
22
229.775
1.070
10
0
24
1131.574
2.082
44
0
67
322.544
1.466
12
0
28
740.110
2.988
9
0
22
267.696
0.312
12
0
20
1321.019
0.560
43
2
49
535.772
3.688
23
0
46
720.938
1.436
26
3
36
86.492
0.312
3
0
8
257.760
32.773

0.409
0.042

20
4

0
0

25
4

32798.242

66.922

589
14.4

146
3.6

1145
27.9

Based on County Business Patterns (CBP) and CMP datasets. There are 589 traded four-digit SIC code
industries (146 of them are service (svc.) industries). Service-oriented clusters are those with more than 35%
of employment in service industries. High-tech clusters are manufacturing clusters with high patenting.

48

Table A2: Automotive Cluster: Constituent Industries and Related Clusters

2396
3052
3061
3210
3230
3322
3465
3519
3544
3549
3592
3711
3714
3799
3824

Automotive and apparel trimmings
Rubber and plastics hose and belting
Mechanical rubber goods
Flat glass
Products of purchased glass
Malleable iron foundries
Automotive stampings
Internal combustion engines, n.e.c.
Special dies, tools, jigs and fixtures
Metalworking machinery, n.e.c.
Carburetors, pistons, rings, valves
Motor vehicles and car bodies
Motor vehicle parts and accessories
Transportation equipment, n.e.c.
Fluid meters and counting devices

Cluster Overlap ( c ,b ) with related clusters

Furniture

Aerospace
Engines

Motor Driven
Products

Heavy
Machinery

Metal
Manufacturing

4-digit SIC Industries

Production
Technology

Clusters Related to Automotive (Shared industries)

X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X

.08

.08

X

X
.32

.25

.03

.03

Source: Porter's (2003) cluster definitions. These 15 industries constitute the narrow cluster definition. The
Automotive cluster has more than 30% overlap with the Production Technology cluster (by average of the percent of
narrow industries shared in each direction).

Table A3: Location of Strong Automotive Clusters in 1990
Top 20% cluster specialization (LQ) &
Top 10% share of US cluster employment (SHR)
LQ
SHR
%
Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI
9.5
25.3
Toledo-Fremont, OH
6.5
2.7
Fort Wayne-Huntington-Auburn, IN
6.4
2.1
Dayton-Springfield-Greenville, OH
5.1
2.9
Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI
4.5
3.0
Indianapolis-Anderson-Columbus, IN
3.6
4.3
South Bend-Mishawaka, IN-MI
3.6
1.3
Cleveland-Akron-Elyria, OH
3.2
6.1
Nashville-Murfreesboro-Columbia, TN
3.0
2.4
Milwaukee-Racine-Waukesha, WI
2.2
2.2
Columbus-Marion-Chillicothe, OH
2.1
1.8

Top 20% Cluster Specialization (LQ)

La Crosse, WI-MN
Traverse City, MI
Jonesboro, AR
Cape Girardeau-Jackson, MO-IL
Lincoln, NE
Huntsville-Decatur, AL
Peoria-Canton, IL
Asheville-Brevard, NC
Kearney, NE
Madison-Baraboo, WI
Mason City, IA
Alpena, MI
Erie, PA
Louisville-Scottsburg, KY-IN
Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR-MO
Buffalo-Niagara-Cattaraugus, NY
Joplin, MO
Oklahoma City-Shawnee, OK
Evansville, IN-KY
Knoxville-Sevierville-La Follette, TN
Lexington-Fayette-Richmond, KY
Waterloo-Cedar Falls, IA
Note: Based on County Business Patterns dataset. The strong Automotive clusters are the top 20% EAs by
employment Cluster Spec (33 EAs out of 173 EAs with any employment in automotive cluster).

LQ
4.1
3.9
3.8
3.3
3.2
3.1
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

SHR
%
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.3
1.0
0.1
0.1
0.4
1.1
0.2
1.2
0.2
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.1

49

Figure A1: Location of Strong Regional Clusters in 1990 (Top 20% of EAs by employment
Cluster Specialization)

EAs with high cluster specialization
EAs with high cluster specialization and high share of US cluster employment (top 10% of EAs)
EAs with high share of US cluster employment but without high cluster specialization (these
regional clusters are not considered strong clusters)

Fig. A1.1: Strong Automotive Clusters in 1990 (See Table A3. Based on CBP dataset)

Fig. A1.2: Strong Financial Services Clusters in 1990 (Based on CBP dataset)

50

Appendix B
Table B1: Explanatory Variables: Correlation Matrix (N=55083)
1
2
1 INDUSTRY SPEC Employ
2 CLUSTER SPEC Employ (Outside the industry)
.20
3 RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC Employ
.10
.20
4 CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBOR Employ
.20
.50
Note: All correlations are significant at 1% level.

3

.21

Table B2: Variables’ Definitions and Descriptive Statistics for Table 5 (EA-industry
growth)
Variables

Definition

WAGE GROWTH1990-05

PATENT GROWTH1990-05

EA-industry (real) wage growth
ln(wage2005/wage1990)
EA-industry (count of)
establishment growth
EA-industry patent growth

INDUSTRY WAGE1990

EA-industry wage

CLUSTER WAGE 1990
(Outside the industry)
RELATED CLUSTERS WAGE1990

Cluster wage

CLUSTER WAGE in
NEIGHBORS1990
INDUSTRY ESTABLISHMENT1990

Neighboring clusters’ average
wage
EA-industry count of
establishments
EA-industry establishment-based
Location Quotient(LQ)

ESTABLISHMENT GROWTH1990-05

INDUSTRY SPECEstab, 1990

Related clusters’ wage

LQi,r 

estabi,r estabr
estabi,US estab US

CLUSTER SPECEstab, 1990

Cluster establishment-based LQ

RELATED CLUSTERS SPECEstab, 1990
CLUSTER SPEC in
NEIGHBORSEstab,1990
INDUSTRY PATENT1990

Related clusters’ establishmentbased LQ (weighted by cluster
overlap)
Neighboring clusters’ average
establishment-based LQ
EA-industry patents granted

INDUSTRY SPECPatent, 1990

EA-industry patent-based LQ

CLUSTER SPECPatent, 1990

Cluster patent-based LQ

RELATED CLUSTERS SPECPatent, 1990

Related clusters’ patent-based LQ
(weighted by cluster overlap)
Neighboring clusters’ average
patent-based LQ

CLUSTER SPEC in
NEIGHBORSPatent, 1990

Mean
(Std Dev)
.12
(.49)
.17
(.87)
.19
(1.30)
34032.79
(25977.68)
35069.27
(18070.13)
54035.93
(28498.58)
33509.65
(9707.44)
19.31
(83.29)
1.63
(2.93)

Source
LBD
CBP

USPTO
LBD
LBD
LBD
LBD
CBP
CBP

1.06
(1.10)
.96
(.44)

CBP

1.02
(.76)
.90
(5.08)
1.27
(2.32)
1.13
(1.29)
1.04
(.48)
1.11
(.63)

CBP

CBP

USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO

Notes: These indicators are based on the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of the Census Bureau; County
Business Patterns (CBP); and United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) datasets. Wages in 2002 $US. The
number of EA-industries are 45843 (wage indicators), 48921(establishment indicators), and 40266 (patent indicators).

51

Table B3: EA-Industry Employment Growth over 1990-2005: Interdependencies among all
Traded Industries (N=55,083).
B3-1
B3-2
Ln INDUSTRY SPEC
-.441
-.383
(.006)
(.006)
Ln RELATED INDUSTRIES SPEC
2.196
(weighted by locational correlation)
(.070)
Ln RELATED INDUSTRIES SPEC
.463
(weighted by Input-Output link)
(.022)
EA Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
R-Squared
.174
.151

Notes: Bold and Bold-Italic numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% and 5% levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered by EA-cluster. In model 1 the relatedness between a pair of industries (i,j) is based on the locational
correlation of employment, while in model 2 relatedness is measured by input-output links (See Section 4).

Table B4: EA-Industry Employment Growth over 1990-2005
(N=104,523; Whole sample, including EA-industries w zero employ in base year).
INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT GROWTH
B4-1
B4-2
Ln INDUSTRY SPEC
-.339
-.346
(.006)
(.006)
Ln CLUSTER SPEC
.123
.095
(Outside the industry)
(.005)
(.006)
Ln RELATED CLUSTERS SPEC
.048
(.008)
Ln CLUSTER SPEC in NEIGHBORS
.073
(.007)
EA Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
INDUSTRY Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
R-Squared
.320
.322

Notes: Bold and Bold-Italic numbers refer to coefficients significant at 1% and 5% levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered by EA-Cluster. The specifications include a dummy equal to 1 if any positive employment in 1990
in the EA-industry.

52

