                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF FRIENDSHIP NETWORKS ON HEALTH BEHAVIORS
                           OF ADOLESCENTS

                                           Jason M. Fletcher
                                            Stephen L. Ross

                                         Working Paper 18253
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18253


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2012

We received valuable comments from numerous seminar participants at Baylor University, Cornell
University, Lafayette College, Lehigh University, Texas A&M, University of California-Santa Barbara,
University of Texas-Austin, Yale University, Population Association of American Conference, the
Annual Health Econometrics Workshop, NBER Summer Institute, Urban Economics Association,
and the Second Annual Economics of Risky Behaviors (AMERB) conference. We thank Yonghong
An, Michael Anderson, Tao Chen, Ethan Cohen-Cole, Bill Evans, Don Kenkel, Brian Krauth, Anna
Mueller, Bruce Sacerdote, Rusty Tchernis and Gautam Tripathi for specific comments that improved
the paper. Fletcher and Ross gratefully acknowledge support from the NICHD (1R21 HD066230-01A1).
Fletcher thanks the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health & Society Scholars program for its financial
support.

This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S.
Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 17 other agencies. Special
acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design.
Persons interested in obtaining data files from Add Health should contact Add Health, Carolina Population
Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (addhealth@unc.edu). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jason M. Fletcher and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Effects of Friendship Networks on Health Behaviors of Adolescents
Jason M. Fletcher and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 18253
July 2012
JEL No. I12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effects of friends’ health behaviors, smoking and drinking, on own health
behaviors for adolescents while controlling for the effects of correlated unobservables between those
friends. Specifically, the effect of friends’ health behaviors is identified by comparing similar individuals
who have the same friendship opportunities because they attend the same school and make similar
friendship choices, under the assumption that the friendship choice reveals information about an individual’s
unobservables. We combine this identification strategy with a cross-cohort, within school design so
that the model is identified based on across grade differences in the clustering of health behaviors
within specific friendship patterns. Finally, we use the estimated information on correlated unobservables
to examine longitudinal data on the on-set of health behaviors, where the opportunity for reverse causality
should be minimal. Our estimates for both behavior and on-set are very robust to bias from correlated
unobservables.


Jason M. Fletcher
Yale School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy and Management
60 College Street, #303
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
jason.fletcher@yale.edu

Stephen L. Ross
University of Connecticut
Department of Economics
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
        Estimating the Effects of Friendship Networks on Health Behaviors of Adolescents

Introduction
           Individuals in modern societies are socially connected in a multitude of ways. For
example, the social networking website Facebook.com has increased its membership by 100
million users in 2009, and now there are over 800 million users worldwide. Individuals use their
social networks to receive and send information as well as establish, update, and enforce social
norms of behavior. Both information acquisition as well as the impacts of social norms within
social networks could have large effects on health behaviors, particularly adolescents, who are
especially responsive to peer pressure (Brown et al. 1997). This heightening of peer influence
also takes place during the developmental stage when many of the most costly health outcomes
and behaviors are initiated. Our analysis will use detailed information on individual’s health
related behaviors and friendship networks from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health (Add Health) to examine the role of social interactions in these behaviors.
           Many studies of social interactions find evidence of clustering of outcomes or behaviors
above and beyond the clustering that might have been expected based on individuals’
observables, including studies of crime (Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman 1996), employment
(Topa 1999, Bayer, Ross, and Topa 2008), welfare usage (Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan
2000), pre-natal care (Aizer and Currie 2004), and youth health behaviors (Weinberg 2008). 1 We
also observe unexpectedly high levels of clustering on health behavior within grades of students
at the same school in our data. Specifically, if we look within schools, very little variation
remains across grades in student composition in terms of racial or socio-economic variables, but
we observe substantial across grade variation in health behaviors for student populations that are
nearly identical. The purpose of this paper is to examine whether the within friendship clustering
of health behaviors that lies underneath the clustering in specific grades is consistent with the
influence of friendship networks.
           Specifically, the primary purpose of our analysis is to examine the impact of friends’
health behaviors on a student’s own behavior while controlling for the likelihood that these
students are friends because they have similar unobservables. Our controls for correlated
unobservables are built on the idea that individuals who make the same friendship choices are
likely to be more similar overall than might be indicated by their observables. Specifically, we
1
    See Ross (2011), Durlauf (2004) and Ioannides and Loury (2004) for relevant literature reviews.

                                                           1
examine a partial equilibrium model of friendship formation and use the model to illustrate the
effect of controlling for fixed effects associated with clusters of observationally equivalent
individuals who face the same friendship opportunity set and make the same “types” of
friendship choices. We show that if individual students face an exogenous shock in terms of
exposure to health behaviors, then as the number of friendship choices becomes large the
unobservables of individuals in the same friendship choice cluster will converge to the same
value and so a cluster fixed effect will act as a non-parametric control for unobservable attributes
that influence friendship formation and might affect health behaviors. Further, we show that
these controls reduce bias in the estimates of friendship effects for a small number of choices.
Significantly, this structure also allows us to separate the influence of friends’ behaviors on
individual behavior from the influence of the observable attributes of those friends, a key part of
the reflection problem. This is true because the within friendship cluster comparisons are made
between individuals who have observationally equivalent sets of friends and so have similar
contextual effects, at least based on observables.
       Our identification strategy relies on several empirical features of adolescent friendship
networks. First, a large literature suggests that individuals exhibit strong racial, gender, and age
preferences when choosing their friends—likes choose likes (Mayer and Puller 2008, Weinberg
2008). Second, data from the Add Health suggests that most friendships occur within grades,
which is important for our use of cross-cohort variation in our identification strategy. Finally, as
discussed above, individual grades within schools are quite homogenous over racial and socio-
economic composition. Specifically, we will estimate models of youth drinking and smoking in
high school that control for the share of same sex-same school-same grade friends who exhibit
this behavior and fixed effects based on clusters of individuals who have the same race,
ethnicity, and maternal educational attainment (individual observables), same school (same
friendship opportunity set over observables), and same number of friends overall and for each
racial, maternal education, and other demographic subgroups (similar friendship choices).
Membership in a specific cohort in a school provides the shock in health behavior exposure, and
in our preferred specification, we randomly choose one individual from each grade per cluster so
that the model estimates are identified only by variation across cohorts within a school.
       This strategy can be illustrated by the following thought exercise: consider a 9th grader
and 10th grader who attend the same high school. As we show in detail below, these students face

                                                 2
very similar friendship opportunities with respect to racial, gender, and socioeconomic
composition of their same-grade classmates, and yet there is substantial clustering of health
behaviors into specific cohorts within schools. Thus, if we compare two students who choose
similar “types” of friends based on race, maternal education, and other demographic
characteristics, there will exist substantial differences in health behaviors between the across
cohort friendship opportunities, and those differences in friends’ health behaviors is arguably
quasi-random. The key is that the age difference between the 9th grader and the 10th grader (who
attend the same high school and have the same preferences for “types” of friends) has effectively
randomized these two students into their actual friendship network.
       We find evidence that this strategy produces somewhat smaller (no more than 10%
smaller) “network effect” estimates than the more standard school fixed effect models, and after
controlling for correlated unobservables we still find very robust evidence of network effects on
the smoking and drinking behavior of adolescents. Further, we find that peer health behaviors
tend to be weak predictors of predetermined student or family attributes with controlling for
friendship choices reducing estimated “effects” on predetermined attributes by between 45 and
97% relative to school fixed effect estimates. In addition, we demonstrate that the effect of
controlling for friendship choices on estimates of the influence of friends is quite similar across
subsamples of students with different numbers of friends. We find no evidence of falling causal
estimates of friends’ behaviors as we increase the number of friends, suggesting that the large
number of friendship demographics included in the construction of the fixed effect are sufficient
to control for individual unobservables even with a small number of actual reported friends.
       Finally, while our fixed effect estimator insulates us from bias associated with correlated
unobservables, neither the fixed effects nor our counterfactuals address concerns about reverse
causation where for example individuals who smoke choose friends who smoke. In a second
analysis, we show how our controls for correlated unobservables from the cross-sectional
analysis can be combined with longitudinal data to examine the effect of friends’ smoking or
drinking behavior at baseline on the onset of smoking or drinking prior to follow-up interviews
one year later. As in cross-sectional analyses, we find robust evidence that having friends who
smoke or drink contributes to the onset of smoking or drinking, and the inclusion of our controls
for unobservable student attributes have little impact on those estimates.



                                                 3
Background Literature
       A large body of research across multiple disciplines has shown very strong correlations in
health behaviors for individuals who are socially connected. One reason there has been so much
research and policy interest in exploring how networks affect health behaviors and outcomes is
the potentially large set of health interventions and policies that could be proposed to leverage
social influences on health behaviors. While the promise of using social networks to affect health
is compelling, so too are the empirical issues inherent in detecting causal effects of social
networks using observational data.
       Social interactions between individuals are believed to matter for those individuals’
outcomes across a variety of dimensions including labor market success, criminal activity,
educational performance and health related behaviors. However, evidence that social interactions
between friends, neighbors or acquaintances actually influence outcomes is usually quite
indirect. For example, the recent Moving To Opportunity field study (Kling, Liebman, Katz,
2007) demonstrates that moving to a lower poverty rate neighborhood improves the mental
health outcomes of mothers and the academic outcomes of their female children, but we do not
know whether these improvements arise due to exposure to broad environmental factors or
because the change in environment influences the individuals with whom these women and
children regularly interact socially. Similarly, a growing literature on peer effects in schools
(Gould, Lavy, and Passerman 2004, Lavy and Schlosser 2007, Lavy, Passerman and Schlosser
2008, Friesen and Krauth 2008, Bifulco, Fletcher and Ross 2011) documents a causal effect of
school demographics, such as gender, race, student ability and parental education, on educational
and health related outcomes using apparently random variation across cohorts of students at the
same school. Again, however, it is unknown whether these peer effects arise because cohort
composition affects the educational environment or because cohort composition affects the
demographic composition of each student’s friends and acquaintances.
       A few studies have provided evidence that explicitly suggest a causal effect of social
interactions on outcomes. For example, Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan (2000) show that
individuals who reside near others who speak the same language are more likely to use welfare if
they belong to a language group with high welfare usage suggesting that communication along
social links can contribute to welfare usage. Bayer, Ross and Topa (2008) find that people who
live on the same block and share key attributes in common, such as having children of similar

                                                4
age, are much more likely to work in the same location, and suggest that this cluster arises from
labor market referrals. Bayer, Hjalmarsson and Pozen (2009) show that sharing time in prison
with other juvenile offenders who have experience with a particular crime leads to a higher
likelihood of an offender committing that crime in the future.
        However, without exploiting information on actual social interactions between
individuals, it is very difficult to know whether these clusters of outcomes are driven by social
interactions or possibly heterogeneous effects of shared environment. For example, Aizer and
Currie (2004) find a strong correlation within groups in the likelihood of expectant mothers using
pre-natal care, but then demonstrate that these effects cannot arise due to information sharing
between mothers because the estimated effects are the same size for mothers who have
previously used the program. Further, recent work on peer effects in schools points to classroom
disruption and the impact of these disruptions on the classroom environment as a mechanism
(Lavy and Schlosser 2007, Aizer 2009, Hoekstra and Carrell In Press),2 rather than through
social relationships between students.
        The estimation of the causal effects of observed social interactions between individuals is
particularly challenging (Manski 1993). First, individuals who are friends share common
unobservables because they chose each other as friends, because they self-select into the same
social network, and because individuals in the same social network are simultaneously affected
by their shared environment. Second, it is difficult to separate the influence of an individual’s
behavior and an individual’s attributes in determining the health behaviors of his or her friends.
Third, individuals may select their friends or peers based on the behavior of those peers, rather
than adapting their behavior to the behavior of friends whom they have already selected.
Unfortunately, failure to overcome these empirical difficulties casts considerable doubt on the
current knowledge base linking the health behaviors among individuals in the same social
network. Providing evidence of the causal mechanisms and the likely effects of policies is
essential to be able to properly leverage social network effects on health behaviors.
        A few studies have attempted to identify the causal effect of observed social relationships
through a variety of mechanisms. Christakis and Fowler (2007, 2008) examine the effect of


2
 Lavy and Schlosser (2007) find that gender composition affects both academic outcomes and the levels of
classroom disruption. Aizer (2009) and Hoekstra and Carrell (In Press) find negative effects of having peers with
ADHD or peers who experience domestic abuse at home and so are more disruptive in the classroom, and in both
cases these effect weaken when either the ADHD is diagnosed or the domestic abuse is reported.

                                                         5
social networks on obesity and smoking in the medical literature arguing that the inclusion of
lags of the outcome for both the respondent and his/her friend are sufficient to control for
common environmental factors. Renna et al. (2008) and Trodgon et al. (2008) also examine
social contagion in obesity, but control for the endogeneity of friendship using a combination of
school fixed effects and instrumental variables for friend’s obesity (obesity status of friend’s
parents and in the case of Trodgon et al. also own birth weight and parent’s health status).
Halliday and Kwak (2009) examine the effect of friends’ obesity controlling for school and
individual fixed effects. Calvó-Armengol et al. (2009) and Patachini and Zenou (In Press)
examine the effect of friendship links on educational outcomes and crime, respectively,
controlling for network fixed effects and, in Patachini and Zenou, instrumenting for friend’s
criminal behavior using the criminal behavior of the friends own self-reported friends.
        The identification strategies pursued in all of these papers have significant limitations and
in several cases have been questioned in the literature.3 Cohen-Cole and Fletcher (2008a) show
that adding controls for environmental factors eliminates the social network effects for obesity
detected in models that use outcome lags as controls for unobserved individual and
environmental factors.4 Halliday and Kwak (2009) show that contagion effects identified in
models that control for school fixed effects are not robust to the inclusion of individual fixed
effects. Further, while network fixed effects control for within school selection into social
networks, the formation of human social networks tends to generate one large connected network
that usually includes a majority of the individuals in the network structure and the vast majority
of the social links in the network structure, and so most of the within school variation in friend’s
behaviors is retained in a within network analysis (Jackson 2008, Ross 2011). Finally,
instrumenting for friend’s behaviors with either parental attributes or the behavior of the friend’s
own self-reported friends may be problematic because these variables or correlates of these
variables are likely to be observable when friendships are formed.
        In the next section, we propose a new identification strategy arguing that observationally
similar individuals who make similar friendship choices are likely to be similar on
unobservables, and so identify the effect of friends’ behavior by comparing individuals who

3
  One exception is Nair et al. (2006) who find peer effects in prescription decisions using data on doctors’
prescriptions and the physicians on whose opinions they rely. They use the release of new drug guidelines as a
exogenous shock to peer prescription behavior
4
  Cohen-Cole and Fletcher (2008b) show more generally that parsimonious models that control for lagged outcomes
will produce social network effects even in outcomes where none are expected to exist, such as for height.

                                                      6
made similar friendship choices but have friends that exhibit different behaviors. We develop a
simple model of friendship formation and demonstrate circumstances under which consistent
estimates of the effect of friends’ health behavior on own health behavior can be uncovered
using this strategy, and show that identification in the presence of correlated unobservables
requires an exogenous shock in exposure to potential friends who exhibit certain behaviors.
Following the literature on peer effects, we propose that across cohort variation within schools
can provide this exogenous variation in exposure to health behaviors and demonstrate
empirically that health behaviors vary substantially more across cohorts than student attributes,
like race or parental education, evidence consistent with our identification strategy.5
         This approach is similar to earlier analyses by Dale and Krueger (2002) and Fu and Ross
(In Press) who use fixed effects for individuals who are equivalent on key attributes (college
application and admission decisions or residential location choice) and then have the same
outcome or make the same choice as a reduced form control in order to minimize bias from
unobservables. However, our analysis has the advantage over these earlier studies because the
identification strategy contains a clear source of exogenous variation that can create within
cluster differences in environment, namely differences in exposure to health behaviors associated
with belonging to a particular cohort or grade of students. Further, our friendship formation
model demonstrates the importance of having such a source of exogenous variation for
identification when attempting to identify causal effects in models with endogenous social
interactions.

Identification Strategy
         In this paper, we seek to estimate the effect of friends’ health behaviors while
overcoming several of the key empirical obstacles that we outlined above. The primary focus of
our analysis is to address selection into friendships and other social relationships based on a
student’s unobservables, but our fixed effect strategy also addresses reflection, at least on
observables, in that students in the same cluster have friends with the same observables. In

5
  Two studies combine across cohort variation with an aggregation strategy in order to identify the effect of
friendship. Babcock (2008) finds that being part of a cohort of more socially connected students raises the
likelihood of high school graduation and college attendance, and Nathan (2008) finds that racial heterogeneity of
friendships improves academic performance especially among whites. However, as with previous studies that
exploit aggregation, such as Culter and Glaeser (1997) on segregation or Evans et al. (1992) on neighborhood
poverty, it is impossible to know if the effects are driven by the implied social connections between individuals or
the associated aggregate environment (Ross 2011).

                                                          7
addition, in our follow-up analysis, we examine the on-set of health behaviors where reverse
causality is unlikely to be a concern.
         The intuition behind our approach is that we seek to form comparison groups based on
information in the data that describes the friendship options of students as well as the students’
choices of friends (given these options) following the premise that individuals who make similar
decisions or have similar outcomes when facing the same set of options likely are very similar on
both observable and unobservable attributes. The beginning of this section illustrates this
intuition, the next two subsections derive formal results.
         We begin with a slight modification to the relatively straightforward linear-in-means
model of social interactions (Case and Katz 1991, Manski, 1993; Moffit, 2001; Brock and
Durlauf, 2001) by restricting social interactions to arise from a subset of individuals “friends”
within a social environment (or school s) and dividing the unobservable into two components: an
unobservable that also affects friendship choice  i and an orthogonal unobservable error that

does not enter the friendship choice model  i .6 Specifically, we consider the following

empirical model:
                        1                        1                
          H is   s        H      js
                                             1  
                                                  n    X      j
                                                                      2  X i  3   is   is
                                                                     
                                                                                                                 (1)
                         ni   jis               i   jis       
where H is indicates a particular health behavior, such as smoking, of individual i in a broad

social environment or school s, X i contains the individual’s observable attributes, ni is the

number of friends of person i or more generally the number of friendship choices,  is defines

the set of individual i’s friends in s, H js and X js indicate the health behavior and observable

attributes of individuals within  is , and  s is a school fixed effect.
         As Manski (1993) demonstrates, even without the correlations in social networks that are
caused by sorting into and within networks based on unobservables, e.g. εis orthogonal to

6
  An alternative specification might involve a single unobservable each for determining health behavior and
friendship outcomes. The specification is equation (1) is equivalent to such a model with the imposition of one
restriction. We start with a model where the composite unobservables in equation (1) and a friendship formation
model,   ~is and  is , are correlated, and then we can define  is as ~is  E[~is |  is ] where we assume that the
 E[~is |  is ]   0  1 is so that the composite error ~is depends upon the uncorrelated disturbances  is and  is
and  1 is simply initialized to one in the health behavior model and generality is maintained by allowing  is to
enter the friendship formation model in a general manner.

                                                                     8
1                 

n    X       j
                    , this model is intrinsically unidentified.7 This occurs because group member
                   
 i   j is       
characteristics that might explain the health of group members j and so act as instruments for
health behavior cannot be excluded from the second stage regression for the health behaviors of i
because these attributes may just as reasonably directly influence i’s behaviors (the reflection
problem).8 9
           Our identification strategy is to sort students into clusters c based on comparing similar
students who faced similar friendship options and made similar friendship choices. This sorting
is based on both observable (to the researcher) and unobservable characteristics. Following the
standard selection argument: if two individuals make similar choices and differ on observables,
then they are expected to differ on unobservables, as well (Heckman, 1976). Similarly, if two
individuals are the same on observables and make similar choices, they are expected to be quite
similar on unobservables (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005). Therefore, as argued by Dale and
Krueger (2002) and Fu and Ross (2010), the inclusion of fixed effects for such clusters should
assure that we are comparing students who are similar on both observables and unobservables,
which weakens the correlation between peers’ behaviors and a student’s unobservable
characteristics. Further, since all students in a cluster should have similar observable
characteristics, the inclusion of the fixed effect also captures the observables associated with the
students’ peers while allowing the effect of behavioral differences within a cluster to identify the
effect of friends’ behavior on individual behavior. This feature of the approach solves the
empirical problem outlined above and isolates the causal effect of student behaviors on the
behavior of their friends from the effect of observable friends’ attributes.


7
  By this we mean that there is insufficient information in the regression to estimate uniquely the parameters of
interest (  1 in particular).
8
  For example, if one observes clustering of criminal behavior among friends whose parents have less education,
even after controlling for all possible individual and environmental factors that might explain such clustering
available in the data, we still cannot conclusively determine whether the clustering is caused because having friends
whose parents have less education contributes to criminal behavior or individuals whose parents have less education
are more likely to engage in criminal behavior and such criminal behavior influences the behavior of the individual’s
friends. See Brock and Durlauf (2001, 2006) for recent methodological progress on this problem.
9
  As noted by Sacerdote (2001) and Bayer and Ross (2008), when social network effects are determined in part by
unobservable characteristics, even random assignment cannot solve this identification problem. While random
assignment breaks the correlation between the health behavior i‘s peers and i’s unobservable characteristics, the
coefficient estimate on the behavior of peers is a composite of both the direct effect of peer’s behaviors and the
effect of peers’ unobservable characteristics.

                                                         9
        Specifically, define a cluster of individuals c in the same school who are observationally
equivalent on Xi and choose observationally equivalent friends based on Xj. This structure
implies that the individual and friendship group observables are the same within a cluster so that
the contribution of the variables that determine clusters to individual’s health behavior are
constant within cluster or
               1                                       1                   
         s        X      j
                                   2  X i  3   s  
                                                        n      X       j
                                                                               2  X k  3
                                                                                                                      (2)
                ni   jis                              i     j ks       
for all i, k  c . Further, we assume that the model that defines selection over friendships on
health behaviors and on observable attributes depend monotonically on the same observable
vector of attributes Xi and the same single index unobservable εis. This assumption is central to
our identification strategy. Without monotonicity, multiple values of the unobservable might be
consistent with the observed friendship choices for observationally equivalent individuals. With
monotonicity on the unobservable, similar individuals who face the same type of friendship
options based on the available social network (s) and make similar choices should have similar
values on their unobservable because if they differed substantially on the unobservable they
would likely have made different friendship choices.
        Specifically, we can define ρc as a cluster fixed effect where based on the discussion in
the preceding paragraph
                       1                                                1                   
         c   s          X       j
                                             2  X i  3   is   s  
                                                                         n       X      j
                                                                                                2  X k  3   ks
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                       (3)
                      ni     jis                                       i     j ks       
Further, based on the construction of μ as an idiosyncratic disturbance, E[ is |  ci ]  0 and

substituting equation (2) into equation (1) yields
                1            
       H ics    H j  1   c  (  is   c )                                         (4)
                  n i j is 
               
where (  is   c ) represents the deviation of the right hand side expression in equation (3) from

the average of this expression for all individuals in cluster c,  c .
        Next, in order to understand the circumstances when our fixed effect estimator will yield
consistent estimates of the effects of friendship networks, we develop a partial equilibrium model




                                                                 10
of friendship formation and use the friendship model to examine the properties of the
specification in equation (4).

Partial Equilibrium Model of Friendship Formation
         We begin this subsection by repeating equation (1)
                      ~         ~
         H is   s  H is 1  X is  2  X i  3   is   is                                                 (5)

                ~        ~       1                               1
where we define H is and X is as
                                 ni
                                             H
                                             j is
                                                      js   and
                                                                 ni
                                                                      X
                                                                      j is
                                                                               j   , respectively, restricting His to only

take on the values of 1 (healthy) or 0 (unhealthy) and Xi to only take on the values 1 (good) or 0
(bad) where the good type is defined agnostically as the type that is more likely to exhibit
healthy behavior, and without loss of generality assume that β2 and β3 are non-negative.10
Further, we assume that μis is an idiosyncratic error so that
                       ~ ~
Assumption 1: E[ is | H is , X is , X i ]  0
         Now we define the likelihood of observing a specific health behavior His and type Xi for a
selected friend by the following general set of functions
                                                                                                                 (6)

where πis is an additional unobservable that does not enter equation (5), but influences friendship
formation over health behaviors. The function fsxh is defined over the four combinations of the
outcomes for X and H and can vary across schools s since the social environment varies across
schools. The four probabilities must sum to one for a given school for any value of the functions’
arguments.
         We assume that the probabilities of having a friend who is of good type and who exhibits
healthy behavior are not directly influenced by own health behavior (Assumption 2), are
monotonic in the individual’s unobservable attributes that influence health behavior (Assumption
3), and that additional unobservable attributes exist that have a monotonic influence on
friendship formation concerning health behavior, but have no influence on either own health
behavior or friendship formation over other friendship attributes (Assumption 4). While the
unobservables might be correlated with Xi, some variation must remain in the unobservables


10
  See Brock and Durlauf (2001, 2006) for an alternative identification approach for the reflection problem that
applies when behavior is discrete.

                                                            11
associated with forming friends with specific health behaviors that does not enter own health
behavior after conditioning on Xi. These assumptions can be summarized as follows

Assumption 2:

Assumption 3:                                    and                               .11

Assumption 4:                                      ,                                 , and Var[ is | X i ]  0

While Assumption 3 will be maintained throughout, we will examine the implications of relaxing
Assumption 2 in the next subsection by allowing own health behavior to influence friendship
formation over friends’ health behavior. Assumption 4 is designed to capture the across cohort
variation described in our identification strategy. Our maintained assumption is that membership
in a cohort is based on age and so exogenous conditional on school, and so is not directly
associated with own health behavior, except of course through the well-known age-gradient in
unhealthy behaviors such as smoking and drinking. Further, cohort membership creates a shock
to the health behavior composition of potential friends while leaving the exogenous attributes of
potential friends relatively unchanged. The implications of violating assumption 4 are further
examined in the appendix.
             Now, we define a cluster c as all students in a school who are of the same type, have the
same number of friends, and make the same friendship choices over “friendship type”.

Definition 1: A cluster c in school s is defined so that Xis = Xks, ni = nk and
1                      1
ni
     X
     jis
              js   
                       nk
                            X
                            j ks
                                     js   for all i and k in cluster c and their exist no individuals l outside of

                                                       1                      1
cluster c where Xis = Xls, ni = nl and
                                                       ni
                                                            X
                                                            jis
                                                                    js   
                                                                              nl
                                                                                   X
                                                                                   jls
                                                                                           js   .

             Our first important result is that the bias in our estimate of  1 in equation (4) limits to
zero as the number of friends, or more generally the number of friendship choices, becomes
large. In our empirical work, the number of choices made is substantially larger than the number

11
   The assumption of a positive relationship between good type and the individual’s friendship formation propensity
yis is made without loss of generality because one can reverse the relationship by designating healthy behavior as
unhealthy. However, once this assumption is made, the sign of the relationship between yis and having friends who
exhibit healthy behavior is meaningful. If this relationship is positive, then one’s type has the same effect on health
behavior composition of friendships as it has on composition of friends over type, and this assumption cannot be
undone by reversal because the definition of what individual type means is nailed down by β3 and the coefficient of
one on εis in equation (5)

                                                                         12
of friends because students choose over many demographic attributes including race, ethnicity,
and maternal education. Further, later in the paper, we demonstrate that our results are robust to
focusing on the subsample of students with the largest number of friends.12

Proposition 1: Under Assumptions 1 through 4 plus Definition 1, the bias arising from
estimating the cluster fixed effects model in equation (4) limits to zero as ni becomes large for all
i in the sample.
Proof: See Appendix
         A key derivation in Proposition 1 is that the bias in the cluster fixed effects estimate of
 1 can be written as
                                ~
             Cov[ is   c , ( H is  H c )]
          
          1
           c
                        ~                                                                                 (7)
                 Var[( H is  H c )]
                                                            ~
where  c and H c are the cluster specific mean of  is and H is , respectively. The bias limits to
zero because, as the number of choices becomes large, two individuals i and k can only belong to
the same cluster if εis = εks. However, the within cluster variation in ε cannot limit to zero while
within-cluster variance of          remains unless         contains variation associated with π. Therefore,
the non-zero variance assumption in Assumption 4 is crucial to the consistency of our estimator.
        Second, even when the number of friends is small, we can show that the inclusion of
cluster fixed effects reduces the bias in estimates of the effect of friend’s health behavior on own
health behavior with the imposition of a couple of additional assumptions. First, we create a
                     ~
linear projection of H is
         ~           ~
         H is  s  X is 1  X i 2  Vis                                                               (8)
                    ~
such that Vis  V ( X is , X i ,  is ,  is ) . We assume that the conditional expectation of Vis is zero and

that the conditional variance of Vis is less than or equal to the variance of Vis.
                       ~
Assumption 5: E[Vis | X is , X i ]  0 and Var[Vis |  c ]  Var[Vis ] .



12
  A second implicit assumption is that the number of observations or students increases more quickly than the
number of friendship choices. This assumption is required in order to assure consistency in the fixed effect
estimates. Later, in our empirical work, we demonstrate that key findings on behavior on-set are robust in
subsamples that focus on individuals in friendship choice clusters that contain a larger number of students.

                                                        13
The first part of Assumption 5 implies that
            ~ ~                       ~
        E[ H is | X is , X i ]  s  X is 1  X i 2                                    (9)
This restriction is essentially a law of large numbers style assumption where we assume that the
                                                                 ~       ~
average of this residual is zero over repeated realizations of H is and X is for a given Xi. This
                                ~
assumption would be standard if X is did not depend upon εis. The second half of Assumption 5
is something that can be theoretically violated in principle, but in practice we expect that
variances will decline after conditioning on additional information, and we also directly verify
this assumption for estimates of Vis using our data.

Proposition 2: Under Assumptions 1 through 5 plus Definition 1, the bias arising from
estimating the cluster fixed effects model in equation (4) has the same sign and is smaller than
the bias that arises for the OLS model described in equation (5).
Proof: See Appendix
         In the appendix, we also consider a situation where the shock to friendship formation
over health behavior  is also affects friendship formation over the exogenous attributes, which
might be the case if we were considering two individual in the same grade who had unobservable
differences (associated with themselves rather than the cohort) that lead them to choose friends
with different health behaviors and so likely also caused them to choose friends with different
attributes. We show that Proposition 1 may not hold when we relax Assumption 4 along this
margin, and in fact the sign of the bias may be reversed relative to OLS when we control for
friendship cluster FE’s that contain variation that does not satisfy Assumption 4, such as within
grade variation in friends’ health behaviors.

Simultaneity of Health Behavior and Friendship Sorting Model
         In this section, we extend the friendship formation function so that friendship formation
over health behavior depends upon one’s own health behaviors, creating true simultaneity
between one’s own health choices and the selection of friends based on their health choices.
Specifically, we relax Assumption 1 so that own health behavior influences the likelihood of
having friends who exhibit a health behavior, but do not allow own health behavior to affect
friendship formation over the observable attributes. So
                                                                                          (10)

                                                         14
with
Assumption 6:                            and                        .

Therefore, the idiosyncratic error μis does not have a conditional expectation of zero because it
                                           ~
influences the health behavior of friends H j through one’s own health behavior, and the bias in

the coefficient on friend’s health behaviors contains a second term φ1.

Proposition 3: Under Assumptions 1 and 3 through 6 plus Definition 1 the cluster fixed effects
model estimate of the effect of friends’ health behavior limits to a reduced form estimate that is
                                                                                    ~
the sum of β1 and a second term that captures the correlation between  is and H is (φ1) as ni
becomes large for all i in the sample.
Proof: See Appendix.
        Proposition 3 illustrates why our fixed effects estimator only addresses bias from
correlated unobservables, but not endogeneity, where smoking causes someone to select friends
who smoke. If β1 is zero, it is still possible for φ1 to be non-zero, because high values of μis will
increase the likelihood of smoking and as a result lead to a larger numbers of smoking friends
other things equal, Vis . We cannot address this limitation theoretically, but later in the paper we
examine an empirical model on the onset of health behaviors where reverse causality should not
be a serious concern. At that time, we will present the methods for conducting the required two
stage estimates.

Friendship Data
        In order to accomplish our research goals, we use the only available national dataset
containing rich friendship network information as well as health behaviors, the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). The Add Health is a school-based,
longitudinal study of the health-related behaviors of adolescents and their outcomes in young
adulthood.13 For this paper, we focus on the In-School data collection, which utilized a self-


13
  In short, the study contains an in-school questionnaire administered to a nationally representative sample of
students in grades 7 through 12 in 1994-95 and three in-home surveys that focus on a subsample of students in 1995
(Wave 1), and approximately one year later (Wave 2) and then six years later (Wave 3). The fourth wave of the
survey was collected in 2008/9. The study began by using a clustered sampling design to ensure that the 80 high
schools and 52 middle schools selected were representative of US schools with respect to region of country,
urbanicity, size, type, and ethnicity. Eligible high schools included an 11th grade and enrolled more than 30

                                                       15
administered instrument to more than 90,000 students in grades 7 through 12 in a 45- to 60-
minute class period between September 1994 and April 1995. The questionnaire focused on
topics including socio-demographic characteristics, family background, health status, risk
behaviors, and friendship nominations. In particular, each student respondent was asked to
identify up to 10 friends (5 males, 5 females) from the school’s roster. Based on these
nominations, social networks within each school can be constructed and characterized, linking
the health behaviors of socially connected individuals.
         Of the nearly 90,000 students in the schools originally surveyed, several reductions in the
sample size were made in order to construct the analysis sample. First, nearly 4,500 students did
not have individual identification numbers assigned. Nearly 12,000 students did not nominate
any friends and 5,000 individuals nominated friends who were not able to be linked with other
respondents due to nominations based on incomplete information (“nicknames” rather than
names, or the nominated friend did not appear on the Add Heath school roster, etc.) These issues
reduced the sample to approximately 66,000 respondents. Appendix Table 1A presents an
analysis of the correlates associated with individuals being dropped from the sample for these
reason discussed above, as well as additional sources of selection arising from the empirical
specification discussed below.14
         In this paper, our main focus is on individuals with same-sex/same-grade level friends,
which reduces the sample to approximately 55,000 students.15 One reason to focus on same-sex
friends is that romantic relationships may be nominated as “friends”. In addition, most previous
studies of friendship networks also limit the network definition to same-sex friends. We limit our
analysis to same-grade friends in order to use cross-cohort (grade) variation in friendship
opportunities and choices, as we describe below. In order to retain sample size, we impute




students. More than 70 percent of the originally sampled high schools participated. Each school that declined to
participate was replaced by a school within the stratum.
14
   Briefly, race, gender, family structure, and missingness on other variables predicts sample selection in to the
original 66,000 observations to some extent, however health behaviors are not robust important predictors. In
regards to same-sex/same-grade friendship nominations, the likelihood of making such nominations increases by
grade and is smaller for more advantaged students. We find that the proportion of smokers in the grade (potential
friends) is not related to these nomination patterns, however, individuals with drinking grademates are slightly more
likely to nominate same-grade/same-gender friends (a 10 point increase in grademates drinking is associated with a
1 percentage point increase in the probability).
15
   Of the 66,000 students, 4,300 do not nominate any same grade friends and 4,100 do not nominate any same-
grade/same-gender friends (that is, they nominate same grade friends but no same-grade/same gender friends).

                                                         16
missing covariates, such as maternal education, and control for missingness, but we do not
impute missing outcomes.
       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the analysis sample and shows that
approximately 34% of the sample reports smoking and 54% of the sample reports drinking
alcohol. The average adolescent nominates 2.8 same-sex friends. In Table 2 we present the
distribution of friends’ health behaviors in the data. Friendship networks include considerable
variation, including individuals who have no smoking/drinking friends through individuals who
have all smoking/drinking friends.

Evidence of Variation in Friendship Options
       As we demonstrate above, identification of the effect of friend’s health behavior requires
a shock in exposure to potential friends with specific health behaviors. In our empirical analysis,
we control for fixed effects associated with similar students who make similar friendship choices
on student attributes, but because they belong to different cohorts of the same school draw
groups of friends who exhibit differing health behavior. That is, the dataset contains multiple
cohorts within each surveyed high school, which allows us to combine our friendship type fixed
effects with the use of cross-cohort, within-school variation and in doing so are able to compare
students who face similar friendship options (are in the same school) and make similar friendship
choices. This extension relies heavily on the assumption that individuals who attend the same
school, but different grades, have essentially the same “types” of friendship options.
       To what extent do students in the same school face similar friendship options? Using the
Add Health data, we show below in Table 3 that controlling for school and grade effects can
predict over 95% of the variation in racial composition of potential friends (classmates) in the
data. Likewise, controlling for school and grade predicts 93% of the variation in peers’ maternal
education level and 96% of the variation in classmate nativity. These findings suggest that
students in different grades but who attend the same school have very similar friendship options
based on race and family background of peers.
       In addition, there is substantially more variation across cohort, within schools in
unhealthy behaviors. Using the same regression analysis, our data show that we only predict 77%
of peer smoking rates and 81% of peer drinking rates. Thus, these results suggest that there is
substantial variation in exposure to health behaviors of potential friends (classmates) even within


                                                17
school, while at the same time the friendship options based on race, maternal education, and
nativity is nearly identical for students across grades within the same school.

Empirical Specification
         Our friendship clusters are based on students in the same school choosing sets of friends
with very similar demographic attributes. As there is evidence that adolescents have strong
preferences to befriend classmates based on age, gender, and race (Mayer and Puller 2008;
Weinberg 2008), we create our “individual type-friendship type clusters” by focusing primarily
on those attributes. Given a limited sample, there is clearly a trade-off between how restrictive
we make our definitions of observationally similar individuals and of same friendship types. We
begin by placing the most weight on obtaining very specific “friendship-type” clusters because
this is dimension over which students are making choices.
         The friendship clusters are based on the following exogenous characteristics of chosen
friends, including (1) race (black vs. Hispanic vs. white vs. Asian vs. other) (2) maternal
education (no college vs. some college vs. college graduate) (3) family structure (living with
mother vs. not living with mother) and (4) nativity (native vs. foreign born). Specifically, the
number of friends chosen from a group for each characteristic is used in the cluster. Importantly,
our clusters are quite flexibly created, such that an individual who chooses five black friends is
in a different cluster than an individual who chooses four black friends.16
         We define observationally equivalent students over two key variables: the student’s race
(white, black, Hispanic, and Asian) and whether their mother is a college graduate for the
creation of individual type-friendship type clusters, This more parsimonious specification of
observationally equivalent students has the added advantage of allowing for additional
counterfactuals over those student observables.                For family structure and nativity, we can
examine whether within cluster differences in friend’s drinking or smoking can explain whether
the student lives with their mother or whether the student is an immigrant. Similarly, for years of
maternal education, we can test whether within cluster variation (restricting comparisons based
on whether their mother completed college or not) in friends’ behavior explain differences in
16
  As an example, friendship cluster 15 could be created based on nominating four friends such that: friend A is
white, has a college educated mother, lives with his mother, and is native born; friend B is white, has a mother with
some college, lives with his mother ,and is native born; friend C is white, has a college educated mother, lives with
his mother, and is foreign born; friend D is black, has a college educated mother, lives with mother, and is native
born. Cluster 16 could be identical except the individual nominated four white friends instead of three white friends
and one black friend; Cluster 17 could be identical to cluster 15 except all the nominated friends are native born.

                                                         18
students’ own maternal education. Finally, we will present counterfactuals for paternal attributes,
education and nativity that are not used in either the definition of individual type or friendship
choices.
         In our final and preferred model, as discussed above, we restrict our comparisons to
students in different grades who are observationally equivalent on race and maternal education
and chose the same friendship set on those attributes plus nativity and living with mother.17
Friends’ health behaviors are based on own-grade friendships, and so these estimates are based
entirely on comparisons across cohorts. Specifically, one student’s friends’ health behavior could
not vary from another student’s in the comparison group because one student selected a given
student and another selected away from the same student. In order to accomplish this, we
randomly choose only one student in each grade from each friendship type cluster so that the
estimated effect of peer behavior cannot be identified off of within grade variation. In these
estimates, the substantial differences in health behavior across cohorts provide the shock to the
health behavior of potential same-grade friends that identifies the effect of friends on health
behavior. In practice, we present the average of the parameter estimates resulting from several
random draws of one individual in each cluster per cohort.18
         Finally, the rich structure of friendship type clusters, as outlined above, will create
singleton clusters of students—those students who have unique or “unusual” friendship
preferences for their school. These singleton clusters will, implicitly, not contribute to the
identification of the network effects estimates, as there will be no within-cluster variation to
exploit. Tables 2A and 3A examine the significance of excluding the variation associated with
these observations from our estimates of the effects of friends’ health behaviors. While we find
some evidence that attrition on this dimension varies with observable attributes, the estimated


17
   In yet another refinement of our cluster approach, in some analyses we also include grade levels-pairs within the
clusters, so that 7th and 8th graders are compared to each other (and 9 th/10th and 11th/12th) in order to move closer to
the thought experiment described in the introduction. All results are robust in terms of magnitude and statistical
significance to the use of adjacent cohort comparisons, but the estimates become relatively noisy when we restrict
ourselves to one individual per cohort and adjacent clusters, which leads to counterfactuals that are somewhat less
informative than those presented in the text.
18
   Standard errors are bootstrapped by repeated sampling of cohorts in schools with replacement, and then for each
bootstrap sample we select one observation per cohort repeating this multiple times in order to get an average
estimate for each bootstrap sample. We create 1,000 bootstrap samples and estimate the model 30 times per
bootstrap sample in order to produce the confidence intervals for our estimate. The repeated averages of estimates
from one observation per cohort should not be able to improve the precision of estimates relative to use of the entire
sample so when the bootstraps imply smaller standard errors we use the standard errors from the full sample in order
to be conservative.

                                                           19
relationship between smoking and drinking status and placement in a single cluster is fairly small
(Table 2A). In addition, we repeat the substantive analyses presented below for subsamples
excluding observations associated with singleton clusters while holding the fixed effect structure
constant (Second row of Table 3A) or varying the fixed effect structure while holding the effect
sample constant (Third row of Table 3A), and singleton clusters have little effect on the pattern
of estimates observed.

Evidence of Friendship Selection
       We can partially test the validity of our approach by examining whether students seem to
be sorting into specific friendship patterns within our friendship clusters. Specifically, we test
whether a student’s own observable attributes correlate with the attributes of their friends within
student clusters. Following the logic of Altonji, Elder, and Tabor (2005), if individuals do not
sort on observables into friendships within clusters, it is very unlikely that they have sorted based
on unobservable characteristics. For example, if we find no evidence of additional correlation
between an individual’s own parental education and the parental education of their friends after
conditioning on the average level of correlation for all students in this cluster, which might
include broader educational categories, then it is unlikely that students are sorting based on
unobservable characteristics like the parents’ involvement with the students’ education or the
parents’ educational and academic expectations since those unobservable characteristics are
likely correlated with parental education. Similar diagnostic tests have been used elsewhere
(Bayer, Ross and Topa 2008; Bifulco, Fletcher and Ross 2011).
         In Table 4A, we present evidence from these diagnostic tests for the effect of friends’
smoking and in Table 4B we present results for friends’ drinking. Each set of rows examines the
correlation between a different “outcome” (individual-level characteristic) and friend’s
characteristics. Columns add controls from left to right. The first column and row shows the
traditional conditional correlation between maternal education and the average level of smoking
or drinking among the individual’s friends based on OLS estimation.19 Column 2 controls for
school fixed effects, which typically the estimated coefficient by a substantial amount, but the
estimated effects are often is still sizable and statistically significant at a very high level of
confidence. Column 3 controls for school by friendship cluster fixed effects. Column 4 controls

19
  All student demographics used in the creation of friendship clusters are included as regressors in all models unless
they are collinear with the fixed effects used in that particular model.

                                                         20
for fixed effects associated with school, friendship cluster, and the individual’s race and maternal
educational attainment, which is obviously not identified for the case of race, but is identified for
maternal years of education. Column 5 presents the results for Column 4 selecting one
observation per cohort per cluster and weighting clusters back up to their original size for
comparability, except for race where the one observation per cohort sample is estimated using
the model in column 3.
       In Rows 1 through 6 in Tables 4A and 4B, we examine the conditional correlation
between whether white, maternal education, mothers’ nativity, whether lives with mother,
paternal education and father’ nativity and the share friend’s smoking or drinking. The OLS and
school fixed effect models are sizable and highly significant for all variables except for live with
mother, which is statistically significant, but noticeably smaller. However, the inclusion of
school by friendship cluster by individual type fixed effects (columns 4 and 5) substantially
erodes the school FE estimates. Focusing on the one per cluster estimates, even for the small
effects on lives with mother, the estimates are reduced to half the magnitude of the school FE
estimates. For the other more sizable estimates, the effects are reduced by between 61 and 97
percent. Of the twelve counterfactuals in column 5, the estimate on percent friends’ drinking is
just significant at the 5 percent level for nativity of mother and just misses 5% significance for
maternal education, but as noted above our method is expected to reduce bias with a finite
number of choices and these estimates are substantially smaller than the fixed effect estimates,
68 and 61 percent respectively.


Results
       Table 5 presents estimates for adolescent smoking and drinking where same-sex/same-
grade friends are used to define the friendship network. In Column 1, the baseline results for
smoking (row 1) suggest that increasing the share of friends who smoke by 10 percentage points
would increase own-smoking by nearly 3.9 percentage points. In Column 2, we follow some of
the previous literature and control for school fixed effects; however this only reduces the
coefficient from 0.385 to 0.366 for friends’ smoking. In Column 3 we control for school by
cluster fixed effects and so control for same friendship-type choices given the same friendship




                                                 21
opportunity set, and we observe a substantially larger decline in the estimated to 0.308.20 The
fourth column incorporates individual observables into the cluster definitions. The fifth column
presents the results for our preferred specification re-estimating the model in column 4 after
restricting the sample to one observation per cohort. The estimates in columns 4 and 5 are very
similar to the estimates in Column 3.
         All of the estimates based on within friendship cluster by school comparisons fall
between 0.308 and 0.320. The lowest estimates are associated with models that contain variation
within grade, which is consistent with the possibility that within grade-within cluster variation
could bias estimates in the opposite direction from the bias in OLS or school FE models. .
Similarly in row 2, school fixed effect estimates of friends’ drinking are 0.302, and the estimates
after controlling for friendship cluster range between 0.253 and 0.287. Focusing on our preferred
estimates using the one observation per cluster per cohort, we see less than a 10% reduction
relative to our school fixed effect estimates for both friends’ smoking and drinking with our
inclusion of individual-friendship type-school fixed effects. Significantly, all reductions due to
cluster fixed effects including those based on estimates that include variation within cluster and
cohort are less than 20%, which is quite small relative to the declines in estimates across the
same model specifications for our balancing tests where the declines are typically on the order of
60 to 90 percent.21 As discussed above, as we control for richer cluster definitions, the sample
size used to identify the coefficients is reduced due to “singleton clusters”. As mentioned earlier
and shown in Appendix Tables 3A and 3B, the change in sample composition cannot be the
explanation for our persistently strong effects of friends smoking.
         The bottom line of these findings is that our estimates suggest only minimal bias from
correlated unobservables in school fixed effect estimates of friends’ smoking or drinking on a
student’s own behavior. After controlling for variables like gender, race, maternal education,
gender, family structure and nativity, factors that are observed in many educational samples,
friendship formation within a grade appears to be relative random at least in terms of
unobservables that have a systematic influence on health behaviors. This finding has relevance
20
   It is interesting to note that the inclusion of friendship cluster fixed effects produces estimates that are very similar
in magnitude to column 2. Rather, it is controlling for friendship choices conditional on the friendship opportunity
set (school) that leads to the significant reductions in the estimated effect.
21
   We also investigate models where smoking or drinking depends upon both friends’ smoking and friends’ drinking.
The estimated effect magnitudes are essentially split between the two friends’ behavior variables with the majority
of the effect being associated with same behavior: friends’ smoking for smoking and friends’ drinking for drinking.
The pattern over the fixed effects specifications is also similar.

                                                            22
for the growing empirical literature on networks (Calvo-Armengol et al. 2009, Trogdon et al.
2008). Most studies in this area are identified by network fixed effects assuming that individual
links within each network are formed randomly. At least after controlling for the role of readily
observable demographics in friendship formation, our research is supportive of this assumption
for smoking and drinking. However, the assumption of exogenous friendship formation may not
be valid for other behaviors or outcomes.

Two Stage Models and an Application to Longitudinal Data
       If our estimates are to capture the causal effects of friends’ behaviors, an additional
assumption is required that a student’s own smoking behavior does not directly cause the student
to form friendships with students who smoke. We can neither directly test whether this
assumption holds or credibly argue that the assumption is reasonable. One reasonable option is to
look at models of the on-set of health related behaviors with a longitudinal sample where reverse
causality is less of a concern. However, quite frequently, longitudinal datasets are substantially
smaller than cross-sectional samples, and the Add Health survey is no exception with the initial
in-school survey attempting to interview the full population of each sampled school, while only a
fraction of these students are followed over time.
       However, the analysis described above generates information on εis associated with all
individuals who are in the same cluster c. Therefore, we can combine this information with the
longitudinal data for examining the onset of health behaviors, such as drinking and smoking,
which by construction could not have caused the earlier friendship choices. The classic threat to
identification in studies of the on-set of health behaviors is that the same set of unobservables
that caused the student to select their friends also lead to later smoking, but in our case the
information generated on each cluster can provide a control for those correlated unobservables.
       Specifically, we estimate the fixed effect associated with each school, student type and
friendship pattern cluster, and that fixed effect provides an estimate of the unobservable for each
individual within the cluster. However, the fixed effect estimate for each cluster is an average
across all cohorts including the cohort from which a student is drawn, which in small samples
can lead to an overcorrection from the fixed effects and an understatement of the true estimate.
The standard solution to this problem is to calculate the control, in this case the fixed effect,
omitting the information that creates this correlation, in this case the information from the same
cohort. Guryan, Kroft and Notowidigdo (2009), however, show that the estimated coefficient on
                                                23
this corrected control may be negatively biased because an individual’s own information is
negatively correlated with the average of the relevant population (that omits the individual) from
which that individual draws peers. In our context of a school fixed effects model, their
recommended control for mitigating this bias is simply the average fixed effect estimate across
all individuals in the school except for the cohort-cluster to which the subject individual belongs.
The resulting estimating equation would be

                 1                 
        H ics        H      j
                                    1  ˆ c i  ˆ s i  (  is   c )  (  c  ˆ c i  ˆ s i )
                                                                                                            (11)
                  ni   jis       
where ̂ ci and ̂ si are the estimated cluster fixed effect omitting the information on the fixed
effect from a student’s own cohort and the mean (weighted by the number of students) of the
cluster fixed effect estimates over all clusters at a school again omitting the student’s cohort
contribution to their cluster fixed effect estimate.
       In order to obtain the most precise estimates for our preferred specification, we collapse
the data at the level of the student type, friendship choices, cohort and school in order to obtain
estimated based only on cross-cohort information using the entire sample. The parameter
estimates and the estimated student type-friendship choice-school FE’s are weighted based on
the number of students in each student type-friendship choice-cohort-school cluster. We also
focus in this analysis on comparisons across all grades in a school, again in order to increase the
amount of information used to calculate the FE’s. Note that the fixed effects are only identified
for friendship clusters in schools containing at least one student in at least two cohorts.
       Table 6 presents models from the cross-sectional sample. The first two columns present
both the school FE and the student type by friendship choice by school FE model estimates for
the individual subsample where one individual is selected randomly per cluster where both are
estimated for the one per cohort sample for which fixed effects are estimable. These school FE
estimates are very similar to the FE estimates in column 2 of Table 5, and the one observation
per cohort per cluster FE’s estimates are identical. The next two columns present the student
weighted estimates using the collapsed data with school and school by cluster FE’s. The school
and cluster FE’s estimates for these two samples are very similar and continue to indicate very
little bias from correlated errors relative to the school FE estimates for smoking or drinking.
       In the last two columns, we present the two stage estimates using the individual sample
and the predicted cluster FE’s. The first of the last two columns includes our prediction of the
                                                                   24
cluster FE that includes information from an individual’s own cohort. Naturally, the estimate on
the fixed effect is large and highly significant because it contains information on the individual’s
own smoking behavior. The inclusion of this variable reduces the effect of friend’s smoking or
drinking, representing a classic overcorrection that occurs with fixed effect estimates based on
small samples. In the last column, we present the estimates for the fixed effect model that
includes the predicted cluster fixed effect that excludes information from the individual’s own
cohort plus the Guryan et al. (2009) control at the school level. The Guryan et al. control is
negative and significant as expected. The estimate on the predicted fixed effect, however, is very
near zero and statistically insignificant. As in the single stage fixed effect estimates, there is no
evidence of substantial bias from correlated unobservables for friendship formation within
schools, and the estimated effect of friends smoking or drinking is quite near to the school FE
estimates.
       Table 7 presents effect estimates for the onset of smoking or drinking as a function of the
behavior of a student’s friends at baseline. The first two columns present the OLS and school
fixed effect estimates for the full sample of all students surveyed at follow-up who did not smoke
or drink, respectively, at baseline. The third column presents the school FE estimates for a
sample restricted to those for which a student type by friendship choice by school FE can be
estimated (students present in the cluster in that school for at least two cohorts). The fourth
column adds the predicted cluster fixed effect using information from the student’s own cohort
and the fifth column controls for the predicted fixed effect omitting that information and for the
Guryan control. The inclusion of school fixed effects erodes the OLS estimates for the friends’
effect on the onset of drinking, but has little impact on the effect of friends’ smoking on smoking
onset. More significantly, the coefficient on the prediction of the cluster FE is effectively zero in
the last two columns, and the effect of friends’ behavior is relatively unchanged as compared to
the school FE presented in column 3. Note that the estimate on the predicted cluster FE are zero
even when the own cohort information is included because the smokers and drinkers from the
first wave who helped drive these cluster predictions have been deleted from the sample in order
to study onset. Similarly, the coefficient estimate on the Guryan control is relatively small in
these models when compared to estimates from Table 6.
       The central threat to identification in our models of the on-set of smoking and drinking is
that the fixed effects may contain considerable noise due to the smaller number of observations

                                                 25
used to estimate each fixed effect. Table 8 presents results based on the size of the school-
student type-friendship pattern clusters used to calculate the cluster FE. The average numbers of
observations associated with the fixed effect estimates are 2.5 for the subsample of small clusters
and 17 for the subsample of big clusters. Obviously, these subsamples are not randomly
determined because, for example, clusters involving individuals with mostly own race friends
will tend to have a substantially larger number of students than clusters of students who have
many friends across racial lines. Regardless, if student friendship formation patterns capture
information on unobservables that influence smoking or drinking, then we should find larger,
more precisely estimated parameters on the predicted fixed effects when those fixed effects are
more accurately measured because they are based on more observations. However, all our results
are robust across the subsamples. The estimates on the predicted fixed effects are uniformly
small and statistically insignificant, and all our results are robust to the inclusion of the predicted
fixed effects. The coefficient on smoking does erode somewhat for the big cluster subsample
when the additional controls are included, but we have verified that those changes are driven
entirely by the inclusion of the Guryan et al. control, rather than the predicted fixed effect.

Robustness to Number of Friends
       One natural concern with our identification strategy is that students only report up to a
maximum of five same gender friends and many report only 1 or 2 same gender friends. While
students make friendship choices over a wide variety of student attributes that are observable,
one still might be concerned that our positive estimates of friendship effects are driven by
students who have a very small number of friends and that in those cases the number of choices
being made is insufficient to eliminate the bias from student unobservables that influence
friendship choice. In Table 9, we divide the sample by the number of friends where the first
panel presents estimates for smoking and the second panel presents estimates for drinking. The
general pattern of results remains the same with the inclusion of school by friendship cluster
fixed effects leading to reductions in estimates by less than 10 percent relative to the school fixed
effects for smoking and small increases, less than 5 percent, for drinking. In terms of the
magnitudes, the changes in the estimated effect size due to the inclusion of cluster FE’s is
actually smaller for the subsample of students with 4-5 friends for smoking and drinking in both
percentage terms and absolute changes.


                                                  26
         In Table 10, we present estimates for the effect of friends’ behavior on the on-set of
smoking (first panel) and drinking (second panel) for the 1-3 and 4-5 friends subsamples. Since
the restricted subsample for 4-5 friends is quite small (between 200 and 300 students), we
estimate a joint model for the entire sample interacting dummies for number of friends with the
share of friends smoking or drinking, rather than estimate separate models for each subsample.22
In the first two columns, we present the school FE estimates for the individual longitudinal
sample. The relationship between friends’ behavior and own behavior is robust in both
subsamples for both drinking and smoking, and as in cross-sectional estimates of behavioral
effects in Table 10 the relationship for on-set is also stronger for the subsample with 4-5 friends.
Columns 3 and 4 then present the estimates for the restricted sample. Three of the four
significant findings persist in the restricted sample, but the estimate on friend’s smoking for the
4-5 friend subsample is very near zero. It is important to note that this zero estimate is for a very
small subsample (less than 300 observations), and that the zero estimate does not provide
evidence in either support of or against the validity of our identification strategy. Regardless, the
inclusion of the predicted cluster FE has very little influence on any of the estimates, reducing
the effect in the three positive and significant estimates by less than three percent and changing
the zero estimate for friends’ smoking for 4-5 friends by only 0.002. Further, we can calculate
the predicted cluster FE that does not omit own cohort for the entire longitudinal sample. When
we estimate the model including those predicted FE’s, the estimated effects of friend’s smoking
are 0.050 and 0.068 for 1-3 and 4-5 friends, respectively, and those reductions are nearly
identical in magnitude across the two subsamples at about 6 percent.

Conclusions
         While researchers typically examine peer effects by defining the peer group broadly, this
paper focuses attention on actual friends and implements a new research design to study the
effects of friend’s health behaviors on own health behaviors for adolescents. The main idea is to
combine a cross-cohort, within school design with controls for friendship options and friendship
choices through the use of “school-student type-friendship pattern” fixed effects. We show that
in the Add Health data used in this paper, there is evidence that our design is successful in


22
  It is not realistic to estimate 60-70 school fixed effects in samples with only a couple of hundred observations. The
pattern and significance arising from models using split samples are qualitatively similar to the estimates in columns
3 and 4, but the magnitudes of the parameter estimates are quite unstable.

                                                          27
narrowing down relevant comparison groups by controlling for the friendship choices and
friendship options of adolescents. Our initial estimates also suggest that all results are robust to
the restriction of sample to one student per cluster per cohort, which assures that the model is
only identified based on comparisons of students across cohorts in the same school.
       Further, we use a model of friendship formation to investigate the circumstances under
which our identification strategy will provide consistent estimates. We find that our approach can
be applied under quite general circumstances. For example, our model allows for a very general
non-linear process of friendship selection and allows for correlation between observable
attributes and unobservables that affect friendship formation. In addition, we show how to apply
the information gained from our analysis to smaller longitudinal samples in order to control for
correlated unobservables in models of behavior on-set where the simultaneity between own
health behavior and friendship choice is unlikely to be able to explain the estimated effects of
friends’ behaviors. The key assumptions required to apply this identifications strategy are that
unobservable determinants of health behavior have a monotonic affect on the patterns of
friendship formation and that individuals experience some type of shock in exposure to health
behavior of potential friends that does not directly enter own health behavior. This shock assures
that some variation remains in friends’ health behavior even after asymptotically eliminating
variation across individuals in friendship outcomes. In our application, this “treatment” is the
variation across cohorts in the exposure to friends’ health behavior. Our empirical analysis is
very supportive of this assumption in that we find very small variation in the demographic
attributes of students across cohorts in the same school, but substantially larger variation in
health behavior.
       Friends’ drinking and smoking appears to have a substantial impact on a student’s own
smoking and drinking and on the onset of smoking and drinking, and controls for correlated
unobservables does little to erode the estimated effect. There continues to be little evidence of
bias in the school FE models when we focus on a subsample of students that have the larger
numbers of friends or on subsamples of clusters where we observed the largest number of
students, which represent circumstances where our analysis should have the greatest potential for
identifying bias. Further, counterfactual analyses of race, maternal and paternal education, and
maternal and paternal nativity find that at most only weak evidence of an effect of friends’



                                                28
behavior remains after applying our identification strategy suggesting that our fixed effect
strategy eliminates most of the bias from correlated unobservables.




                                               29
Literature Cited

Aizer, Anna. 2009. Peer Effects and Human Capital Accumulation: the Externalities of ADD.
        NBER Working Paper No. 14354.
Aizer, A, and J Currie. 2004. ‘‘Networks or neighborhoods? Correlations in the use of publicly
        funded maternity care in california.’’ Journal of Public Economics 88(12): 2573–85
Altonji, J G., Elder, TE, CR Tabor. 2005. “Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
        Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113: 151-
        184.
Angrist, J and K Lang. 2004. “Does school integration generate peer effects? Evidence from
        Boston’s Metco Program.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1613-1634.
Bayer, Patrick, Hjalmarsson, Randi and David Pozen. 2009. “Building criminal capital behind
        bars: Peer effects in juvenile corrections,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 105-
        147.
Bayer. P and S. Ross. 2008. “Identifying individual and group effects in the presence of sorting:
        A neighborhood effects application.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper #12211
Bayer, P., Ross, S. and G. Topa. 2008. “Place of work and place of residence: Informal hiring
        networks and labor market outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (6): 1150-1196
Ballester, C., Calvó-Armengol, A. and Y. Zenou. 2006. Who's who in networks. Wanted: the
        key player. Econometrica, 74, 1403-1417
Bearman, P., Moody J., and K. Stovel. 2004. “Chains of affection: the structure of adolescent
        romantic and sexual networks.” American Journal of Sociology, 110 (1): 44-91
Bertrand, M, E Luttmer, and S Mullainathan. 2000. ‘‘Network effects and welfare cultures.’’
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3):1019–55.
Bifulco, R., Fletcher, J. and S. Ross. 2011. “The effect of classmate characteristics on individual
        outcomes: evidence from the Add Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic
        Policy 3(1):25–53
Blundell, R and M C. Dias. 2009. “Alternative approaches to evaluation in empirical
        microeconomics.” Journal of Human Resources, 44, 565-640.
Bramoulle Y. and B. Rogers. 2009. “Diversity and popularity in social networks. Social Science
        Research Network, Working Paper, 2009.
Brock, WA. and SN. Durlauf. 2006. “Identification of binary choice models with social
        interactions.” Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Brock, W A. and S N. Durlauf. 2001. “Discrete choice with social interactions.” Review of
        Economic Studies, 68, 235-260.
Brown, B. B., Dolcini, M. M. and A. Leventhal. 1997. “Transformations in peer relationships at
        adolescence: implications for health-related behavior.: In: Schulenberg, J.,Maggs, J. L. &
        Hurrelmann, K., eds. Health Risks and Developmental Transitions During Adolescence,
        pp. 161–189. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Calvó-Armengol, A., Patacchini, E. and Y. Zenou. 2009. “Peer effects and social networks in
        education.” Review of Economic Studies 76, 1239-1267
Case, A and L Katz. 1991. “The company you keep: The effects of family and neighborhood on
        disadvantaged youths. NBER Working Paper 3705
Christakis N and J. Fowler. 2007. “The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32
        years.” New England Journal of Medicine, 2007, 357: 370-9.

                                                30
Christakis N and J. Fowler. 2008. “The collective dynamics of smoking in a large social
        network.” New England Journal of Medicine, 2008, 358: 249-58.
Clark, A and Y Loheac. 2007. “‘It wasn’t me, it was them!’ Social influence in risky behavior by
        adolescents.” Journal of Health Economics 26(4): 763-784
Cohen-Cole, E. and J.M Fletcher. 2008a. “Detecting implausible social network effects in acne,
        height, and headaches: Longitudinal analysis.” British Medical Journal, 337: a2533.
Cohen-Cole, E. and J.M. Fletcher. 2008b. “Is obesity contagious? Social networks vs.
        environmental factors in the obesity epidemic.” Journal of Health Economics, 27 (5):
        1382-1387.
Cutler, D. and E. Glaeser. 2007. “Social interactions and smoking.” National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper #13477.
Cutler, David and Edward Glaeser. 1997. Are Ghettos Good or Bad? Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 112, 827-872.
Dale, S. and A. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the payoff to attending a more selective college: An
        application of selection on observables and unobservables.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 117(4):1491-1527.
Durlauf, S. 2004. “Neighborhood effects.” In The Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
        Volume 4: Cities and Geography, edited by V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse. Elsevier
        Science/North Holland.
Evans, Willian, Wallace Oates, and Robert Schwab. 1992. Measuring Peer Group Effects: A
        Study of Teenage Behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 10, 966-991.
Fletcher, J.M. 2010. “Social interactions and smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts,
        instrumental variables, and school fixed effects.” Health Economics. 19(4) 466-484
Fletcher, J.M. (in press). “Peer Influences on Alcohol Consumption.” Journal of Population
        Economics.
Friesen, J and B Krauth. 2011. “Ethnic Enclaves in the Classroom.” Labour Economics 18 (5):
        656-66.
Fu, S and S L. Ross. 2010. “Wage premia in employment clusters: How important is worker
        heterogeneity?” Working Paper
Gaviria, A and S Raphael. 2001. “School-based peer effects and juvenile behavior.” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 83 (2)
Glaeser, D L., B Sacerdote, and J A. Scheinkman. 1996. “Crime and social interactions,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 507-548.
Gould, E, V Lavy, and D Paserman. 2009. “Long term classroom peer effects: Evidence from
        random variation in enrollment of disadvantaged immigrants. Economic Journal, 119,
        1243-1269.
Guryan, J, D Kroft and N J. Notowidigdo. 2009. “Peer effects in the workplace: Evidence from
        random groupings in professional golf tournaments. American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics, 1, 34-68.
Halliday, T J. and S. Kwak. 2009. “Weight gain in adolescents and their peers.” Economics and
        Human Biology, 7(2), 181-190.
Halliday, T J. and S. Kwak. 2008. “What is a peer? The role of network definition in the
        estimation of endogenous peer effects.” IZA Discussion Paper #3335.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Markman, J.M., Rivkin, S.G., 2003. “Does peer ability affect
        student achievement?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 18 (5), 527–544.



                                              31
Hoekstra, Mark L. and Scott Carrell. In Press. Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
        Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone. American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics.
Ioannides, Y M. and L D Loury. 2004. “Job information networks, neighborhood effects, and
        inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 1056-93.
Jackson, M.O. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
        Press, 2008.
Kling, J.R., J.B. Liebman, & L. Katz. (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects
        Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.
Lavy, V, D Passerman and A Schlosser. In Press. “Inside the black box of ability peer effects:
        Evidence from variation in low achievers in the classroom. Economic Journal.
Lavy, VD and A Schlosser. 2011. “Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at school.”
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 3(2): 1–33
Liu X, Lee LF, and J. Kagel. 2006. “Dynamic discrete choice models with lagged social
        interactions: With an application to a signaling game experiment.” Ohio State: Mimeo.
Lundborg, P. 2006. “Having the wrong friends? Peer effects in adolescent substance use.”
        Journal of Health Economics, 25: 214-233
Manski, C. 1993. “Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem.” Review
        of Economic Studies. 60
Manski, C. 1995. Identification Problems in the Social Sciences. Harvard University Press:
        Cambridge, MA
Manski, C. 2000. “Economic analysis of social interactions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
        14:3
Mayer. A and S. Puller. 2008. “The old boy (and girl) network: Social network formation on
        university campuses.” Journal of Public Economics, 92 (1-2): 329-347.
Patacchini, E. and Y. Zenou. In Press. “Juvenile delinquency and conformism.” Journal of Law,
        Economics and Organization.
Powell, L, J Taurus, and H Ross. 2005. “The Importance of peer effects, cigarette prices, and
        tobacco control policies for youth smoking behavior.” Journal of Health Economics, 24:
        950-968.
Renna, F, I Grafova, and N Thakur. 2008. “The effects of friends on adolescent body weight.”
        Economics & Human Biology 6, (3): 377-387.
Ross, S L. 2011. “Social interactions within cities: Neighborhood environments and peer
        relationships.” In Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning (Eds. N. Brooks, K.
        Donaghy, G. Knapp). Oxford University Press.
Sacerdote. B. 2001. “Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth roommates.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 92): 681-704.
Trogdon, J, J Nonnemaker, J Pais. 2008. “Peer effects in adolescent overweight.” Journal of
        Health Economics, 27(5): 1388-1399
Topa, G. 2001. “Social interactions, local spillovers, and unemployment.” Review of Economic
        Studies, 68: 261-295.
Weinberg, B. 2008. “Social interactions with endogenous associations.” Ohio State University
        Working Paper




                                             32
                                                Table 1
                                          Descriptive Statistics
        Variable                                    Mean      Std Dev    Min        Max
        Smoke                                          0.34       0.47          0          1
        Drink                                          0.54       0.50          0          1
        Get Drunk                                      0.29       0.45          0          1
        Exercise                                       2.29       1.19          0          4
        Any Exercise                                   0.95       0.22          0          1
        Age                                           14.87       1.69         10         19
        Male                                           0.45       0.50          0          1
        White                                          0.62       0.49          0          1
        Hispanic                                       0.13       0.33          0          1
        Black                                          0.16       0.37          0          1
        Asian                                          0.06       0.23          0          1
        Live with Mom                                  0.94       0.25          0          1
        Maternal Years of Education                   13.49       2.33          0         18
        Maternal Caring Scale                          4.79       0.58          1          5
        Native Born                                    0.92       0.26          0          1
        Grade = 7                                      0.14       0.35          0          1
        Grade = 8                                      0.14       0.35          0          1
        Grade = 9                                      0.21       0.41          0          1
        Grade = 10                                     0.19       0.39          0          1
        Grade = 11                                     0.16       0.37          0          1
        Grade = 12                                     0.15       0.36          0          1
        Missing                                        0.34       0.47          0          1
        Number of Nominations                          2.78       1.30          1          5
        Proportion White                               0.61       0.43          0          1
        Proportion Black                               0.17       0.35          0          1
        Proportion Hispanic                            0.13       0.28          0          1
        Proportion Asian                               0.06       0.20          0          1
        Proportion Other Race                          0.04       0.14          0          1
        Proportion Mom Less High School                0.14       0.25          0          1
        Proportion Mom Some College                    0.18       0.25          0          1
        Proportion of Mom College Grad                 0.35       0.33          0          1
        Proportion Native                              0.93       0.22          0          1
        Proportion Live with Mom                       0.94       0.18          0          1
Notes: This table presents the mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum for the
approximately 54,000 individuals sampled in wave 1 who nominated at least one friend of the
same gender who could be confirmed to attend the same grade in the same school and
reported whether they smoke or drank.




                                               33
                                             Table 2
                    Distribution of Health Behaviors in Friendship Networks
       % Smoke    Freq.      Percent    Cum.        % Drink   Freq.     Percent   Cum.
       Same Sex Friends
             0.00   22,994      42.51     42.51       0.00     12,509     23.18     23.18
             0.10                                     0.10
             0.20    1,534       2.84     45.34       0.20        931      1.73     24.91
             0.30    7,270      13.44     58.78       0.30      5,542     10.27     35.18
             0.40    1,154       2.13     60.91       0.40      1,064      1.97     37.15
             0.50    7,146      13.21     74.12       0.50      7,713      14.3     51.45
             0.60      770       1.42     75.55       0.60      1,135       2.1     53.55
             0.70     2651        4.9     80.45       0.70      3,774      6.99     60.55
             0.80    1,748       3.23     83.68       0.80      3,440      6.38     66.92
             0.90                                     0.90
             1.00    8,830      16.32      100        1.00     17,847     33.08      100
       Total        54,097        100             Total        53,955       100
Notes: The results identify the number and frequency of students who have friends with an
average incidence of health behavior falling into a particular bin. The bins run from the number
listed to any number less than the number in the next row, but since individuals at most have
five same gender friends the top and bottom rows capture the number of people with friends
where either none smoke or drink or all smoke or drink. Similarly, the rows associated with
0.20-0.29 and 0.80-89 both captures individuals with five friends where four exhibit one
behavior and the other does not, but 0.20-0.29 also captures individuals with four friends
where one smokes. Sample sizes are based on the total number of individuals with at least one
same grade/same gender friend who reported their drinking or smoking behavior.




                                               34
                       Table 3
            Variation in Friendship Options
      Peer Variable                        R-squared

      % Maternal College Graduate                92.5%
      % Black                                    97.2%
      % Hispanic                                 97.4%
      % White
      % Asian                                    93.8%
      % Native Born                              96.1%

      Mean Maternal Caring Scale                 55.1%

      % Smoke Cigarettes                        76.5%
      % Drink Alcohol                           80.9%
 Notes: The results reported indicate the R-squared from a
regression of the grade-level measure of peer characteristics or
peer health behaviors on a complete set of school-level and
grade-level dummy variables. The sample is the approximately
65,000 students who were surveyed in wave 1.




                             35
                                               Table 4A
                       Balancing Tests of Friendship Sorting: Friends’ Smoking
Outcome           White             White               White                  White                White
Specification      OLS                OLS                 OLS                   OLS                  OLS
                                                                                               School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects     None              School            School‐Cluster      School‐Cluster‐X     One Per Cohort
% Smoke         0.171***           0.077***               0.007                 NA                  0.002
                 (0.027)            (0.015)              (0.009)                                   (0.009)
Observations     53,564             53,564               53,564                                    43,197
R‐squared         0.017              0.365                0.808                                     0.952
                Maternal           Maternal             Maternal
Outcome         Education          Education            Education       Maternal Education    Maternal Education
Specification      OLS                OLS                  OLS                OLS                       OLS
                                                                                               School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects      None             School         School‐Cluster         School‐Cluster‐X      One Per Cohort
% Smoke         ‐0.292***         ‐0.324***          ‐0.227***                 ‐0.088*                ‐0.077
                  (0.075)           (0.048)            (0.060)                 (0.050)               (0.050)
Observations      53,564            53,564             53,564                   53,564               43,236
R‐squared          0.002             0.112              0.602                    0.883                 0.951
                Nativity of    Nativity of        Nativity of          Nativity of Mother    Nativity of Mother
Outcome          Mother        Mother             Mother
Specification       OLS               OLS                OLS                    OLS                  OLS
                                                                                               School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects     None              School            School‐Cluster      School‐Cluster‐X     One Per Cohort
% Smoke         0.056***           0.028***              0.010*                0.004                0.002
                 (0.018)            (0.006)              (0.005)              (0.006)              (0.006)
Observations     52,322             52,322               52,322               52,322               42,197
R‐squared         0.010              0.163                0.698                0.822                0.880




                                                 36
                                                Table 4A
                        Balancing Tests of Friendship Sorting: Friends’ Smoking
Outcome         Live w/ Mom       Live w/ Mom         Live w/ Mom           Live w/ Mom         Live w/ Mom
Specification        OLS               OLS                 OLS                   OLS                  OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects       None             School           School‐Cluster    School‐Cluster‐X      One Per Cohort
% Smoke          ‐0.010**          ‐0.012***            ‐0.012**            ‐0.008*                 ‐0.006
                   (0.004)           (0.003)              (0.006)           (0.005)                (0.005)
Observations       52,761            52,761               52,761            52,761                 42,474
R‐squared           0.001             0.011                0.537             0.890                   0.927
                  Paternal          Paternal             Paternal
Outcome          Education         Education            Education      Paternal Education    Paternal Education
Specification        OLS               OLS                  OLS               OLS                    OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects       None             School           School‐Cluster    School‐Cluster‐X       One Per Cohort
% Smoke          ‐0.299***         ‐0.269***            ‐0.216***            ‐0.124                ‐0.110
                   (0.061)           (0.045)              (0.067)            (0.082)               (0.082)
Observations       40,517            40,517               40,517             40,517                32,450
R‐squared           0.004             0.087                0.619              0.775                 0.853
                 Nativity of       Nativity of          Nativity of     Nativity of Father    Nativity of Father
Outcome            Father            Father               Father
Specification        OLS               OLS                  OLS                OLS                  OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects      None              School           School‐Cluster    School‐Cluster‐X      One Per Cohort
% Smoke          0.082***           0.028***             0.015*              0.005                 0.005
                  (0.023)            (0.007)             (0.008)            (0.008)               (0.008)
Observations      40,760             40,760              40,760             40,760                32,662
R‐squared          0.008              0.312               0.779              0.882                 0.920




                                                 37
                                               Table 4B
                       Balancing Tests of Friendship Sorting: Friends’ Drinking
Outcome           White              White              White                   White              White
Specification      OLS                OLS                 OLS                    OLS                OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects     None               School           School‐Cluster     School‐Cluster‐X     One Per Cohort
% Drink         0.071***            0.027**              ‐0.001                NA                  0.001
                 (0.024)            (0.010)              (0.008)                                  (0.008)
Observations     53,445             53,445               53,445                                   43,108
R‐squared         0.003              0.361                0.809                                    0.949
                Maternal           Maternal             Maternal
Outcome         Education          Education            Education      Maternal Education    Maternal Education
Specification      OLS                OLS                  OLS               OLS                     OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects      None              School           School‐Cluster     School‐Cluster‐X     One Per Cohort
% Drink         ‐0.239***          ‐0.276***            ‐0.176***             ‐0.074              ‐0.088*
                  (0.057)            (0.034)              (0.048)             (0.045)              (0.045)
Observations      53,445             53,445               53,445              53,445               43,095
R‐squared          0.002              0.111                0.603               0.882                0.910
                Nativity of        Nativity of          Nativity of     Nativity of Mother   Nativity of Mother
Outcome          Mother             Mother               Mother
Specification       OLS                OLS                  OLS                 OLS                 OLS
                                                                                              School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects     None              School            School‐Cluster     School‐Cluster‐X     One Per Cohort
% Drink         0.067***           0.049***             0.023***             0.020**              0.019**
                 (0.017)            (0.010)              (0.008)             (0.009)              (0.009)
Observations     52,212             52,212               52,212              52,212               42,085
R‐squared         0.012              0.166                0.700               0.822                0.868




                                                 38
                                                                      Table 4B
                                              Balancing Tests of Friendship Sorting: Friends’ Drinking
Outcome                              Live w/ Mom        Live w/ Mom         Live w/ Mom            Live w/ Mom                               Live w/ Mom
Specification                             OLS                OLS                 OLS                    OLS                                        OLS
                                                                                                                                           School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects                             None                  School              School‐Cluster           School‐Cluster‐X              One Per Cohort
% Drink                                ‐0.009**               ‐0.009**                  ‐0.009                   ‐0.007                          ‐0.005
                                         (0.004)                (0.004)                 (0.006)                  (0.006)                        (0.006)
Observations                             52,647                 52,647                  52,647                   52,647                         42,397
R‐squared                                 0.001                  0.011                   0.538                    0.890                           0.926
                                        Paternal               Paternal                Paternal
Outcome                                Education              Education               Education            Paternal Education             Paternal Education
Specification                              OLS                    OLS                     OLS                     OLS                             OLS
                                                                                                                                           School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects                            None                   School              School‐Cluster          School‐Cluster‐X                One Per Cohort
% Drink                               ‐0.259***               ‐0.275***               ‐0.159**                   ‐0.091                         ‐0.070
                                        (0.063)                 (0.043)                (0.074)                   (0.091)                        (0.091)
Observations                            40,412                  40,412                 40,412                    40,412                         32,417
R‐squared                                0.003                   0.088                  0.619                     0.775                          0.853
                                      Nativity of             Nativity of             Nativity of           Nativity of Father             Nativity of Father
Outcome                                 Father                  Father                 Father
Specification                             OLS                     OLS                    OLS                        OLS                          OLS
                                                                                                                                           School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects                            None                  School               School‐Cluster           School‐Cluster‐X              One Per Cohort
% Drink                                0.066***               0.036***                 0.014*                     0.007                         0.005
                                        (0.019)                (0.007)                 (0.007)                   (0.009)                       (0.009)
Observations                            40,665                 40,665                  40,665                    40,665                        32,659
R‐squared                                0.006                  0.313                   0.779                     0.882                         0.918
Notes: Each set of rows and each column in Tables 4A and 4B display coefficients from separate regressions. Additional controls include age, gender, race and
ethnicity dummy variables, maternal education, whether live with mother, whether native born and indicators for whether an observation has data missing on
a given variable. Cluster and X refer to cells associated with friendship patterns and student demographics, respectively. Paternal and maternal attributes are
based on student reports where education is years of schooling and nativity is whether not born in the U.S. All regressions control for grade‐level fixed effects,
and standard errors are clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                               39
                                                                          Table 5
                                                                Friendship Network Effects
Outcome                                 Smoke                   Smoke             Smoke                           Smoke                        Smoke
Specification                            OLS                     OLS               OLS                             OLS                          OLS
                                                                                                                                           School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects                            None                   School              School‐Cluster          School‐Cluster‐X               One Per Cohort
% Smoke                                0.385***                0.366***               0.308***                   0.301***                         0.320
                                        (0.010)                 (0.011)                (0.019)                    (0.023)                        (0.023)
Observations                            49,845                  49,845                 49,845                     49,845                          41723
R‐squared                                0.140                   0.147                  0.582                      0.703                          0.803
Outcome                                  Drink                   Drink                  Drink                      Drink                        Drink
Specification                             OLS                     OLS                    OLS                        OLS                          OLS
                                                                                                                                           School‐Cluster‐X
Fixed Effects                            None                   School              School‐Cluster          School‐Cluster‐X               One Per Cohort
% Drink                                0.329***                0.302***               0.253***                   0.256***                         0.287
                                        (0.011)                 (0.011)                (0.019)                    (0.022)                        (0.022)
Observations                            49,656                  49,656                 49,656                     49,656                          41572
R‐squared                                0.153                   0.163                  0.609                      0.726                          0.821
Notes: Each column displays coefficients from separate regressions. Cluster and X refer to cells associated with friendship patterns and student demographics,
respectively. All regressions control for grade‐level fixed effects and indicators for observations where control variables are missing. Standard errors (shown in
parentheses) are clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                               40
                                                                              Table 6
                                                 Two Stage Estimates of Friendship Effects on Smoking and Drinking
Outcome                      Smoke                   Smoke                  Smoke                     Smoke                         Smoke                          Smoke
Specification               School FE           School‐Cluster‐X          School FE              School‐Cluster‐X         School FE, Cluster FE Est.     School FE, Cluster FE Est.
                                                One Per Cohort                                                                w/ own Cohort                 w/out own Cohort
Sample                      Individual             Individual             Collapsed                 Collapsed                     Individual                    Individual
% Smoke                      0.340***               0.320***               0.363***                  0.336***                      0.318***                       0.328***
                             (0.014)                (0.023)                (0.017)                   (0.027)                       (0.010)                         (0.011)
Predicted FE w/ or                                                                                                                 1.037***                         -0.002
w/out own cohort                                                                                                                   (0.003)                         (0.009)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                                                                  -171.477***
Control                                                                                                                                                           (16.991)
Observations                 11,373                  11,373                 11,373                    11,373                        17,500                         17,500
R‐squared                    0.147                   0.539                  0.192                      0.553                         0.377                           0.392
Outcome                       Drink                   Drink                  Drink                     Drink                         Drink                         Drink
Specification               School FE           School‐Cluster‐X          School FE              School‐Cluster‐X         School FE, Cluster FE Est.     School FE, Cluster FE Est.
                                                One Per Cohort                                                                w/ own Cohort                 w/out own Cohort
Sample                      Individual             Individual             Collapsed                 Collapsed                     Individual                    Individual
% Drink                      0.289***               0.287***               0.320***                  0.321***                      0.287***                       0.288***
                             (0.014)                (0.022)                (0.016)                   (0.023)                       (0.010)                         (0.012)
Predicted FE w/ or                                                                                                                 1.037***                         0.005
w/out own cohort                                                                                                                   (0.004)                         (0.011)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                                                                  -179.230***
Control                                                                                                                                                           (15.565)
Observations                 11,340                  11,340                 11,340                    11,340                        17,435                         17,435
R‐squared                    0.154                   0.550                  0.209                      0.568                         0.385                          0.403

          Notes: Each column and panel displays coefficients from separate regressions. The individual sample is estimated using student level data for which a school
          by type by friendship pattern fixed effect is identified and the first two columns are based on the one student per cohort per fixed effect sample, while the
          collapsed sample is based on one observation for each grade‐school‐cluster‐X cell and weighted by the number of students in that cell. The predicted fixed
          effect regressor in Column 5 is the estimated school‐cluster‐X fixed effect from the model shown in column 4. The predicted fixed effect in Column 6 is the
          weighted mean over all grades of the grade‐school‐cluster‐X residual from the model in column 4 omitting the fixed effect contribution from a student’s own
          grade. The Guryan control is the same weighted mean over all grade‐cluster‐X cells in a school again omitting the contribution from a students’ own grade‐
          cluster‐X cell. All regressions control for grade‐level fixed effects, standard demographic controls shown above and indicators for observations where
          variables are missing. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                        41
                                                                        Table 7
                                             Longitudinal Analysis of the onset of Smoking and Drinking
Outcome                                  Smoke                  Smoke                  Smoke                      Smoke                         Smoke
Specification                              OLS                 School FE              School FE         School FE, Cluster FE Est.    School FE, Cluster FE Est.
                                                                                                            w/ own Cohort                w/out own Cohort
Sample                                 Full Sample            Full Sample            Restricted                 Restricted                    Restricted
% Smoke                                 0.063***               0.061***               0.053***                   0.051***                      0.045***
                                        (0.011)                (0.012)                (0.016)                    (0.017)                        (0.017)
Predicted FE w/ or                                                                                                -0.018                         0.002
w/out own cohort                                                                                                 (0.035)                        (0.021)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                                                 11.743**
Control                                                                                                                                         (5.392)
Observations                              6,137                  6,137                  1,895                      1,895                         1,895
R‐squared                                 0.019                  0.041                  0.093                      0.093                         0.095
Outcome                                   Drink                  Drink                  Drink                      Drink                         Drink
Specification                           School FE              School FE              School FE         School FE, Cluster FE Est.    School FE, Cluster FE Est.
                                                                                                            w/ own Cohort                w/out own Cohort
Sample                                 Full Sample            Full Sample            Restricted                 Restricted                    Restricted
% Drink                                 0.120***               0.112***               0.110***                   0.107***                            0.114***
                                        (0.015)                (0.016)                (0.027)                    (0.028)                              (0.028)
Predicted FE w/ or                                                                                                -0.044                               -0.028
w/out own cohort                                                                                                 (0.056)                              (0.028)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                                                        -10.836
Control                                                                                                                                              (11.298)
Observations                                4,310                  4,310                   1,228                      1,228                             1,228
R‐squared                                   0.034                  0.074                   0.119                      0.120                             0.121
 Notes: Each column and panel displays coefficients from separate regressions. The restricted sample is estimated only using students who belong to
 school‐cluster‐X cells where there are students in that cell from at least two grades (fixed effects identified). The predicted fixed effect in Column 4 is the
 estimated school‐cluster‐X fixed effect from the model shown in column 4 of Table 6. The predicted fixed effect in Column 5 is the weighted mean over all
 grades of the grade‐school‐cluster‐X residual from the same model omitting the fixed effect contribution from a student’s own grade. The Guryan control is
 the same weighted mean over all grade‐cluster‐X cells in a school again omitting the contribution from a students’ own grade‐cluster‐X cell. All regressions
 control for grade‐level fixed effects, standard demographic controls shown above and indicators for observations where variables are missing. Standard errors
 (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                               42
                                                                          Table 8
                                               Longitudinal Analysis of the onset of Smoking and Drinking
                                                                Stratified by Cluster Size
Outcome                                        Smoke                            Smoke                            Smoke                             Smoke
Specification                                School FE                         School FE               School FE, Cluster FE Est.        School FE, Cluster FE Est.
                                                                                                          w/out own Cohort                  w/out own Cohort
Sample                                      Restricted                       Restricted                       Restricted                        Restricted
                                           Small Cluster                    Large Cluster                    Small Cluster                     Large Cluster
% Smoke                                        0.055*                           0.052**                            0.047                          0.041**
                                               (0.029)                          (0.021)                           (0.031)                          (0.021)
Predicted FE w/out                                                                                                 -0.025                           0.054
own cohort                                                                                                        (0.029)                          (0.036)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                      9.439                         18.294**
Control                                                                                                          (11.739)                          (8.465)
Observations                                     833                             1,062                               833                            1,062
R‐squared                                       0.190                            0.125                              0.191                           0.133
Outcome                                         Drink                            Drink                            Drink                             Drink
Specification                                School FE                         School FE                   School FE, Cluster               School FE, Cluster
                                                                                                           w/out own Cohort                 w/out own Cohort
Sample                                      Restricted                       Restricted                       Restricted                        Restricted
                                           Small Cluster                    Large Cluster                    Small Cluster                     Large Cluster
% Drink                                       0.151***                          0.079**                           0.151***                        0.082**
                                              (0.048)                           (0.037)                            (0.047)                        (0.038)
Predicted FE w/out                                                                                                  -0.015                         -0.034
own cohort                                                                                                         (0.044)                        (0.070)
Guryan et. al.                                                                                                      -1.374                       -24.185*
Control                                                                                                           (18.174)                       (14.256)
Observations                                      571                             657                                 571                            657
R‐squared                                       0.238                            0.175                               0.238                          0.179
 Notes: Each column and panel displays coefficients from separate regressions. The restricted sample is estimated only using students who belong to school‐
 cluster‐X cells where there are students in that cell from at least two grades. Small and large clusters refer to subsamples with the number of observations in
 school‐cluster‐X cell above or below the median. The predicted fixed effect is the weighted mean over all grades of the grade‐school‐cluster‐X residual from
 the model in column 4 of Table 7 omitting the fixed effect contribution from a student’s own grade. The Guryan control is the same weighted mean over all
 grade‐cluster‐X cells in a school again omitting the contribution from a students’ own grade‐cluster‐X cell. All regressions control for grade‐level fixed effects,
 standard demographic controls shown above and indicators for observations where variables are missing. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are
 clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                                 43
                                                                          Table 9
                                                          Friendship Effects by Number of Friends
Outcome                                       Smoke                           Smoke                            Smoke                            Smoke
Specification                                School FE                       School FE                  School‐Cluster‐X FE              School‐Cluster‐X FE

Sample                                 Collapsed Sample                 Collapsed Sample                Collapsed Sample                 Collapsed Sample
                                            1‐3 Friends                     4‐5 Friends                      1‐3 Friends                      4‐5 Friends
% Smoke                                      0.326***                         0.599***                        0.307***                         0.589***
                                             (0.017)                          (0.031)                         (0.027)                          (0.058)
Observations                                  9,201                            2,154                           9,201                            2,154
R‐squared                                     0.187                            0.284                           0.546                            0.604
Outcome                                        Drink                           Drink                            Drink                            Drink
Specification                                School FE                       School FE                  School‐Cluster‐X FE              School‐Cluster‐X FE

Sample                                 Collapsed Sample                 Collapsed Sample                Collapsed Sample                 Collapsed Sample
                                            1‐3 Friends                     4‐5 Friends                      1‐3 Friends                      4‐5 Friends
%Drink                                        0.290***                        0.539***                       0.297***                          0.543***
                                               (0.016)                         (0.033)                       (0.025)                            (0.063)
Observations                                    9,173                           2,149                         9,173                              2,149
R‐squared                                       0.201                           0.313                         0.559                              0.621
 Notes: Each column and panel displays coefficients from separate regressions. Each column represents a subsample of individuals with either 1‐3 or 4‐5 same
 grade/same gender friends. Cluster and X refer to cells associated with friendship patterns and student demographics, respectively. The collapsed sample is
 based on one observation for each grade‐school‐cluster‐X cell and weighted by the number of students in that cell. All regressions control for grade‐level fixed
 effects, standard demographic controls shown above and indicators for observations where variables are missing. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are
 clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                44
                                                                              Table 10
                                                         Friendship Effects on On‐set by Number of Friends
Outcome               Smoke                  Smoke                   Smoke                     Smoke                          Smoke                          Smoke
Specification        School FE              School FE              School FE                  School FE             School FE‐ Cluster FE Est.        School‐ Cluster FE Est.
                                                                                                                       w/out own Cohort                 w/out own Cohort

Sample              Individual              Individual            Restricted                 Restricted                    Restricted                      Restricted
                    1‐3 Friends            4‐5 Friends             1‐3 Friends               4‐5 Friends                    1‐3 Friends                    4‐5 Friends
% Smoke              0.053***                0.073***               0.067***                    0.001                        0.066***                         -0.001
                     (0.015)                 (0.017)                (0.020)                    (0.029)                       (0.021)                         (0.029)
Observations                       6,137                                            1,895                                                     1,895
R‐squared                          0.042                                            0.094                                                     0.094
Outcome                Drink                  Drink                   Drink                     Drink                          Drink                          Drink
Specification        School FE              School FE              School FE                  School FE             School FE‐ Cluster FE Est.        School‐ Cluster FE Est.
                                                                                                                       w/out own Cohort                 w/out own Cohort

Sample              Individual              Individual            Restricted                 Restricted                    Restricted                      Restricted
                    1‐3 Friends            4‐5 Friends             1‐3 Friends               4‐5 Friends                    1‐3 Friends                    4‐5 Friends
% Drink              0.088***                0.151***               0.083***                  0.220***                       0.081***                        0.217***
                     (0.016)                 (0.029)                (0.028)                   (0.071)                        (0.029)                         (0.073)
Observations                       4,310                                              1,228                                                  1,228
R‐squared                          0.075                                              0.124                                                  0.124
      Notes: Each pair of columns in each panel displays coefficients from separate regressions. The restricted sample is estimated only using students who belong
      to school‐cluster‐X cells where there are students in that cell from at least two grades. Each column represents a subsample of individuals with either 1‐3 or 4‐
      5 same grade/same gender friends. Columns 5 and 6 include controls for a predicted fixed effect based on a weighted mean over all grades of the grade‐
      school‐cluster‐X residual from the model in column 4 of Table 7 omitting the fixed effect contribution from a student’s own grade and a Guryan‐style control
      that is the same weighted mean over all grade‐cluster‐X cells in a school again omitting the contribution from a students’ own grade‐cluster‐X cell. All
      regressions control for grade‐level fixed effects, standard demographic controls shown above and indicators for observations where variables are missing.
      Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the school level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                     45
