                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SOCIAL SUPPORT SUBSTITUTION AND THE EARNINGS REBOUND:
EVIDENCE FROM A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY IN DISABILITY INSURANCE REFORM

                                              Lex Borghans
                                             Anne C. Gielen
                                            Erzo F.P. Luttmer

                                          Working Paper 18261
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18261


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2012




 We would like to thank Gerard van den Berg, Mark Duggan, Amy Finkelstein, Paul Frijters, Pierre
 Gielen, Ed Glaeser, David Johnston, Pierre Koning, Peter Kuhn, Ellen Meara, Jon Skinner, Doug Staiger,
 and Frank Vella, for helpful conversations. We thank seminar participants at IZA, Tilburg University,
 Maastricht University, University of Milan, the NBER Public Economics meetings, SciencesPo, University
 of New South Wales, Queensland University, the CPB, Erasmus University of Rotterdam, the University
 of Chicago, and the Tinbergen Institute, as well as participants at the IZA/IFAU, LEW, EALE, IZA/CEPR,
 and IZA/SOLE conferences for insightful comments. We would like to especially thank Bas ter Weel,
 who greatly contributed to the conception of this paper. All errors are our own. The views expressed
 herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2012 by Lex Borghans, Anne C. Gielen, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. All rights reserved. Short sections
 of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Support Substitution and the Earnings Rebound: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity
in Disability Insurance Reform
Lex Borghans, Anne C. Gielen, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer
NBER Working Paper No. 18261
July 2012
JEL No. H53,I38,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we exploit a cohort discontinuity in the stringency of the 1993 Dutch disability reforms
to obtain causal estimates of the effects of decreased generosity of disability insurance (DI) on behavior
of existing DI recipients. We find evidence of substantial “social support substitution”: individuals
on average offset a euro of lost DI benefits by collecting 31 cents more from other social assistance
programs. This benefit-substitution effect declines somewhat over time, but is still a significant 20%
eight years later. Individuals also exhibit a strong rebound in earnings: labor earnings increase by 62
cents on average per euro of lost DI benefits. This is novel evidence of substantial remaining earnings
capacity in a sample of long-term claimants of DI. On average, individuals make up for almost the
entire DI benefit reduction through increases in other forms of social assistance and in labor earnings.


Lex Borghans                                        Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Department of Economics and ROA                     Department of Economics
Maastricht University                               Dartmouth College
P.O. Box 616                                        6106 Rockefeller Center, Room 305
NL-6200 MD Maastricht                               Hanover, NH 03755
The Netherlands                                     and NBER
lex.borghans@maastrichtuniversity.nl                Erzo.FP.Luttmer@Dartmouth.Edu

Anne C. Gielen
Erasmus School of Economics
Erasmus University Rotterdam
PO Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
gielen@ese.eur.nl
1. Introduction
       Because estimates of labor supply responses are of tremendous policy relevance,
the literature on the effects of social assistance on behavior has rightly focused on labor
supply responses to changes in the eligibility criteria or generosity of social assistance
programs.   These estimates, however, do not capture two additional policy-relevant
dimensions of the response to changes in social assistance programs. First, they do not
capture potential spillover effects to other social assistance programs that arise when
individuals substitute between programs. Such social support substitution may decrease
the reduced-form labor supply response to changes in generosity of a particular program
when individuals take up other programs instead of adjusting their labor supply.
Similarly, social support substitution reduces the welfare impact of reductions in
generosity of any given program on recipients of that program. Evidence on the extent of
social support substitution is also important for policy makers because it allows them to
make more accurate predictions of the budgetary impact of a reform to a social assistance
program by taking into account the spillover effects of the reform on participation in
other programs.    Second, existing estimates of supply responses generally do not
distinguish between the responses by existing claimants and responses by (potential) new
enrollees. Evidence of labor supply responses among existing long-term DI recipients is
of great importance for policy reforms because effects that operate on the existing stock
of recipients have the potential for a much greater immediate impact than reforms that
operate on the comparatively small inflow into a DI program.
       In this paper, we estimate the extent of social support substitution in response to
reforms in disability insurance in the Netherlands as well as the reduced-form labor
supply response to this reform among existing DI recipients. Together, this allows us to
estimate the impact of the reform on the total income of affected DI recipients. The
reforms to the Dutch DI system, which also insures against partial loss of earnings
capacity, entailed medical re-examinations of existing recipients. A common
consequence of the re-examination was a change in the benefit level. Two features make
this reform particularly suitable for studying substitution between different social
assistance programs as well as labor supply responses among current recipients. First, we
have administrative panel data on the universe of Dutch disability insurance claimants,



                                                                                         1
including information on their future labor market earnings and their future income from
all other government cash social assistance programs. These data allow us to track for a
period of nearly a decade what happens to (former) disability insurance claimants in the
wake of the reform. Second, the reform contains a cohort discontinuity: the reform was
significantly more stringent and led to an average benefit reduction of an additional 10%
for the cohort that turned 45 after August 1st, 1993. Because we have each individual’s
month of birth, we exploit this discontinuity by comparing later labor market earnings
and social assistance income for the cohort just below this age cutoff to outcomes for the
cohort just above the age cutoff.         We scale this difference in outcomes by the
discontinuity in disability benefit levels around the age cut-off. This yields two key
ratios: (i) the benefit-substitution ratio, which is the average causal effect of the more
stringent DI rules on income from other social assistance as a fraction of average lost DI
income, and (ii) the earnings crowd-out ratio, which is the average causal effect of the
more stringent DI rules on earnings as a fraction of average lost DI income.
       We find that, in the short term (about 2 years after reform), the more stringent DI
rules increase the probability of receiving any income from other social assistance
programs by 5 percentage points (on a base of 14 percent), and the income from these
other social assistance programs replaces 31% of lost DI income. In other words, we find
a substantial amount of social support substitution with a short-term benefit-substitution
ratio of 0.31. The more stringent rules increase the probability of having any labor
market earnings by 3 percentage points (on a base of 35 percent) and also increase labor
earnings on average. The additional earnings replace 62% of foregone DI income, i.e.,
the earnings crowd-out ratio is 0.62. Recipients classified as fully disabled have a crowd-
out ratio of 0.52, which is novel evidence of a substantial labor supply response among
long-term fully disabled individuals.       Combining the effects of social assistance
substitution and earnings crowd out, we find that individuals are able to replace basically
all of their foregone DI income on average.          Specifically, we cannot reject that
individuals fully offset the cut in their DI benefit by increased income from other social
assistance programs and labor earnings.
       Over time (up to 8 years after the re-examinations for our cohorts), the benefit-
substitution ratio falls somewhat and the earnings crowd-out increases slightly, but these



                                                                                         2
trends are not significant in either ratio. Even in 2005, or about 8 years after the
implementation of the reform, the benefit-substitution ratio is still a statistically and
economically significant 0.20 and the earnings crowd-out ratio stands at 0.71. Spillovers
between social assistance programs may operate not only through former DI recipients’
own choices, but could potentially also operate through the decisions of their spouses.
However, we do not find any statistically significant evidence of responses by spouses in
terms of labor supply or social assistance receipt. The point estimates indicate that
spouses increase their labor supply but do not change their social assistance receipt. This
implies that if we measure earnings crowd out and benefit substitution at the household
level rather than at the individual level, we find a slightly (about 18 percentage point)
higher earnings crowd-out ratio and a similar benefit-substitution ratio.
         While the precise magnitudes of our findings are obviously specific to this
particular Dutch disability insurance reform, we believe our paper offers important
lessons that are widely applicable. First, our evidence demonstrates that social support
substitution occurs at an economically meaningful scale for prime-age disability
insurance recipients. Hence, a carefully designed reform of a social assistance program
needs to take into account its effects on other social assistance programs. Second, our
findings show that even long-term disability insurance recipients can still exhibit a
meaningful rebound in their labor supply. Third, to measure the full impact of social
insurance reforms on labor supply and the reliance on other forms of social insurance, it
is important to also consider effects over the longer term and to take possible behavioral
responses of spouses into account.
         Our findings on the existence of spillover effects between different social
assistance programs confirm earlier results from other contexts.1 With respect to child-
related benefits, Garrett and Glied (2000) show that the increase in child Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) eligibility in the early 1990s led to a greater increase in SSI
enrollment in states with less generous benefits for Aid to Families with Dependent
1
  The one exception is a paper by Autor and Duggan (2008), in which they exploit a ruling that suddenly
expanded the eligibility for Veterans’ Disability Compensation (DC) for a subgroup of Vietnam Veterans.
They find that the increased take-up of Veteran’s Disability Compensation due to this ruling raised the
receipt of Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits. As Autor and Duggan note, this result may
be explained by the fact that one needs leave the labor force to qualify for SSDI, and leaving the labor force
is less costly for people who already receive DC. Thus, this institutional feature may explain the
complementarity between two social assistance programs in this case.


                                                                                                            3
Children (AFDC) while Schmidt and Sevak (2004) show that states that reduced the
generosity of their AFDC program experienced increases in SSI enrollments. Both
studies suggest that families use SSI and AFDC as substitutes. Kubik (2003) shows that
the substitution of SSI for AFDC is larger in states with negative fiscal shocks,
suggesting that states actively encouraged this substitution (because the state-share in SSI
payments is generally lower than the state-share in AFDC payments). Duggan and
Kearney (2007) examine individual-level panel data to find that households in which a
child becomes eligible for SSI subsequently receive less income from AFDC, WIC, and
food stamps.2 With respect to early retirement, Duggan, Singleton, and Song (2007), Li
and Maestas (2008), and Coe and Haverstick (2010) exploit differences by cohort in the
generosity of Social Security retirement benefits to show that the reduction in the
generosity of Social Security retirement benefits led to increases in applications for or
receipt of Social Security disability benefits.             Koning and Van Vuuren (2010) use
administrative data to describe program enrolment after dismissal, and find that DI
substitutes for UI but fail to find evidence that UI substitutes for DI. Karlström, Palme,
and Svensson (2008) use a difference-in-differences design to examine the effect of the
abolition of DI as a path to early retirement for 60-64 year olds in Sweden. They find
that, in the 2-3 years following the reform, this group responded by taking up other forms
of social assistance rather than by increasing their labor supply. Finally, Staubli (2011)
also uses a difference-in-differences approach to show that a disability insurance reform
that affected 55-56 year-old males in Austria had spillover effects on their take up of
unemployment insurance and sick leave, in addition to affecting their labor supply. Our
paper contributes to this literature by estimating substitution between social support
programs for prime-age individuals, and doing this in a setting that allows us to very
cleanly identify the degree of spillovers between programs. In addition, we extend the
literature by examining substitution effects over longer horizons (up to eight years after
the re-examinations for our cohorts took place).
           Our estimates also contribute to an extensive literature on the labor supply effects
of disability insurance (see Bound and Burkhauser 1999 for an overview) by showing
well-identified effects on the labor supply of existing long-term DI participants. Parsons

2
    WIC provides nutritional assistance to low-income families with young children and pregnant women.


                                                                                                         4
(1980) shows cross-sectional evidence that suggests that the rise DI generosity has
contributed to the decline in male labor force participation. Gruber (2000) exploits a
natural experiment in Canada and finds a sizeable labor force participation response
among older workers to the generosity of DI benefits. Much of the more recent work in
the U.S. on labor supply effects of DI compares accepted to rejected DI applicants.
Bound (1989) and Von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011) directly compare accepted
and rejected applicants, and those estimates are probably upperbounds of labor supply
effects because there are likely unmeasured determinants of the rejection decision that are
correlated with labor supply.      To get around this issue, other studies use plausibly
exogenous variation in rejection rates. Gruber and Kubic (1997) use variation across
states and time in rejection rates, Chen and Van der Klaauw (2008) use an age
discontinuity in rejection rates for a particular subgroup, De Jong, Lindeboom, and Van
der Klaauw (2010) use variation in screening severity induced by an experimental
intervention, French and Song (2011) use variation in rejection rates due the essentially
random assignment of administrative law judges to DI cases, and Maestas, Mullen, and
Strand (2011) use variation in rejection rates due the essentially random assignment of DI
examiners to DI cases. These studies all find clear evidence of labor supply responses to
disability insurance. Autor and Duggan (2003) exploit the interaction of state disability
replacement rates with national changes in program stringency to find credible evidence
that increased DI generosity reduced labor force participation of high school dropouts.
Finally, Maestas and Song (2011) use the automatic conversion of DI into Social Security
benefits to show that there is a labor supply effect of DI on older disability insurance
recipients. Our study contributes to this literature by showing the labor supply responses
not only occur at the point of the initial eligibility determination, but that there are strong
labor supply responses to changes in DI generosity even among prime-age long-term
disability insurance recipients, including individuals classified as fully disabled.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the
reform in the Dutch disability act that we use for identification in this paper. Section 3
describes the data, and Section 4 presents the results. Section 5 concludes.




                                                                                             5
2. The 1993 Dutch Disability Insurance Reform
         After a waiting period of one year, individuals in the Netherlands are entitled to
disability benefits if an illness or infirmity prevents them from earning the amount they
used to earn before the onset of the disability.3 The replacement rate offered by DI
depends on the “degree of disability,” which is defined by the percentage difference
between the prior earnings and the remaining potential earnings capacity of the DI
applicant. In other words, the Dutch DI system also covers partial disability. Health
insurance is not linked to DI in the Netherlands, so this is not a consideration for DI
participation.
         In order to explain the 1993 DI reform, we first describe how the Dutch disability
insurance system determined eligibility and replacement rates prior to the reform. Prior
to the reform, the potential earnings capacity was determined by the following procedure.
First, a medical doctor examined the applicant and compiled a list of work activities that,
according to the doctor’s judgment, the applicant could still perform.4 Second, using a
dictionary of occupations that specified for each occupation the required education level
and work activities, a list of occupations that an applicant could still perform was
compiled, but occupations that were more than two “education levels” (on a 7-level scale)
below the education level required for the applicant’s previous occupation were not
considered. Finally, if the list contained at least 5 suitable occupations with at least 10
active workers (though not necessarily vacancies) in the applicant’s region5, then the
mean wage of the 5 highest paying occupations on the list was taken as the applicant’s
potential earnings capacity. The loss of earnings due to the disability, measured by the
difference between the prior labor earnings and the potential earnings capacity,
determined the degree of disability.               If it was not possible to specify 5 suitable
occupations with at least 10 workers, the degree of disability was set at 100%. The


3
  Also see Bovenberg (2000), who provides useful institutional background information on the Dutch
disability act. See García-Gómez, Von Gaudecker, and Lindeboom (2011) for further background
information and descriptive evidence on DI enrollment trends and patterns.
4
  The list includes 27 physical activities (such as “lifting,” “kneeling,” and “ability to deal with temperature
fluctuations”) and a list of 10 psychological abilities (such as “ability to work under time pressure,” “ability
to perform monotonous work,” and “ability to deal with conflict”).
5
  The Netherlands was divided up in 5 regions and in 16 “start regions.” Alternative jobs had to be found in
the “start regions” first. Only if none were available, the labor market expert could look for jobs in the
neighboring regions (within one of the main 5 regions).


                                                                                                              6
measured degrees of disability were grouped into 8 categories varying from 0-15% to 80-
100%, and these categories determined the replacement rate (see Table 1).                              The
replacement rate was applied to the individual’s indexed previous earnings, where the
previous earnings are subject to cap (about €36,000/year in 1999). Individuals on DI
have an earnings exemption equal to their capped indexed previous earnings times the
degree they are not disabled (which is set at 100% minus the lowerbound of their degree
disabled category). Earnings above the exemption lead to a one-for-one reduction in DI
benefits in the short term, and to a reclassification in the degree disabled in the longer
term (typically after about 3 years).
        The DI reforms of 1993 tightened this procedure in two respects.6 First, the
determination of disability had to be based on objective medical information (rather than
just the doctor’s judgment). In other words, the applicant needed to have a clearly
observable functional work limitation, and a direct relationship between the functional
work limitation and the medical diagnosis had to be plausible. Disabilities due to mental
health problems became more difficult to prove than physical health problems. Second,
the criteria for the list of suitable alternative occupations were relaxed: (i) occupations
more than two “education levels” below the applicant’s education level were included
from now on, (ii) the list only needed to contain 3 suitable alternative occupations (rather
than 5), and (iii) the geographic region in which these occupations had to exist with at
least 10 active workers was expanded roughly threefold.7 With these relaxed criteria, it
became more likely to find higher-paying alternative occupations and less likely that the
list would not contain at least the minimum number (now 3) of occupations needed to
avoid declaring the applicant as fully disabled.                By changing the criteria for what
constituted suitable alternative employment, the reform aimed to lower the generosity of
disability benefits and to reduce the number of claimants.8


6
  The formal name of the 1993 UI reforms is “Terugdringing Beroep op Arbeidsongeschiktheidsverzeker-
ingen (TBA),” which roughly translates as “Reducing claims on disability insurance.”
7
  Now all available jobs within the main region where the individual was residing (out of 5 main regions)
could be used to calculate the potential earnings capacity, rather than just jobs in one of the 16 “start
regions.”
8
  Another important change of the 1993 DI reform was the introduction of an age- and duration-dependent
benefit for new applicants. To those already receiving disability benefits as of August 1993, i.e. the group
that we are studying here, these changes did not apply and the benefit level remained a function of the
indexed previous earnings.


                                                                                                          7
        The new procedure for determining benefits was applied to new DI applicants as
well as to existing DI claimants who were 50 or younger at the time the reform went into
effect (August 1st, 1993).       Because re-examinations of existing claimants are time
consuming, these re-examinations were scheduled to take place by cohort over a period
of several years. Disability claimants who were age 34 or younger on the 1st of August
1993 were re-examined in 1994, the 35-40 year-old cohort in 1995, the 41-44 year-old
cohort in 1996/1997, and the 45-50 year-old cohort were to be re-examined in 1997-
2001. However, shortly before the re-examinations for this latter cohort started, political
pressure led the government to decide to that the 45-50 age cohort would be re-examined
based on the previous and more generous procedure for determining replacement rates
rather than the new and more stringent procedure. While re-examinations tended to
lower benefits, this was not necessarily the case for every claimant. Some disability
claimants saw their benefits rise, for example because their medical condition had
deteriorated. However, because the new procedure is more stringent in all respects, the
benefit determined under the new procedure is weakly lower than what it would have
been for that particular individual if the old procedure had still been used.


3. Data
3.1 Data sources
        This paper relies on administrative data that Statistics Netherlands has assembled
from several sources. Information from these various sources is merged at the individual
level by using a so-called RIN-number (which is a coded version of the Dutch equivalent
of the U.S. Social Security number).9
        First, we have administrative data on all disability benefits recipients aged 15-64
in the Netherlands for the period 1995-2005.                The data were collected by the
organizations responsible for administering disability benefits. The information from
these administrative records include the start and end dates of a disability spell, the
degree of disability (in categories), disability benefit payments, previous earnings,
industry information, and the reason for the termination of the disability spell, but does


9
  These data can be accessed via a remote-access computer after a confidentiality statement has been
signed.


                                                                                                  8
not contain reliable or consistent information about the medical condition that gave rise
to the disability spell.
        We obtain the demographic characteristics of the disability claimants from the
municipal registries (“GBA”), which contain all residents of the Netherlands.          This
database includes information on each person’s month and year of birth, marital status,
number of children, national origin, and place of residence, as well as the identification
numbers (RIN-codes) of their partners. The RIN-codes of the partners allow us to
include income sources of the partner. We collect these demographic characteristics as of
January 1996, which is the start of our sample period.
        Finally, we obtain information on labor market earnings and sources of social
assistance income other than DI by merging five administrative datasets: earnings of all
employees, self-employment earnings, unemployment benefits (“WW”), general
assistance (“Bijstand”), and receipt of any other form of social assistance (from about 30
relatively minor programs). Data on social assistance come from the organizations that
administer these programs. Information about the earnings from paid labor and self-
employment are gathered by Statistics Netherlands using information from the tax
authorities and social insurance records. All these files are available from 1999 onwards,
which is why 1999 is the start year for our empirical analysis. Unemployment insurance
covers any income loss due to unemployment for a duration of up to 5 years, where the
duration depends on one’s work history. General assistance is unlimited in duration and
does not require dependents (unlike the U.S. welfare program), but is means tested.
Apart from the programs mentioned here, there are no additional cash social assistance
programs in the Netherlands that are relevant for individuals in the age range of our
sample. Exact variable definitions are provided in Appendix B.


3.2 Sample definition
        In our baseline analysis, we restrict the sample to all individuals who (i) received
disability benefits on August 1st, 1993, (ii) who were between the ages of 42.5 and 47.5 at
that date, and (iii) who were still on DI as of January 1st, 1996. The first restriction is
necessary because the discontinuity in benefit rules only applies to existing claimants on
the date the reform went into effect. The second restriction limits the sample to those



                                                                                          9
who are close to age 45, where the discontinuity in benefit rules occurs. We selected this
bandwidth based on the criterion by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009).10                                The last
restriction is driven by data availability. While our data on disability starts in 1995, the
information in the 1995 file does not contain previous earnings, so we use the files from
1996 onwards instead. Thus, we can only observe individuals who were on disability at
the time of the passage of the reform legislation if they remained on disability until
January of 1996 or later. We believe it is highly unlikely that differential attrition
occurred around the age discontinuity prior to January 1st of 1996 because the re-
examinations for the individuals in our sample did not start until later in 1996 and the
government decided only in 1997 that the age 45+ cohort would not be subject to the
new, more stringent criteria.11 A plot of the density of disability claimants by cohort is
relatively smooth and therefore gives no indication of differential attrition (see Appendix
Figure A1). The plot further indicates that heaping-induced bias (Barreca, Lindo, and
Waddell, 2011) is not a concern and that there is no discontinuity in the density around
the cutoff age of 45 (p-value of 0.126 in the McCrary, 2008, density test). Our data
extends until 2005 because in 2006 there was a fundamental reform to DI.
         We exclude all individuals that appeared on more than one disability record in our
data in a given month (about 3 percent of the sample). We exclude these observations
because it is not clear whether they reflect administrative/coding errors or whether they
truly concern individuals who are entitled to two (or more) different disability insurance
benefits because they were employed in two (or more) jobs before they became disabled.
In the latter case it is hard to understand why we observe that in many of these cases there
has been a health improvement (i.e., a reduction in the degree of disability) during a
particular period for one of the benefit claims, but not for the other. We have checked
that no discontinuity occurs at age 45 in the likelihood that an individual has more than
one disability record, and are therefore not concerned that the omission or inclusion of



10
   The Imbens-Kalyanaraman criterion yields different optimal bandwidths for different outcome variables.
Rather than changing the sample for each outcome variable, we selected a bandwidth in the middle of the
optimal bandwidths suggested by the Imbens-Kalyanaraman criterion, and applied this bandwidth to all our
specifications. Below, we show that our key results are robust to using different bandwidths.
11
   Please note that we refer to cohorts by their age at the time the reform went into effect (i.e., as of August
1st, 1993).


                                                                                                            10
the 3 percent of observations with multiple records would substantively affect our results.
After these sample restrictions, our baseline sample contains 84,185 observations.


3.3 Summary statistics
       Table 2 presents summary statistics for our key variables. Panel A shows the
characteristics of our sample measured as of January 1996, i.e. before the re-
examinations took place. About a third of disability claimants are female and about two
thirds are married. The average DI spell started in 1985. So when the reform was
implemented in 1996-1998 for the cohorts in our sample, the average claimant in our data
had been on DI for more than a decade. Finally, about two thirds of the sample is
classified as fully disabled (earnings capacity reduction of 80% or more) and is therefore
eligible for a replacement rate of 70%. The fraction fully disabled is markedly higher
among females than among males. Only about 4% of the sample is considered to have
lost between 55% and 80% of their earnings capacity. The remaining 30% of the sample
is considered to have lost between 15% and 55% of their earnings capacity and is eligible
for replacement rates between 14% and 35%.
       Panel B presents the means of our key outcome variables. While we have these
variables for all years from 1999 through 2005, we only present the values for 1999 and
2005 in the interest of space. In 1999, so about 1 to 3 years after the re-examinations
took place for the age cohorts in our sample, 92% of those on DI at the start of 1996 were
still on DI, where being on DI in 1999 is defined as having received positive income from
DI in 1999. In short, the re-examinations cannot have had a dramatic effect on DI
participation, though our next section will show evidence of a clear discontinuity in exit
rates around the age cutoff. About 36% percent of our sample was working, defined as
having positive earnings (including from self-employment) in 1999, which is consistent
with DI also covering partial disability in the Netherlands. Of those who had left DI,
53% were employed, whereas 33% of those on DI were employed, so a considerable
number combined DI receipt with work. The fraction of men working (45%) is more
than twice as high as the fraction of females with positive labor earnings (18%). Sixteen
percent of our sample also had social assistance income (other than from the original DI
spell) in 1999. Another four percent are not observed in any of our administrative files.



                                                                                        11
Most of these individuals did not have any formal labor or social assistance income in
1999 but about a third of them died or emigrated during our sample period.12
        The average income in our sample is about €17,000, of which roughly two-thirds
comes from DI benefits with the remaining third coming mostly from labor earnings.
Income from other social assistance programs accounts only for about 6% of total
income.
        In 2005, so about 7 to 9 years after the re-examinations, 81% of those on DI at the
start of 1996 were still on DI. Between 1999 and 2005, the fraction employed fell from
36% to 28% and the fraction with income from social assistance other than from the
original DI spell increased from 16% to 25%. These trends are consistent with the
general decline in labor force participation in the Netherlands as people approach
retirement. In 2005, still about two-thirds of total income in our sample comes from DI
benefits.


4. Results
4.1 Magnitude of the reform
         To what extent did the more stringent re-examinations reduce the generosity of
the DI program for the under-45 cohort? The answer to this question allows us to
interpret the magnitude of the effects of the reform on earnings and on receipt of other
forms of social assistance.          Figure 1 shows three measures by which to gauge the
magnitude of the reform: the effect on benefit amounts, the effect on replacement rates,
and the effect on participation in the DI program.
         Panel A plots annual disability benefit amounts in 1999, including zeros for those
who have exited, by cohort. Visually, there is a clear discontinuity at the cutoff age. We
estimate the size of this discontinuity by running an OLS regression of the outcome
variable on a treatment dummy that equals 1 for cohorts subject to the more stringent re-
examinations (so age less than 45), a linear term in age, and an interaction of the
treatment dummy with (age-45). All ages are specified as ages as of 8/1/93, so they


12
   About 1.1% of our sample had died by 1999 and 0.3% had emigrated. These observations are included
in the main analysis and their income and participation variables are all set to zero in 1999. Results are
extremely similar if we exclude these observations altogether. The more stringent reforms had no
significant impact on the probability of death or the probability of emigration.


                                                                                                         12
effectively measure cohorts. We run this specification for all RD estimates reported in
the figures in the paper. The fitted regression line is indicated in the plot, and the RD
estimate on the treatment dummy is -1.076, indicating that the more stringent re-
examinations for the younger cohort reduced their annual DI benefits by €1076, or about
10%. All reduced-form RD estimates can be seen as local average treatment effects –
local in the sense that they only apply at the discontinuity (so for the cohort being exactly
45 as of 8/1/93) and average in the sense that it is the average effect for all those at the
discontinuity. The key identifying assumption behind all our RD estimates is that the
only discontinuous change at the age cutoff is the stringency of the DI re-examinations.
While we cannot test this assumption, we know of no other policy changes that would
create a discontinuity at this cutoff.              Further, when we run our reduced-form RD
specification using all our demographic characteristics as dependent variables, we only
find two significant coefficients, in line with what would expect under the null hypothesis
of no effect when running 39 placebo regressions.13
         Panel B shows that the replacement rate, including zeros for those who exited, is
5.9 percentage points lower for the affected cohort at the discontinuity.14 The average
replacement rate for those who just escaped the more stringent re-examinations is 0.55,
so the 5.9 percentage point drop represents an 11 percent decline. Panel C shows that the
fraction of the sample that is still on the original DI spell in 1999 falls discontinuously by
3.8 percentage points at the age cutoff. Overall, Figure 1 shows that the more stringent
re-examinations roughly translate into a 10% benefit reduction. The effects of the reform
on labor supply and other benefit receipt should be viewed in light of this magnitude.
         The reforms led to somewhat larger reductions in benefits and replacement rates
for men (reductions by 12%) than for women (reductions by 7%), but induced 6.1 percent

13
   The demographic characteristics are measured as of January 1996, i.e., before the implementation of the
reform for our sample, and therefore should not contain a discontinuity. Reassuringly, only two of the 39
estimates are significant at the 5-percent level. This is roughly what one would expect by pure chance
given that, even if there is no true effect, one out of every 20 regressions on average shows a coefficient
that is significant at the 5-percent level. In addition, there is one coefficient that is significant at the 10-
percent level. The full results are presented in Appendix Table A1. It would be instructive to do similar
checks on the identification strategy with our key outcome variables: labor income and income from other
social assistance programs. Unfortunately, we do not have data on these variables prior to 1999.
14
   The data do not contain the post-reform replacement rate for those who exited from DI. Based on
discussions with the DI administration, our impression is that most exits occurred for those who were no
longer eligible for DI, but we cannot rule out that some of those who exited were still eligible for a positive
replacement rate.


                                                                                                             13
of female recipients to exit but only 2.7 percent of male recipients. It is not clear what
exactly drives these differences, but many factors (types of jobs, types of disabilities,
outside options) obviously differ by gender, and it is therefore plausible that the reform
had a differential impact by gender. In light of this differential impact, we will split out
our key results by gender.
         Because we do not have income measures from before the reform, we cannot
estimate effects of the reform on income from labor and from other social assistance
programs separately for those staying on DI and for those leaving DI. However, we do
have the pre-reform replacement rate, which allows us to examine heterogeneity in the
effects of the reform on replacement rates.
         The first column of Table 3 shows the change in replacement rates at age 45.0 for
those subject to the less stringent re-examination.15 About 72% of this group saw no
change in their replacement rate, 12% experienced an increase in their replacement rate,
and 16% faced a decrease in their replacement rate. The second column shows the
change in the replacement rates at age 45.0 for those who underwent the more stringent
re-examination. A much larger fraction (29%) in is latter group experienced a reduction
in the replacement rate, and a much lower fraction (5%) saw an increase in the
replacement rate. Still, even in the group subject to the more stringent re-examination,
about two thirds experienced no change in the replacement rate. The third column shows
the treatment effect of the more stringent re-examination on the change in the
replacement rate, which is simply the difference between the first two columns. This
column shows a downward shift in probability mass throughout the distribution of
changes in replacement rates, showing that the re-examination made DI less generous for
each counterfactual change in replacement rates.



15
  We run our standard reduced-form RD specification using dummies for each possible change in the
replacement rate as the dependent variables. We estimate changes in the replacement rate at age 45.0 for
those subject to the less stringent re-examination as the intercept of the right segment of regression line at
age 45.0. Changes in the replacement rate for those subject to the more stringent re-examination are
estimated by the intercept of the left segment of regression line at age 45.0. More detailed estimates are
provided in Appendix Table A2, which presents the joint distribution of the replacement rate in 1996 (pre
reform) and 1999 (post reform) at age 45.0 for those who were subject to the less stringent re-examination
rules and well as the impact of the reform on these joint probabilities (estimated by the RD effect). The
estimates in Table 3 summarize these joint probabilities by presenting the sums of the diagonal entries of
the Appendix Table.


                                                                                                            14
            As an additional partial check on our identifying assumption that no factors
besides the DI re-examinations had a discontinuous impact at age 45, Figure 2 reports DI
exit rates separately for 1995, 1996/97, 1998, and 1999. Exit is defined as the end date of
the original DI spell, as recorded in the administrative data file, occurring during the year
in question. We calculate these rates as fractions of DI claimants in our sample on
January 1st, 1996.16 Since no re-examinations took place in 1995 for DI claimants in the
age 40+ cohorts, a discontinuity at age 45 in the 1995 exit rate would invalidate our
identifying assumption. Reassuringly, the 1995 exit rate shows no sign of a discontinuity
at age 45. In 1996 en 1997, the age 40-44 cohort was re-examined as well as part of the
age 45 cohort. Exactly in these years, the discontinuity at age 45 is very pronounced. In
1998, the remainder of the age 45 cohort and some of the age 46 cohort were re-
examined, which explains the statistically significant discontinuity in the opposite
direction. This discontinuity, however, is much smaller in size because the age 45+
cohort was re-examined under the old and less stringent standards. Hence, if we calculate
the total exit rate over the 1996-1998 period, we find a discontinuous increase in exit for
the group subject to the more stringent re-examinations. In 1999, all the re-examinations
for the age 44-45 cohort were completed and we find no discontinuity in exit rates at the
age cutoff.


4.2 Reduced-form impacts on labor market and social assistance outcomes
            To what extent did individuals whose DI was reduced by the reform end up in
other social assistance programs and to what extent did they find paid work? The answer
to this question is critical for judging the effectiveness of the reform. In the former case,
the reform merely shuffles individuals across programs and budgetary savings only occur
to the extent that benefits in other programs are lower than DI benefits. In the latter case,
increased earnings are an indication of moral hazard among existing disability recipients.
In this subsection, we examine labor market and social assistance outcomes in 1999,
which is the first year for which we have the required data, and which is about two years
after the re-examinations took place. In subsection 4.6, we will examine the effects over
a longer horizon.

16
     However, the exit rate for 1995 is calculated as a fraction of DI recipients as of January 1st, 1995.


                                                                                                             15
       We start by analyzing the reduced-form effects of the DI reform on receipt of
other forms of social assistance. The first panel of Figure 3 plots income from other
social assistance (including income from new DI spells, but excluding income from the
original DI spell) by cohort. The figure shows a clear upward jump in income from other
social assistance for the cohort that underwent the more stringent re-examinations. In
fact, the RD regression estimates that the more stringent re-examinations increased other
social assistance income by €314 per year. The second panel shows that the fraction
receiving any social assistance income from a source other than the original DI spell
discontinuously increases by 4.7 percentage points at the age cutoff for the more stringent
re-examinations. Both increases are highly significant and represent an increase of about
a third in the amount and in the participation rate. In other words, we find clear evidence
of substitution of other forms of social assistance for DI benefits.
       Do people who leave DI fully account for the increased income from other social
assistance or is some of the increase also caused by those who remain on DI receiving
higher amounts? To answer this question, we re-run the RD regression on the subsample
of those who left DI. The regression shows that income from other social assistance
jumps by €601/year at the age discontinuity; the regression line just to the right of the age
cutoff (where the re-examination was less stringent) lies at €1962 of other social
assistance income per year, whereas it lies at €2564/year just to the left of the age cutoff
(where the re-examination was more stringent).            Some of those who exited are
“inframarginal” leavers – they would have left DI even under the less stringent re-
examination. These inframarginal leavers were by definition not affected by the increase
in stringency of the re-examination at the age discontinuity, and we therefore assume that
other social assistance income is equal to €1962/year on both sides of the age cutoff for
inframarginal leavers. The participation rate just at the right of the age continuity is
93.2% (see Figure 1c), so 6.8% are inframarginal leavers. Figure 1c also showed that
3.8% are marginal leavers, so 35.8% (=3.8/(6.8+3.8)) of all leavers are marginal leavers
and 64.2% are inframarginal leavers.        This implies that income from other social
assistance for marginal leavers must have been €3644 per year so that the weighted
average of all leavers to the left of the discontinuity is the amount we found above,
namely €2564 (so 0.358*3644 + 0.642*1962 = 2564). If marginal leavers receive €3644



                                                                                          16
per year from other social assistance, the maximum amount by which their income from
other social assistance could have possibly increased due to the more stringent re-
examination is €3644. Given that they comprise only 3.8% of the of the entire sample (so
both stayers and leavers) at the age cutoff, they can at most account for an increase of
0.038*3644 = €138 in the RD estimate of €314/year that we found for the entire sample.
Thus, we conclude that those leaving DI altogether can at most be responsible for 44%
(=138/314) of the overall jump in income from other social assistance, and that at least
56% must be due to increases in other social assistance income by those remaining on DI.
       Next, we present the reduced-form effects of the DI reform on labor market
outcomes. The first panel of Figure 4 plots labor earnings, including self-employment
income, in 1999 by cohort. The figure shows a discontinuity in earnings at the cutoff age
but the discontinuity is not as visually compelling as in the earlier figures due to the
higher variance in earnings. However, the RD regression estimates that earnings are
€624 per year higher at the cutoff age for those who were subject to the more stringent re-
examinations, and this estimate is highly significant. The €624 increase represents an 11
percent increase in annual earnings. This figure establishes our qualitative finding that
disability income crowds out labor income. It also contributes to the literature on the
labor supply disincentive effects of disability insurance by showing novel evidence of
labor supply responses among prime-age DI recipients who are long-term recipients of DI
(with durations of at least 2 years at the time of the reform, but on average 10 years). We
will discuss the economic magnitude of the labor supply response in the next subsection.
       Because we do not have earnings for prior years, we cannot precisely determine
the extent to which the average increase in earnings stems from non-workers finding
employment (extensive margin) and from workers increasing their earnings (intensive
margin). However, at least some of the increase comes from the extensive margin
because the second panel of Figure 4 shows a clear discontinuity in the fraction of
individuals with strictly positive income from wages or self-employment.          The RD
regression estimates that the more stringent re-examinations caused the fraction working
to increase by 2.9 percentage points. To explain the observed increase in earnings in the
absence of an intensive-margin labor supply response, average earnings for those who
started working would need to be €21,500 (=624/0.029) per year, which is higher than the



                                                                                        17
observed average earnings for those with positive earnings (€17,000/year). It therefore
seems likely that some of the response also occurred along the intensive margin. We can
also do a bounding calculation similar to the one we did above for income from other
social benefits. We find that those who left DI altogether can at most be responsible for
61% of the overall jump in earnings caused by the more stringent re-examination, and
that at least 39% must be due to earnings increases among those remaining on DI.


4.3 Benefit Substitution and Earnings Crowd Out
        Figures 3 and 4 establish that people substitute between DI income and other
forms of social assistance, and that DI benefits crowd out labor income. We now turn to
the economic magnitudes of earnings crowd out and substitution of social assistance. In
the first column of Table 4, we scale our reduced-form estimates by the amount by which
disability benefits from the original spell decrease at the age discontinuity whereas in the
second column we scale by the discontinuity in the replacement rate. We implement this
scaling by running IV regressions following the standard “fuzzy RD” specification.17 We
include a rich set of demographic control variables to increase the precision of the
estimates. As should the case with a valid RD design, the control variables do not
substantially affect the magnitudes of our estimates (See Appendix Table A3 for the
corresponding estimates without controls). Given that the re-examination was in all
respects more stringent for those below the cutoff age, the monotonicity assumption
required for the fuzzy RD design should be satisfied; being subject to a re-examination
following the more stringent new protocol rather than the old protocol weakly decreases
the benefit amount for any given individual and weakly decreases the replacement rate
for any given individual. We do not interpret these IV estimates as causal impacts of the
level of DI benefits per se or as causal estimates of the DI replacement rate per se
because at the age discontinuity both the level of benefits and the earnings exemption
change. Rather, we see the IV estimates as a way to relate the magnitudes of the
behavior effects of the reform to alterative measures of the size of the reform. In other
words, we view this solely as a scaling exercise.

17
  Excellent discussions of the theoretical underpinnings and the practical application of RD methods can
be found in Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw (2001), Imbens and Lemieux (2008), and Lee and Lemieux
(2010).


                                                                                                       18
       Panel A of Table 4 examines to what extent the reduced generosity of disability
benefits induces individuals to shift to other forms of social assistance (including new DI
spells). The first row of column 1 of panel A shows that per euro reduction in disability
benefits, individuals receive €0.31 more from other social assistance programs in 1999.
Thus, the benefit-substitution ratio is 0.31. A government not taking this substitution into
account would overestimate the reduction in government expenditure from tightening the
DI eligibility rules by 44%. The second row shows that per €1000 per year decrease in
DI benefits caused by the more stringent rules, the probability that an individual receives
income from another social assistance program increases by 4.5 percentage points. An
alternative way of scaling the degree of substitution between social assistance programs
is provided in the second column, which shows that for a 10-percentage point reduction
in disability replacement rates, income from other social assistance programs increases by
€535 per year (an increase of more than 50%) and the probability of participation in other
social assistance programs increases by 8.0 percentage points. The estimates of panel A
establish that benefit substitution is not only statistically significant but also important in
economic terms.
       Benefit substitution can occur mechanically when individuals automatically
receive more income from other social assistance programs as their DI benefits decrease.
While this might explain some of the substitution, it cannot account for the entire reaction
because we also observe individuals enrolling in other forms of social assistance, for
which enrollment is not automatic. Benefit substitution can also be a result of the
individual actively looking for alternative sources of benefits and trying to qualify for
them. Finally, benefit substitution can occur when caseworkers steer individuals towards
alternative sources of support. We have no direct evidence on the relative importance of
these three channels, and suspect that all three may have contributed to some degree to
the observed amount of benefit substitution.
       The estimate in the first row of column 1 of panel B indicates that per euro of
benefits decrease caused by the reform, the reform induced individuals to increase
earnings by €0.62 in 1999. In other words, we find an earnings crowd-out ratio of 0.62: a




                                                                                            19
euro of DI benefits crowds out 62 cents of labor earnings.18 Alternatively, one can scale
the change in earnings by the change in total benefits (including the original DI benefits)
due to the more stringent re-examination. Given that for each euro in decreased DI
benefits, other benefits went up by €0.31, total benefits only decreased by €0.69. Thus,
per euro decrease in total benefits, earnings went up by €0.90 (=0.62/0.69). The second
row of Panel B examines the extensive margin response and shows that, per €1000 of
disability benefits decrease caused by the reform, the probability of being employed in
1999 increases by 2.9 percentage points. The second column presents the analogous
estimates, but now scaled by the change in replacement rates caused by the more
stringent re-examinations.           We find that for a 10-percentage point decrease in
replacement rates, earnings increase by €1085 per year (or about 19 percent) and the
probability of employment increases by 5.1 percentage points. All four estimates in
panel B are highly statistically significant and establish that the degree to which DI
benefits crowd out labor market earnings and participation is economically meaningful.
         In the late 1990s, the Netherlands experienced an economic boom, which likely
made it relatively easy for individuals to increase their labor supply and reduced the
incentive to look for other forms of social assistance. As a result, our estimate for
earnings crowd out may be higher than it would be during average economic times, and
the estimate of benefit substitution may be lower than it would be during average
economic times. During the early 2000s, the Netherlands experienced a recession, and as
we will see in Section 4.6 below, our estimates of earnings crowd out and benefit
substitution remained very similar during that period. A further reason why the earnings
crowd out estimate may be relatively high is that the Netherlands had a variety of policies
to help individuals re-integrate into the labor market.
         DI recipients have an earnings exemption that equals their indexed previous
earnings times the degree to which they deemed able to work (i.e., one minus the degree
disabled). Any earnings beyond the exemption are effectively taxed 100% on the margin
through reduced DI benefits. Thus, if the re-examination led to a reduction in the degree
disabled, this both reduced the DI benefit (which is an income effect) and it increased the

18
  All amounts are gross of tax and social insurance contributions. Both benefits and earnings are subject to
taxation and mandatory social insurance contributions, so we can directly compare changes in income to
changes in benefits.


                                                                                                         20
earnings exemption (which is a substitution effect). Therefore, like most of the previous
literature on the labor supply response to DI, we cannot determine the extent to which the
response is driven by the substitution effect and by the income effect. However, given the
large magnitude of the earnings reaction (especially if compared to the change in total
benefits), we suspect that incentive effects stemming from the change in the earnings
exemption played a large role.
         Panel C presents the combined effect of benefit substitution and labor crowd out.
The estimate in the first row and column indicates that individuals increased income from
other social assistance and work by €0.92 per euro of DI benefits lost. In other words, on
average individuals almost fully offset the decrease in DI benefits by increased income
from other sources, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the offset was complete (p-
value 0.494). Even if the offset is complete, individuals now have to work more and will
be worse off to the extent they receive disutility from supplying labor.19 The second row
shows the effect on a dummy for working or receiving income from a social assistance
program other than the original DI spell. We find that per €1000 decrease in DI, an
individual is 5.7 percentage points more likely to obtain income from a new source. The
fact that this estimate is less than the sum of the estimates in row 2 of panels A and B
indicates that some individuals both started working and started drawing income from
other forms of social assistance. In particular, per €1000 decrease in DI, individuals
became 1.7 (=2.9+4.5-5.7) percentage points more likely to have both income from other
social assistance programs and labor income in 1999.
         The estimates in Table 4 are based on a bandwidth of +/- 2.5 years around the
cutoff age, which is the bandwidth suggested by applying the Imbens-Kalyanaraman
criterion (2009) to our data. Appendix Table A4 explores the sensitivity of the benefit-
substitution ratio and the earnings crowd-out ratio to the choice of bandwidth. For any
bandwidth between +/- 1 year and +/- 5 years, both ratios are statistically significant at
the 1-percent level. The size of the benefit-substitution ratio is relatively insensitive to


19
  Even if we cannot reject that individuals are on average able to fully offset the DI benefit cut, it is
conceivable that certain subgroups are not able to do so. To examine this possibility, we ran reduced-form
quantile RD regressions on log total income (including DI income). We find statistically significant
declines in log total income between the 15th and 40th percentiles of the income distribution. See Appendix
Figure A2 for details.


                                                                                                         21
the choice of bandwidth but the earnings crowd-out ratio is substantially larger for
smaller bandwidths – it rises to 0.78 for a bandwidth of +/- 1 year.


4.4 Effects by Income Source, Gender, and Degree of Disability
       The first column of panel A of Table 5 splits out the results of the first column of
Table 4 by source of income. Of the increase in benefits, 67% comes from increased UI
benefits, 10% from increased General Assistance, 3% from re-entry into DI, and 20%
from all other types of social support benefits. We find that the increases in wage
earnings account for 80% (=0.492/0.618) of the earnings response and changes in self-
employment income only for 20%. Given that evasion of wage earnings is hard and
limited, this breakdown indicates that the earnings response is unlikely to be largely
driven by people not changing their actual labor supply but simply starting to report their
earnings. Panel B examines receipt of any amount by income sources, and its results are
very similar to the results of panel A.
       Columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 split out the results of the first column by gender.
These columns suggest that social support substitution is more predominant among
women. In particular, the point estimate of the benefit-substitution ratio is much larger
for women than for men (0.48 vs. 0.26) but this difference is not statistically significant
(p-value 0.149). The difference is statistically significant, however, if we look at the
participation response for other forms of social assistance. Per €1000 decrease in DI
benefits, women increase their participation in other social assistance programs by 7.4
percentage points, which is nearly twice the 3.8 percentage point increase by men. In
response to a given DI benefit cut, women are also significantly more likely than men to
start working whereas the point estimate of the earnings response is actually slightly
larger for men than for women (though not significantly so). The fact that labor force
participation is only 18% for women but 45% for men may explain why women
experience a larger response on the extensive margin but that total earnings increase
slightly more for men because the scope for an intensive-margin response is larger among
men. There is no significant difference in the degree to which men and women are able
to offset the decrease in DI benefits by other sources of income. As noted earlier, it is
hard to determine what exactly drives differences in the effects of the DI reform on men



                                                                                        22
and women, but we suspect differences in initial DI benefit levels, differences in types of
disabilities, and differences in opportunities in market and household production are
likely explanations. For example, a primary diagnosis of a psychiatric condition is much
more prevalent among women than men in our sample (39.6% vs. 28.2%) whereas a
primary diagnosis of a musculoskeletal disorder is much more prevalent among men then
women (39.2% vs. 28.6%).
         Table 6 analyzes benefit substitution and earnings crowd out by the degree
disabled into which individuals were classified as of January 1st 1996 (so before the re-
examinations took place).20 Panel A shows that social support substitution is much more
prevalent among individuals classified as fully disabled than among those classified as
partially disabled. This finding applies both for social assistance benefit amounts and for
social assistance participation, and holds in the entire sample as well as the subsamples
by gender. These differences are not only statistically significant but also large in
magnitude. The benefit-substitution ratio for the fully disabled is 0.50, which is four
times as large as the ratio of 0.12 for partially disabled recipients. About 90% of this
difference in benefit substitution ratios is accounted for by the larger increases of UI
benefits among the fully disabled relative to partially disabled individuals.
         In contrast, we find high rates of labor crowd out both for those classified as
partially disabled and for those classified as fully disabled. Panel B shows that the point
estimate of crowd out is somewhat higher for the partially disabled than for the fully
disabled (0.68 vs. 0.52), but this difference is not statistically significant. The high
degree to which the fully disabled are able to replace foregone disability income with
labor income is striking, though it should be kept in mind that degree of disability
depended on the availability of suitable jobs in the applicant’s region, and that an
applicant could also be classified as fully disabled if not enough of such jobs were found.
         Panel C shows that both the partially and fully disabled are able to offset basically
all of their lost DI income by other sources of income. The point estimates indicate that
the fully disabled actually offset somewhat more of the lost DI benefits than the partially
disabled, but this difference is not statistically significant.

20
  We also investigated whether the benefit-substitution ratio and the labor crowd-out ratio varied by
marital status, previous earnings, duration of the DI spell, and national origin. We found no significant
differences along these dimensions. See appendix Table A5 for details.


                                                                                                            23
         Our data has information on primary medical diagnoses, but much of this data
was retrospectively added. As a result, this data is significantly less likely to be missing
for those who remained on DI, and there is a strong discontinuity at the age cutoff in the
indicator for the medical diagnosis being missing. This implies that we cannot stratify
our estimates by medical diagnosis. Because the medical part of the re-examination was
the same on either side of the age cutoff, there should be no causal effect of the more
stringent re-examination on the medical diagnosis itself.21 Therefore any discontinuity at
the age cutoff in the prevalence of a given medical diagnosis among those who remained
on DI must be due to differential exit by that medical diagnosis. It turns out that we lack
statistical precision on the inferred distribution of differential exit by medical diagnosis,
but the point estimates indicate that the more stringent reforms led to disproportionally
high exit rates among those with diagnoses of musculoskeletal, psychiatric, and
neurological conditions and disproportionally low exit rates among those whose
diagnosis was labeled “general”. Full results are in Appendix Table A6.


4.5 Responses of Partners of DI recipients
         In Table 7, we provide estimates of benefit substitution and earnings crowd out at
the household level. These estimates differ from our baseline estimates of Table 4 in that
the current estimates account for possible responses of partners of (former) DI recipients.
We find that our point estimates of benefit substitution in the entire sample are virtually
identical whether or not we take the partners’ response into account. For men the benefit
substitution ratio becomes somewhat larger and for women it becomes smaller when we
take the partners’ response into account, but neither difference is statistically significant.
The increase for earnings crowd out, while at 18 percentage points not insubstantial in
economic terms, is statistically insignificant.            Earnings responses of partners were
previously studied by Cullen and Gruber (2000) who estimate that increased UI benefits
paid to unemployed males are largely offset by decreased labor market earnings of their
wives.     While partner responses could potentially be important, and therefore are
important to consider, we find only a limited role for them in our setting. Including the


21
  As explained in Section 2, the re-examination was more stringent for the younger cohort only because the
procedure that translated medical diagnoses into replacement rates was less generous for them.


                                                                                                       24
partner responses, however, decreases the precision of our estimates, which is why we
exclude them from our other analyses.


4.6 Responses over time
        Responses to reductions in DI benefits could vary over time, for example because
it can take time to find the right match in the labor market or because certain forms of
social assistance have time limits. Hence, focusing only on 1999, the first year that re-
examinations are completed for individuals near each side of the age discontinuity, yields
an incomplete picture of the consequences of the reform. We therefore repeated our main
analyses for all years until 2005, which is the last year in our dataset.22
        Panel A of Figure 5 presents estimates of the reduced-form RD regression of DI
benefit amounts for each of the years from 1999 to 2005. This panel shows that the effect
of the reform on DI benefit amounts is remarkably constant over time. Panel B shows
estimates of the benefit-substitution ratio and the earnings crowd-out ratio over time. In
other words, the figure plots the coefficients from the same fuzzy RD IV regression that
we presented in the first row of Panels A and B of Table 4, but now for all years until
2005. We find that both the earnings crowd-out ratio and benefit-substitution ratio are
positive and statistically significant in each year. The degree to which individuals replace
lost DI benefits with other forms of social assistance decreases over time, from 31% in
1999 to 20% in 2005. This decrease, however, is not statistically significant. The decline
of the benefit-substitution ratio is driven by the decreased reliance on UI benefits over
time. Whereas UI benefits accounted for 20 percentage points of the benefit-substitution
ratio in 1999, they only account for 5 percentage points in 2005.                     This decline is
consistent with the fact that unemployment assistance is only available for a limited
duration. This decline is partly offset by increased reliance on new DI spells. Income
from new DI spells account for about 1 percentage point of the 1999 benefit-substitution
ratio but for 6 percentage points in 2005. Reliance on General Assistance and other
forms of social assistance remains roughly constant over time. The figure shows a slight

22
  Additional DI reforms took place in 2002 and 2004. The first reform only affected new entrants while
the second reform led to a re-examination of people on DI who were younger than 50 on July 1st, 2004. All
individuals in our sample were older than 50 at that time. These reforms therefore do not affect the
individuals in our sample. There was a major overhaul of the DI system in 2006. This overhaul also
affected the individuals in our sample, which is why we end our sample period in 2005.


                                                                                                      25
increase over time in the earnings crowd-out ratio, which rises from 62% in 1999 to 71%
in 2005, but this increase is not statistically significant and the fraction of earnings that
comes from self-employment remains roughly constant over time. Finally, Panel C
shows the benefit-substitution ration and the crowd-out ratio scaled by the change in DI
benefits in 1999 in order to isolate the movements that are solely due to changes in
earnings and social assistance receipt (other than the original DI spell). This panel is very
similar to the previous panel, which is not surprising given that we found before that the
impact of the more stringent re-examination on DI benefit amounts was basically
constant over time.


5. Conclusion
          In this paper, we investigate the consequences of a reduction in the generosity of
one social support program when that program is part of a larger system of social
assistance programs. Especially in the case of social assistance to people in their prime
age, it was unknown to what extend reduced generosity of one program induces them to
increase labor supply and to what extent it leads them to rely more on other social
assistance programs instead.        Examining the labor supply response of existing
beneficiaries (as opposed to labor supply responses to qualify for a program) is important
for policy because a response by the large stock of existing beneficiaries can quickly
affect DI participation rates whereas a response by new enrollees will only slowly affect
overall DI participation. Showing a labor supply response of long-term DI beneficiaries,
including individuals who are classified as fully disabled, also establishes that long-term
participation in DI does not severely degrade one’s labor market skills.             Benefit
substitution is of obvious policy relevance in many countries. While existing studies
have investigated spillover effects among programs for children or for people close to
retirement, this paper examines benefit-substitution and earnings crowd-out effects for
people on DI in their late 40s. Finally, our paper recognizes that spillovers from a reform
to one program can be partly driven by responses by the partners of people affected by
the reform and that the spillovers may vary with the amount of time passed since the
reform.




                                                                                          26
       The combination of access to extensive administrative panel data and the presence
of a cohort discontinuity in a reform law allows us to produce causal estimates of the
effect of the 1993 Dutch disability insurance reform on the participation in other social
assistance programs.    We find economically meaningful and statistically significant
evidence of social support substitution. About 2 years after the implementation of the DI
reform for our sample members, income drawn from other social assistance programs
increases by 31 cents for each euro of reduced DI benefits. Thus, ignoring this benefit-
substitution effect of 31% would lead one to overestimate the cost savings of the DI
reform by nearly one half.       At 50%, the benefit substitution effect is especially
pronounced for the fully disabled whereas it is just 12% for partially disabled DI
recipients. While the benefit-substitution ratio decreases over time, the benefit-
substitution ratio still stands at 20% about 8 years after the implementation of the reform
for our sample.
       We also find a remarkable earnings rebound given that all members of our sample
were at least partially disabled and on average had been receiving DI for over a decade
when the reform was implemented for our cohorts. On average, individuals were able to
make up 62% of their foregone DI benefits through increases in earnings, and this figure
is similar for partially and fully disabled individuals. Between increased income from
labor and other social assistance programs, individuals almost fully offset the decrease in
DI benefits. Of course, these estimates are based on a relatively minor (10% on average)
cut in DI benefits, and may not apply for larger cuts. Also, because these estimates
reveal average responses they can mask more severe impacts on total income for certain
subgroups of DI recipients.
       Benefit-substitution and earnings crowd-out estimates would obviously be
different in different settings, but the direction in which the estimates would change is not
clear. Our benefit-substitution figure may higher than it would be in other countries
because the Netherlands has a relatively generous system of alternative social assistance
programs. On the other hand, the reform we analyzed concerned a relatively minor
reduction in DI generosity. Thus, many of those affected by the reform may not have
qualified for means-tested alternative forms of social assistance, or alternative forms of




                                                                                          27
social assistance may still have been less attractive than DI (despite the reduction in DI
generosity).
        While our specific coefficient estimates only directly apply to this particular
Dutch DI reform, we believe our paper offers three general lessons that are widely
applicable. First, our paper provides strong evidence that spillover effects between social
assistance programs can be can be substantial, also for prime-aged individuals. Thus, any
analysis of a reform of a social assistance program would be wise to consider the
possibility of benefit substitution. Second, we show that among long-term disability
recipients there may still be a substantial capacity to change labor income in response to
relatively moderate changes in DI generosity. In other words, labor supply among DI
recipients is not just determined by limitations from the disability, but also by economic
incentives. Finally, our work emphasizes that it can potentially be important to take into
account the responses of the partners of the individuals directly affected by the reform
and to consider the amount of benefit substitution and earnings crowd out over the longer
term.
        Because the discontinuity in the stringency of disability reform applies to existing
recipients, we examine social support substitution and labor supply responses among
those already receiving disability insurance at the time the reform went into effect. Our
setting does not allow us to estimate spillover effects and labor supply responses
stemming from people who would have flowed into DI under the less stringent rules but
not under the more stringent rules. We view estimates of such spillover effects and labor
supply responses as complementary to our estimates.




                                                                                         28
Literature


Autor, David H., and Duggan, Mark G. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the
       Decline in Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 157 - 206.
Autor, David H., and Duggan, Mark G. 2008. “The Effect of Transfer Income on Labor
       Force Participation and Enrollment in Federal Benefits Programs: Evidence from
       the Veterans Disability Compensation Program,” unpublished manuscript.
Barreca, Alan I., Jason M. Lindo, and Glen R. Waddell. 2011. “Heaping-Induced Bias
       in Regression-Discontinuity Designs,” NBER Working Paper No. 17408.
Bound, John.      1989.   “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance
       Applicants,” American Economic Review 79(3): 482-503.
Bound, John, and Richard V. Burkhauser.       1999.   “Economic Analysis of Transfer
       Programs Targeted on People with Disabilities,” in Orley C. Ashenfelter and
       David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, Ch. 51, pp.
       3417 – 3528.
Bovenberg, A. Lans.       2000.     “Reforming Social Insurance in the Netherlands,”
       International Tax and Public Finance 7(3): 345-368.
Chen, Susan, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2008. “The Work Disincentive Effects of the
       Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2):
       757-784.
Coe, Norma B., and Kelly Haverstick. 2010. “Measuring the Spillover to Disability
       Insurance Due to the Rise in the Full Retirement Age,” CRR WP 2010-21, Boston
       College.
Cullen, Julie Berry, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd
       out Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics 18(3): 546-572.
De Jong, Philip R., Maarten Lindeboom, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2011. “Screening
       Disability Insurance Applications,” Journal of the European Economic
       Association 9(1): 106-129.
Duggan, Mark G., Perry Singleton, and Jae Song. 2007. “Aching to Retire? The Rise in
       the Full Retirement Age and its Impact on the Disability Rolls,” Journal of Public
       Economics 91(7-8): 1327-1350.



                                                                                      29
Duggan, Mark G., and Melissa Schettini Kearney. 2007. “The Impact of Child SSI
       Enrollment on Household Outcomes,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management 26(4): 861-886.
French, Eric and Jae Song. 2011. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor
       Supply.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper Series, WP 2009-05.
Garrett, Bowen, and Sherry Glied. 2000. “Does State AFDC Generosity Affect Child SSI
       Participation?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(2): 275–295.
García-Gómez, Pilar, Hans-Martin von Gaudecker, and Maarten Lindeboom.              2011.
       “Health, Disability and Work: Patterns for the Working Age Population,”
       International Tax And Public Finance 18(2): 146-165.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply,” Journal of
       Political Economy 108(6): 1162-1183.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Jeffrey D. Kubik. 1997. “Disability Insurance Rejection Rates
       and the Labor Supply of Older Workers,” Journal of Public Economics 64(1): 1-
       23.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra E. Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and
       Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,”
       Econometrica 69(1): 201-209.
Imbens, Guido W., and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2009. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for
       the Regression Discontinuity Estimator,” NBER working paper no. 14726.
Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A
       Guide to Practice,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.
Li, Xiaoyan, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. “Does the Rise in the Full Retirement Age
       Encourage Disability Benefits Applications? Evidence from the Health and
       Retirement Study,” MRRC Working Paper #198.
Karlström, Anders, Mårten Palme, and Ingemar Svensson. 2008. “The Employment
       Effect of Stricter Rules for Eligibility for DI: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
       in Sweden,” Journal of Public Economics 92(10-11): 2071-2082.
Koning, Pierre W. C., and Daniel J. van Vuuren. 2010. “Disability Insurance and
       Unemployment Insurance as Substitute Pathways,” Applied Economics 42(5):
       575-588.



                                                                                       30
Kubik, Jeffrey D. 2003. “Fiscal Federalism and Welfare Policy: The Role of States in the
       Growth of Child SSI,” National Tax Journal 56(1): 61-79.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in
       Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature 48(2): 281-355.
McCrary, Justin.   2008.   “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
       Discontinuity Design: A Density Test,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 698-714.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand.           2011   “Does Disability
       Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate
       Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt,” Unpublished manuscript, RAND.
Maestas, Nicole, and Jae Song. 2011. “The Labor Supply Effects of Disability Insurance:
       Evidence from Automatic Conversion Using Administrative Data,” MRRC
       Working Paper #247.
Parsons, Donald O. 1980. “The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation,” Journal of
       Political Economy 88(1): 117-134.
Schmidt, Lucie, and Purvi Sevak.           2004. “AFDC, SSI, and Welfare Reform
       Aggressiveness: Caseload Reductions vs. Caseload Shifting,” Journal of Human
       Resources 39(3): 792-812.
Staubli, Stefan. 2011. “The Impact of Stricter Criteria for Disability Insurance on Labor
       Force Participation,” Journal of Public Economics 95 (9-10): 1223–1235.
UWV (The agency that administers social insurance for employees in the Netherlands).
       2006. Kroniek van de Sociale Verzekeringen 2006 - Wetgeving en Volume-
       Ontwikkeling in Historisch Perspectief (in Dutch), UWV, Amsterdam.
von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011 “Trends in Employment and
       Earnings of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability
       Insurance Program,” American Economic Review 101(7): 3308-3329.




                                                                                      31
Figure 1: Magnitude of the reform

Panel A: Effect on DI Benefit Amounts (1000 €/yr). Estimate of the discontinuity: -1.076 (0.096)***




Panel B: Effect on the DI Replacement Rate. Estimate of the discontinuity: -0.059 (0.003)***




Panel C: Effect on Participation in DI in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: -0.038 (0.004)***




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each figure
is based on 84,185 observations. The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. Regression estimates
come from reduced-form RD regressions without demographic control variables.




                                                                                                                   32
Figure 2: Exit by Year
Panel A: Exit in 1995. Estimate of the discontinuity: 0.001 (0.002)




Panel B: Exit in 1996/1997. Estimate of the discontinuity: 0.051 (0.003)***




Panel C: Exit in 1998. Estimate of the discontinuity: -0.012 (0.002)***




Panel D: Exit in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: 0.001 (0.002)




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. The dotted
lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. The exit rate is defined as a fraction of our sample in January 1996,
except for panel A where it is a fraction of the sample in January 1995. Regression estimates come from reduced-
form RD regressions without demographic control variables.



                                                                                                                   33
Figure 3: Effects of DI Reform on Social Assistance Other Than the Original DI Spell

Panel A: Social Assistance Income in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: 314 (51)***




Panel B: Social Assistance Participation in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: 0.047 (0.005)***




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Figures are
based on 84,185 observations. The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. Benefits from the original DI
spell are not included in social assistance income, and participation rates exclude the original DI spell. Regression
estimates come from regressions without demographic control variables. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                  34
Figure 4: Effects of DI Reform on Labor Market Outcomes

Panel A: Effect on Earnings in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: 624 (154)***




Panel B: Effect on Employment in 1999. Estimate of the discontinuity: 0.029 (0.007)***




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Figures are
based on 84,185 observations. The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. Employment is defined as
having positive earnings from employment or self-employment. Regression estimates come from reduced-form RD
regressions without demographic control variables.




                                                                                                                  35
Figure 5: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting over Time

Panel A: Effect of More Stringent Re-examination on DI Benefits in €1000/year (First Stage)
                                          0

                                      -0.2
 Effect on DI benefit (in €1000/yr)




                                      -0.4

                                      -0.6

                                      -0.8

                                          -1

                                      -1.2

                                      -1.4
                                                 1999     2000    2001    2002    2003       2004         2005

Panel B: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting Using Year-Specific First Stage

               1.2


                                      1


               0.8                                                                       Earnings Crowd-Out Ratio


               0.6


               0.4

                                                                                         Benefit-Substitution Ratio
               0.2


                                      0
                                               1999     2000     2001    2002    2003        2004         2005

Panel C: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting Using 1999 First Stage
             1.2


                                      1


             0.8                                                                         Earnings Crowd-Out Ratio


             0.6


             0.4

                                                                                         Benefit-Substitution Ratio
             0.2


                                      0
                                               1999     2000     2001    2002    2003       2004          2005
Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.


                                                                                                                      36
Table 1: Relation between Degree of Disability and Replacement Rates
Degree of disability:            Replacement rate (% of last earned wage):
80 – 100 %                       70 %
65 – 80 %                        50.75 %
55 – 65 %                        42 %
45 – 55 %                        35 %
35 – 45 %                        28 %
25 – 35 %                        21 %
15 – 25 %                        14 %
Less than 15 %                   0%
Source: UWV (2006). UWV is the abbreviation of the agency that administers all social insurance for employees in
the Netherlands. See text for a description of how the degree of disability is determined. Disability insurance benefit
levels are determined as a percentage of the last earned wage and adjusted for inflation over time.




                                                                                                                   37
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                    Full sample              Males             Females
Panel A: Sample characteristics, measured prior to re-examination
Female (0=no; 1=yes)                                    0.34                   0.00               1.00
Married (0=no; 1=yes)                                   0.66                   0.69               0.61
Age on August 1st, 1993                                45.18                  45.19              45.18
Start date of DI spell (year)                         1985.1                 1984.8             1985.7
Degree of disability (% of earnings capacity lost):
 15-25                                                  7.67                  8.85               5.36
 25-35                                                  9.53                  11.96              4.74
 35-45                                                  6.91                  8.75               3.28
 45-55                                                  5.78                  6.32               4.74
 55-65                                                  2.01                  2.22               1.60
 65-80                                                  1.97                  2.41               1.11
 80-100                                                 66.1                  59.50             79.17
Panel B: Outcomes after re-examination
Labor market status in 1999 (%):
 Still on DI (on the original spell)                         91.75            91.68             91.89
 Employed                                                    35.75            44.78             18.03
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)            15.50            14.78             16.92
 Zero income (dummy for no formal income)                     3.91             3.66              4.39
Labor market status in 2005 (%):
 Still on DI (on the original spell)                         81.01            80.04             82.91
 Employed                                                    28.84            36.36             14.09
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)            24.94            26.41             22.06
 Zero income (dummy for no formal income)                     8.46             8.97              7.46
Income by source in 1999, €/year (including zeros):
 DI from original DI spell                                  10,296           11,135             8,649
 Earnings                                                    5,916            7,753             2,309
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)              949              862             1,120
Income by source in 1999, €/year (if non-zero):
 DI from original DI spell                                  11,731           12,732              9,785
 Earnings                                                   17,045           17,814             13,282
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)            6,169            5,900              6,631
Income by source in 2005, €/year (including zeros):
 DI from original DI spell                                  11,421           12,343             9,611
 Earnings                                                    5,452            7,136             2,145
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)            1,940            1,854             2,107
Income by source in 2005, €/year (if non-zero):
 DI from original DI spell                                  14,491           15,887             11,862
 Earnings                                                   20,136           20,889             16,308
 Social assistance (other than original DI spell)            7,793            7,038              9,569
N                                                         84,185            55,772             28,413
Note: Since we have information available from 1996 onwards, both marital status and degree of disability are
recorded in January 1996 (before the re-examinations).




                                                                                                          38
Table 3: Re-examinations and the Change in the Replacement Rate between 1996 and 1999
                                           (1)                    (2)                               (3)
                                 Predicted probability   Predicted probability         Treatment effect of the more
                                  at age 45.0 for the     at age 45.0 for the          stringent examination on the
Change in the                        less stringent         more stringent              probability of the specified
replacement rate                    re-examination          re-examination              change in replacement rate
7 "steps" less generous                   6.10                    7.81                       1.70    (0.35)
6 "steps" less generous                   0.47                    1.52                       1.05    (0.11)
5 "steps" less generous                   0.84                    2.43                       1.59    (0.13)
4 "steps" less generous                   1.08                    2.26                       1.18    (0.15)
3 "steps" less generous                   1.12                    2.31                       1.19    (0.16)
2 "steps" less generous                   2.23                    3.76                       1.52    (0.21)
1 "step" less generous                    3.90                    9.01                       5.11    (0.28)
Same generosity                         72.17                    65.52                      -6.65    (0.59)
1 "step" more generous                    3.52                    1.40                      -2.12    (0.18)
2 "steps" more generous                   1.46                    0.67                      -0.79    (0.12)
3 "steps" more generous                   1.57                    0.90                      -0.66    (0.14)
4 "steps" more generous                   1.87                    0.91                      -0.96    (0.14)
5 "steps" more generous                   2.13                    0.85                      -1.28    (0.15)
6 "steps" more generous                   1.54                    0.66                      -0.89    (0.12)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Each row is estimated using our standard reduced-form RD regression
without demographic controls, where the outcome variable is a dummy for the change in the replacement rate
between 1996 and 1999 that corresponds to row header. There are eight possible replacement rates: 0%, 14%, 21%,
28%, 35%, 42%, 50.75%, 70%, where we assign 0% to those who exit from DI before the post-examination
replacement rate is recorded. Column 1 shows the intercept at age 45.0 from the regression line to the right of the
discontinuity (i.e., for those who underwent the less stringent re-examination), column 2 shows the intercept at age
45.0 from the regression line to the left of the discontinuity (i.e., for those who underwent the more stringent re-
examination), and column 3 shows the treatment effect (i.e., the difference between columns 1 and 2). N=84,185.




                                                                                                                 39
Table 4: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting
                                         Effect scaled by decrease in              Effect scaled by decrease in
                                            amount of original DI                      the replacement rate
                                               (in 1000 €/year)                              (fraction)
Panel A: Other social assistance in 1999
 Income from other social assistance                       0.305 (0.047)***               5.353 (0.801)***
 Participation dummy                                       0.045 (0.005)***               0.797 (0.082)***
Panel B: Labor market outcomes in 1999
 Earnings                                                  0.618 (0.108)***              10.848 (1.924)***
 Employment dummy                                          0.029 (0.005)***               0.511 (0.084)***
Panel C: Total
 Income except from original DI spell                      0.923 (0.113)***              16.201 (1.983)***
 Dummy for work or other social assistance                 0.057 (0.006)***               0.992 (0.092)***
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each entry
in the table comes from a separate IV regression based on the fuzzy RD design. The dependent variable is listed in
the rows. Other social assistance only includes disability income from re-entry in to disability (so it excludes
disability income from the original spell). The variable that is instrumented (endogenous explanatory variable) is
listed in the columns. The instrument itself is the treatment dummy (age as of 8/1/93 less than 45). Earnings and
income are measured in thousands of euros per year. The replacement rate is expressed as a fraction. Each
regression is based on 84,185 observations. The following controls are used in the regressions: age in months as of
8/1/93, (age-45) interacted with the treatment dummy, 6 dummies for degree of disability in 1996, a cubic
polynomial in pre-DI earnings, 9 national origin dummies, a dummy for being married in 1996, 39 regional
dummies, a cubic polynomial in duration in DI at the start of the reform, a full set of interactions between the
dummies for the degree of disability and the cubic polynomial in pre-DI earnings, a gender dummy, and a full set of
interactions between all previously listed controls and gender. In total, each regression has 163 control variables.




                                                                                                                 40
Table 5: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting by Source and by Gender

                                                        Effect of reform per 1000 €/year
                                                       decrease in amount of original DI                   P-value
                                              Full sample              Males             Females          gender dif.
Panel A: Amounts in 1999
Total other social assistance, of which:   0.305 (0.047)***      0.261 (0.047)***     0.482 (0.146)***      0.149
  Unemployment insurance                     0.203 (0.020)***     0.187 (0.021)***     0.266 (0.051)***
  General assistance                         0.030 (0.007)***     0.032 (0.007)***     0.024 (0.024)
  Re-entry into DI                           0.008 (0.008)       -0.001 (0.009)        0.046 (0.025)*
  All other benefits                         0.063 (0.041)        0.043 (0.040)        0.146 (0.129)
Total earnings, of which:                  0.618 (0.108)***      0.632 (0.124)***     0.564 (0.208)***      0.781
  Wage earnings                              0.492 (0.098)***     0.497 (0.114)***     0.471 (0.181)***
  Self-employment earnings                   0.126 (0.061)**      0.135 (0.070)*       0.093 (0.113)
Total income from other income sources 0.923 (0.113)***          0.892 (0.127)***     1.046 (0.250)***      0.582

Panel B: Participation in1999
Any income from other social assistance 0.045 (0.005)***         0.038 (0.005)***     0.074 (0.016)***      0.037
  Any Unemployment insurance              0.034 (0.003)***        0.030 (0.003)***     0.050 (0.009)***
  Any general assistance                  0.009 (0.002)***        0.010 (0.002)***     0.007 (0.006)
  Re-entry into DI                        0.001 (0.001) **        0.001 (0.001) *      0.003 (0.002)
  Any other benefits                      0.015 (0.004)***        0.010 (0.004)**      0.035 (0.013)***
Any work                                   0.029 (0.005)***      0.023 (0.005)***     0.053 (0.013)***      0.026
  Any wage income                            0.024 (0.005)***     0.018 (0.005)***     0.050 (0.012)***
  Any self-employment income                 0.006 (0.003)**      0.007 (0.003)**     -0.001 (0.005)
Any other income source                    0.057 (0.006)***      0.044 (0.006)***     0.105 (0.019)***      0.002
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each entry
in the table comes from a separate IV regression based on the fuzzy RD design. The dependent variable is listed in
the rows. Income and earnings are measured in thousands of euros per year. “Other income sources” excludes DI
income from the original spell. General assistance provides an income floor for everyone and does not require
having dependents. Any other benefits are benefits from a large number of smaller (about 30) benefit programs. The
variable that is instrumented (endogenous explanatory variable) is the amount of DI, so all coefficients can be
interpreted as effect size per €1000/year decrease in DI. The instrument itself is the treatment dummy (age less than
45 as of 8/1/93). The regressions are based on 84,185, 55,772, and 28,413 observations for the full sample, males,
and females, respectively. See the note to Table 4 for the demographic controls included in the regression.




                                                                                                                    41
Table 6: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting by Degree of Disability and Gender

                                                        Effect of reform per 1000 €/yr
                                                      decrease in amount of original DI                   P-value
                                             Full sample             Males              Females          gender dif.
Panel A: Other social assistance in 1999
 Income from other social assistance
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.122 (0.048)**      0.124 (0.049)**      0.112 (0.143)        0.939
   Fully disabled in 1996                   0.501 (0.087)***     0.415 (0.084)***     0.803 (0.271)***     0.171
   p-value on difference by disability          <0.001                0.003               0.024
 Participation dummy
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.015 (0.006)***     0.016 (0.006)***     0.012 (0.015)        0.840
   Fully disabled in 1996                   0.078 (0.010)***     0.063 (0.010)***     0.131 (0.035)***     0.062
   p-value on difference by disability          <0.001               <0.001               0.002

Panel B: Labor market outcomes in 1999
 Earnings
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.682 (0.166)***     0.732 (0.186)***     0.435 (0.357)        0.460
   Fully disabled in 1996                   0.520 (0.128)***     0.506 (0.148)***     0.572 (0.250)**      0.819
   p-value on difference by disability          0.441                 0.341               0.753
 Employment dummy
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.023 (0.006)***     0.020 (0.006)***     0.037 (0.017)**      0.357
   Fully disabled in 1996                   0.034 (0.008)***     0.026 (0.009)***     0.062 (0.019)***     0.087
   p-value on difference by disability          0.246                 0.555               0.333

Panel C: Total
 Income except from original DI spell
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.804 (0.163)***     0.856 (0.182)***     0.547 (0.360)        0.444
   Fully disabled in 1996                   1.021 (0.153)***     0.921 (0.166)***     1.376 (0.392)***     0.285
   p-value on difference by disability          0.332                 0.793               0.119
 Dummy for work or other soc. asst.
   Partially disabled in 1996               0.030 (0.005)***     0.028 (0.005)***     0.036 (0.017)**      0.656
   Fully disabled in 1996                   0.084 (0.011)***     0.062 (0.011)***     0.163 (0.041)***     0.017
   p-value on difference by disability          <0.001                0.005               0.004

N
    Partially disabled in 1996                  28,509               22,590                5,919
    Fully disabled in 1996                      55,676               33,182               22,494
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each entry
in the table comes from a separate IV regression based on the fuzzy RD design. The dependent variable is listed in
the rows. Income and earnings are measured in thousands of euros per year. The variable that is instrumented
(endogenous explanatory variable) is the amount of DI, so all coefficients can be interpreted as effect size per
€1000/year decrease in DI. The instrument itself is the treatment dummy (age less than 45 as of 8/1/93). Degree of
disability is as determined by the disability administration (see text for the description of the procedure for the
determination of degree of disability). See the note to Table 4 for the demographic controls included in the
regression.




                                                                                                                   42
Table 7: Earnings Crowd Out and Benefit Shifting Including Partner Responses
                                                                                                         P-value
                                                        Effect of reform per 1000 €/yr                  gender dif.
                                                      decrease in amount of original DI
                                            Full sample              Males              Females

Panel A: Labor market outcomes in 1999
 Earnings                             0.795 (0.209)***         0.718 (0.182)***      1.102 (0.749)         0.619

Panel B: Other social assistance in 1999
 Income from other social assistance     0.302 (0.083)***      0.307 (0.065)***      0.284 (0.318)         0.945

Panel C: Total
 Income except from original DI spell      1.097 (0.204)***    1.025 (0.185)***      1.386 (0.705)**       0.620

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each entry
in the table comes from a separate IV regression based on the fuzzy RD design. The dependent variable is listed in
the rows. Income and earnings are measured in thousands of euros per year. The variable that is instrumented
(endogenous explanatory variable) is the amount of DI, so all coefficients can be interpreted as effect size per
€1000/year decrease in DI. The instrument itself is the treatment dummy (age less than 45 as of 8/1/93). The
regressions are based on 84,185 observations for the full sample, and on 55,772 and 28,413 observations for males
and females, respectively. See the note to Table 4 for the demographic controls included in the regression.




                                                                                                                   43
Appendix A: Additional Results (not for publication)

Figure A1: Number of Observations by Cohort




Note: The McCrary density test is insignificant (p-value 0.126). The large trough and spike around ages 47 and 48
are the effect of WWII (the “hunger winter of 1944”) and the subsequent baby boom.

Figure A2: Quantile Regressions of Effect of More Stringent Re-examination on Log Total Income




Note: Each dot corresponds the estimated effect from an RD quantile regression with log total income as the
outcome variable. Lines correspond to 95-percent confidence intervals. Log total income is bottom coded at
€1000/year to avoid very large percentage swings at very low incomes. Weighted by income (not logged), the
average estimated effect of the more stringent re-examination is a 0.9% decline in total income.


                                                                                                              44
Appendix Table A1: Placebo Regressions
                                            N       Treatment dummy: age<45             P-value         Sample mean
Panel A: Gender
Female                                    84185             0.000 (0.007)                0.958              0.338
Panel B: Degree DI in 1996
Degree DI in 1996 (scale of 1-8)          84185             0.037   (0.031)              0.231              6.554
Degree DI is 15-25% in 1996               84185            -0.001   (0.004)              0.797              0.077
Degree DI is 25-35% in 1996               84185            -0.009   (0.004)**            0.039              0.095
Degree DI is 35-45% in 1996               84185             0.003   (0.004)              0.327              0.069
Degree DI is 45-55% in 1996               84185            -0.001   (0.003)              0.666              0.058
Degree DI is 55-65% in 1996               84185            -0.000   (0.002)              0.827              0.020
Degree DI is 65-80% in 1996               84185             0.003   (0.002)              0.160              0.020
Degree DI is 80-100% in 1996              84185             0.005   (0.007)              0.444              0.661
Panel C: Province
Province: Friesland                       84185            -0.002   (0.003)              0.523              0.040
Province: Drenthe                         84185             0.001   (0.003)              0.774              0.034
Province: Overijssel                      84185             0.001   (0.004)              0.704              0.073
Province: Flevoland                       84185             0.000   (0.002)              0.826              0.018
Province: Gelderland                      84185             0.002   (0.004)              0.633              0.111
Province: Utrecht                         84185             0.003   (0.003)              0.322              0.066
Province: Noord-Holland                   84185            -0.008   (0.006)              0.164              0.192
Province: Zuid-Holland                    84185            -0.006   (0.005)              0.258              0.168
Province: Zeeland                         84185            -0.000   (0.002)              0.838              0.016
Province: Noord-Brabant                   84185             0.002   (0.005)              0.731              0.151
Province: Limburg                         84185             0.007   (0.004)*             0.074              0.090
Panel D: Duration in DI in 1993
Duration on DI (months; as of 8/1993)     84185            -0.601 (1.037)                0.562              96.72
Duration: 5 years or more                 84185            -0.007 (0.007)                0.284              0.592
Panel E: Marital status in 1996
Married                                   84185             0.007 (0.007)                0.260              0.664
Panel F: Earnings before DI
Previous earnings (euro/yr)               84185              13.0   (123.8)              0.916              16928
Quintile 1                                84185            -0.003   (0.006)              0.601              0.200
Quintile 2                                84185             0.005   (0.006)              0.413              0.200
Quintile 3                                84185            -0.004   (0.006)              0.528              0.200
Quintile 4                                84185             0.005   (0.006)              0.351              0.200
Quintile 5                                84185            -0.003   (0.006)              0.550              0.200
Panel G: Origin
Native Dutch                               84185            0.003 (0.005)                 0.608              0.834
Morocco                                    84185           -0.001 (0.001)                 0.246              0.005
Turkey                                     84185            0.003 (0.002)                 0.143              0.028
Surinam                                    84185           -0.005 (0.002)***              0.007              0.018
Antilles and Aruba                         84185           -0.000 (0.001)                 0.654              0.003
Other Non-Western Country                  84185           -0.000 (0.001)                 0.917              0.008
Netherlands, but born elsewhere            84185           -0.000 (0.003)                 0.919              0.059
Other Western Country                      84185            0.002 (0.002)                 0.298              0.019
East-Europe                                84185            0.001 (0.001)                 0.330              0.009
Dutch East Indies                          84185           -0.002 (0.002)                 0.189              0.017
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each
coefficient is estimated using our standard reduced-form RD regression without demographic controls. Previous
earnings are capped at the maximum amount covered by DI (about €36,000/year in 1999).




                                                                                                                     45
Table A2: Replacement Rates and Re-examinations
Panel A: Joint distribution of the 1996 and 1999 replacement rates at age 45.0 under the less stringent re-examination
                                                                   Replacement rate in 1999
Replacement rate in 1996           0%         14%        21%           28%         35%            42%        50.75%                  70%                    Total
14%                               1.65        2.43       0.74          0.23        0.13           0.04        0.02                   1.54                  6.79
21%                               1.43        0.72       3.64          1.07        0.33           0.10        0.11                   2.11                  9.49
28%                               0.59        0.15       0.60          3.10        0.65           0.18        0.08                   1.72                  7.06
35%                               0.55        0.05       0.18          0.40        2.93           0.36        0.21                   1.26                  5.94
42%                               0.22        0.00       0.04          0.07        0.15           0.92        0.14                   0.51                  2.07
50.75%                            0.11        0.00       0.02          0.03        0.07           0.10        0.83                   0.55                  1.71
70%                               6.14        0.35       0.62          0.52        0.38           0.28        0.32                  58.33                 66.93
Total                             10.68          3.70          5.85          5.42          4.64          1.98          1.70         66.02                100.00
Panel B: Treatment effect of the more stringent re-examination on the joint distribution of 1996 and 1999 replacement rates
                                                                  Replacement rate in 1999
Replacement rate in 1996          0%         14%         21%          28%           35%          42%       50.75%       70%                                  Total
14%                              1.36        0.21       -0.52        -0.12         -0.11        -0.02       -0.01      -0.89                               -0.10
                                (0.21)      (0.28)      (0.08)       (0.05)        (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.12)                              (0.37)
21%                              0.33        1.07       -0.11        -0.59         -0.25         0.01       -0.04      -1.27                               -0.85
                                (0.18)      (0.11)      (0.32)       (0.10)        (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.15)                              (0.41)
28%                              0.31        0.42        1.38        -0.37         -0.44        -0.10        0.04      -0.89                                0.35
                                (0.12)      (0.06)      (0.11)       (0.28)        (0.07)       (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.13)                              (0.36)
35%                              0.14        0.16        0.36         0.53         -0.47        -0.19       -0.06      -0.61                               -0.14
                                (0.10)      (0.04)      (0.06)       (0.08)        (0.26)       (0.06)      (0.05)     (0.13)                              (0.33)
42%                              0.02        0.09        0.10         0.08          0.13        -0.16       -0.05      -0.25                               -0.04
                                (0.06)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.05)       (0.15)      (0.04)     (0.08)                              (0.20)
50.75%                           0.11        0.08        0.10         0.14          0.03         0.08        0.07      -0.33                                0.27
                                (0.05)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.16)     (0.09)                              (0.20)
70%                              1.75        0.98        1.46         0.83          0.49         0.30        0.51      -5.82                                0.51
                                (0.35)      (0.09)      (0.11)       (0.10)        (0.09)       (0.07)      (0.08)     (0.69)                              (0.66)
Total                               4.01          3.01          2.78          0.50         -0.61         -0.09         0.46        -10.06                   0.00
                                   (0.45)        (0.32)        (0.36)        (0.32)        (0.29)        (0.19)       (0.19)        (0.68)                 (0.00)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel A shows the predicted joint probability of replacement rates in 1996 and 1999 at exactly age 45. Each entry is
estimated as the intercept at age 45.0 of the regression line to the right of the discontinuity (i.e., for those who underwent the less stringent re-examination). Panel
B shows the treatment effect of the more stringent re-examination on each joint probability of replacement rates. Each entry is estimated using our standard
reduced-form RD regression without demographic controls, where outcome variable is a dummy for combination of replacement rates in 1996 and 1999 that
corresponds to that cell. Those who exit DI before the post-examination replacement rate is recorded are assigned a replacement rate of 0. N=84,185.


                                                                                                                                                                     46
Appendix Table A3: Baseline Estimates Without Controls Variables

                                                                Effect of reform per 1000 €/year
                                                                decrease in amount of original DI

                                                  Full Sample                  Males                      Females

Panel A: Other social assistance in 1999
 Income from other social assistance     0.292          (0.053)***     0.246    (0.051)***        0.511     (0.194)***
 Participation dummy                     0.044          (0.006)***     0.037    (0.006)***        0.080     (0.024)***
Panel B: Labor market outcomes in 1999
 Earnings                                0.580          (0.135)***     0.659    (0.144)***        0.254     (0.285)***
 Employment dummy                        0.027          (0.006)***     0.026    (0.006)***        0.036     (0.017)**
Panel C: Total
 Income except from original DI spell    0.872          (0.142)***     0.906    (0.147)***        0.765     (0.343)**
 Dummy for work or other soc. asst.      0.054          (0.007)***     0.045    (0.006)***        0.094     (0.027)***

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. The
estimates in this table come from regressions that are identical to those used in Tables 4 and 5 except that the
regressions for this table do not include demographic controls (except, of course, age as of 8/1/93 and the interaction
of (age-45) with the treatment dummy).



Appendix Table A4: Sensitivity of Baseline Estimates to Bandwidth
                                              Effect scaled by decrease in amount of original DI
                                                                (in 1000 €/yr)

                                  First stage:       Income sources in 1999                   Participation in 1999
                                  DI amount
                                   in 1999                           Income from
                                   (in 1000                           other social                          Other social
                        N           €/year)         Earnings           assistance             Work           assistance

+/- 5 years          160207         -1.047           0.330              0.412                 0.020            0.050
                                    (0.049) ***     (0.088)***         (0.037)***            (0.003)***       (0.004)***
+/- 4 years          129557         -1.074           0.417              0.346                 0.023            0.044
                                    (0.055) ***     (0.097)***         (0.038)***            (0.004)***       (0.004)***
+/- 3 years           98668         -1.112           0.596              0.266                 0.028            0.041
                                    (0.065) ***     (0.097)***         (0.042)***            (0.004)***       (0.005)***
Baseline              84185         -1.086           0.618              0.305                 0.029            0.045
(+/- 2.5 years)                     (0.071) ***     (0.108)***         (0.047)***            (0.005)***       (0.005)***
+/- 2 years           66818         -1.101           0.825              0.305                 0.034            0.044
                                    (0.080) ***     (0.119)***         (0.052)***            (0.005)***       (0.006)***
+/- 1 year            32772         -1.010           0.778              0.395                 0.036            0.055
                                    (0.116) ***     (0.183)***         (0.083)***            (0.008)***       (0.009)***
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. The table
shows our key estimates of the effect of the more stringent re-examination on the DI amount, the benefit-substitution
ratio, and the earnings crowd-out ratio for different choices of bandwidth. Our baseline choice of bandwidth (+/- 2.5
years) was guided by the Imbens-Kalyanaraman (2009) criterion.




                                                                                                                         47
Appendix Table A5: Heterogeneity of Effect
                                                   Effect scaled by decrease in amount of original DI
                                                                    (in 1000 €/year)
                                                                                 Income from other social
                             N                         Earnings                        assistance
Panel A: By marital status
 Married                   55913                       0.551 (0.110)***                   0.253 (0.042)***
 Single                    28272                       0.879 (0.326)***                   0.496 (0.183)***
   p-value          on                                                                       0.196
difference                                                0.341

Panel B: By previous earnings
 Below median             42095                        0.563 (0.156)***                   0.369 (0.070)***
 Above median             42090                        0.676 (0.144)***                   0.255 (0.063)***
   p-value         on                                                                        0.223
difference                                                0.597

Panel C: By origin
 Native Dutch                  70205                   0.658 (0.128)***                   0.286 (0.055)***
 Other origin                  13980                   0.495 (0.186)***                   0.360 (0.092)***
   p-value         on                                                                        0.489
difference                                                0.470

Panel D: By duration on DI as of 8/1/1993
 Less than 5 years        34378                        0.897 (0.272)***                   0.236 (0.126)*
 More than 5 years        49807                        0.512 (0.109)***                   0.326 (0.044)***
   p-value         on                                                                        0.477
difference                                                0.189

Panel E: By degree of disability in 1996
 Partially disabled        28509                       0.682 (0.166)***                   0.122 (0.048)**
 Fully disabled            55676                       0.520 (0.128)***                   0.501 (0.087)***
   p-value          on                                    0.441                              <0.001
difference
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each entry
comes from our standard fuzzy RD regression with the outcome variable indicated in the column header and the
sample indicated in the row header. Previous earnings are the earnings to which the DI replacement rate is applied.




                                                                                                                 48
Appendix Table A6: Inferred Distribution of Medical Conditions Among Those Induced to Exit DI


                                                                           Stayers with         Induced leavers     Induced leavers     Odds ratio of prevalence
                      Stayers with condition                               condition as          with condition      with condition       of condition among
                        as a percentage of                              percentage of total     as percentage of    as percentage of    induced leavers relative
                              stayers                                       population          total population    induced leavers       to untreated stayers
                       At left    At right                               At left At right
                      border of border of                               border of border of
                       age 45     age 45                                 age 45     age 45        Difference,
                      (treated) (untreated) Difference, (1)-(2):        (treated) (untreated)      (5)-(4):                                      (7)/(2):
Medical condition        (1)        (2)             (3)                    (4)        (5)             (6)                  (7)                     (8)

Musculoskeletal          37.4        38.0        -0.62     (0.69)         33.4       35.4              2.0                 52.5                   1.38
Psychiatric              31.8        32.8        -0.98     (0.67)         28.4       30.5              2.1                 55.7                   1.70
General                  12.6        10.6        1.96      (0.46)***      11.3        9.9             -1.3                -35.5                  -3.33
Neurological              4.1         4.7        -0.60     (0.32)*         3.6        4.3              0.7                 18.7                   4.00
Cardiovascular            4.3         4.4        -0.07     (0.32)          3.9        4.1              0.2                  6.0                   1.36
Digestive system          2.1         2.3        -0.13     (0.22)          1.9        2.1              0.2                  5.2                   2.31
Respiratory system        2.2         2.1        0.09      (0.22)          2.0        2.0              0.0                  0.0                  -0.02
Urological                1.5         1.3        0.14      (0.18)          1.3        1.2             -0.1                 -1.9                  -1.43
Visual impairment         1.0         0.9        0.04      (0.14)          0.9        0.9              0.0                  0.1                   0.10
Endocrinology             0.9         0.9        0.01      (0.15)          0.8        0.8              0.0                  0.6                   0.65
Hearing impairment        0.8         0.8        0.01      (0.14)          0.7        0.8              0.0                  0.6                   0.67
Dermatological            0.9         0.7        0.15      (0.14)          0.8        0.7             -0.1                 -2.8                  -3.80
Hematological             0.4         0.3        0.02      (0.09)          0.3        0.3              0.0                 -0.2                  -0.49
Pregnancy related         0.0         0.1        -0.04     (0.04)          0.0        0.1              0.0                  0.9                  11.64
Total                      100.0       100.0       0.00                    89.4       93.2              3.8                100.0
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. We run a reduced-form RD regression with our standard
controls (see note to Table 4) on the sample of those who remain on DI, where outcome variable is a dummy for the individual having as main diagnosis the
condition indicated in the row header. Column 1 shows the intercept at the cutoff age (exactly 45 on 8/1/93) from the regression line to the left of the
discontinuity (i.e., for those who underwent the more stringent re-examination), column 2 shows the intercept at the cutoff age from the regression line to the
right of the discontinuity (i.e., for those who underwent the less stringent re-examination), and column 3 shows the “treatment effect” (i.e., the difference
between columns 1 and 2) among the selected sample of those who remain on DI. Under the (reasonable) assumption that there is no difference between the
more stringent and less stringent re-examination on the main diagnosis for a given individual, the “treatment effect” is due to differential exit by medical
condition. The composition of medical conditions of those induced to exit by the more stringent re-examination is listed in columns (6) and (7). N=74,028 for the
regressions that generate the estimates in columns (1) through (3).




                                                                                                                                                              49
Appendix B: Variable Definitions (not for publication)

Variables come from the datasets described below. The data sets are merged based on an
individual identifier that is a scrambled version of the Dutch equivalent of a Social Security
Number (“burgerservicenummer”).

Earnings and other sources of income
Information on income by source comes from various administrative datasets. Employment
earnings (from the jobs database, “SSB-Banen”) and self-employment earnings (from the self-
employed database, “SSB-Zelfst”) are obtained from yearly tax files, and hence comprise annual
gross earnings measured in euros. Gross benefit payments are registered monthly by the
respective benefit administration offices. From these monthly payments we construct the income
flow for each source of benefits in euros per year. Benefits are gross; they are subject to income
taxation and social insurance contributions. All amounts are nominal but inflation was low
(around 3%/yr) in the time period of our data.


Variable          Dataset     Definition                                     Timing & Units

I. Labor market earnings
Employment       SSB-         Employment participation: having positive Measured by year;
                 Banen        annual income from paid employment in a 0/1 dummy
                              given year

                              Employment earnings: gross annual earnings Measured by year;
                              from paid employment (0 if not employed)   euros/year

Self-             SSB-        Self-employment     participation:  having Measured by year;
employment        Zelfst      positive annual income (profits) from self- 0/1 dummy
                              employment in a given year

                              Self-employment earnings: gross annual Measured by year;
                              earnings (profits) from self-employment (0 if euros/year
                              not self-employed)

II. Social support benefits
Unemployment WW               Unemployment insurance participation: Measured by year;
insurance                     having positive annual income from UI in a 0/1 dummy
                              given year

                              Unemployment income: gross annual income Measured by year;
                              from UI (0 if not unemployed)            euros/year

General           SSB-        General assistance participation: having Measured by year;
assistance        ABW         positive annual income from GA in a given 0/1 dummy
                              year



                                                                                               50
                             General assistance income: gross annual Measured by year;
                             income from GA (0 if not enrolled in GA) euros/year

Re-entry into AO             Re-entry in DI: having positive annual Measured by year;
disability                   income from DI in a given year coming from 0/1 dummy
insurance                    a new DI-spell

                             New DI income: gross annual income from Measured by year;
                             DI (0 if not enrolled in DI) coming from a euros/year
                             new DI-spell

Other sources OUITK          Participation in other benefit programs: Measured by year;
of benefits                  having positive annual income from other 0/1 dummy
                             programs in a given year

                             Income from other benefit programs: gross Measured by year;
                             annual income from other programs (0 if not euros/year
                             enrolled in scheme)


DI administrative data
The disability offices in The Netherlands register many details for each DI claimant. From 1996
onwards, there is monthly information about all DI claimants in the Netherlands. Information
includes start and end dates of DI-spells, degree of disability, amount benefit paid, and previous
earnings, which is used as a reference to calculate the benefit level.

Variable          Dataset    Definition                                       Timing & Units
Disability        AO         Participation in DI: The original DI spell (i.e. Measured by year;
                             the one that the individual was on when the 0/1 dummy
                             reform was enacted on 8/1/93) continues into
                             at least part of the current year

                             Income from DI: gross annual income from Measured by year;
                             disability insurance benefits stemming from euros/year
                             the original DI spell (0 if not enrolled in DI)

Degree            AO         The degree of disability before the re-         Measured as of
Disabled                     examination started. Categorical variable,      January 1996; 1-8
                             based on percentage income loss due to DI       scale, increasing in
                             (0-15%, 15-25%, 25-35%, 35-45%, 45-55%,         the degree disabled
                             55-65%, 65-80%, 80-100%).                       categories.

Previous          AO         Gross annual earnings (including vacation Taken from the
Earnings                     allowance, yearly bonus, extra pay for shift 1996 database, but
                             work, etc.) in the year before entry in DI. refers to whichever



                                                                                               51
                              This amount was capped at a certain was the last year of
                              maximum level of earnings (€35,754 per work prior to DI;
                              year in 1999).                         euros/year.

Duration in DI    AO          Duration in DI at the time of the reform Measured on
                              (August 1st, 1993)                       August 1st, 1993;
                                                                       measured in months


Demographic characteristics
Each city (or aggregation of small villages) in The Netherlands keeps a registry (“GBA”) of all
its native and foreign inhabitants. When an individual moves within the Netherlands, the person
has to register in the new city (and unregister in the old city). Whenever there is a demographic
change (e.g., child born, marriage), this is registered by the city administration. In this paper, we
use the following demographics from the municipal registries: date of birth, gender, place of
residence, origin, and marital status.

Variable         Dataset     Definition                               Timing & Units
Age              GBA         Age in months at the time of the reform, In months,
                             calculated from year and month of birth  measured on
                                                                      August 1st, 1993

Married          GBA         Dummy calculated        from    marital   status Measured as of
(dummy)                      information.                                     January 1996;
                                                                              Dummy equals 1 if
                                                                              married
Gender           GBA         Dummy if person is female                        Measured as of
                                                                              January 1996;
                                                                              Dummy equals 1 if
                                                                              female
Origin           GBA         Origin based on someone’s country of birth Measured as of
                             and that of his/her parents. Native Dutch are January 1996; 10
                             those (i) born in The Netherlands just as their dummy (0/1)
                             parents, and those (ii) born in another country variables
                             whose parents were both born in The
                             Netherlands. Non-native Dutch are all others
                             for whom at least one parent was not born in
                             The Netherlands. Within the group of non-
                             native Dutch we distinguish between
                             countries of origin. For those born abroad, the
                             country of birth is taken as the country of
                             origin. When born in the Netherlands, the
                             country of birth of the mother is taken as the
                             country of origin. When both the individual
                             and the mother are born in the Netherlands,
                             the country of origin is based on the country



                                                                                                  52
               of birth of the father. We create 10 original
               dummies for the following categories:
               Native Dutch, Morocco, Turkey, Surinam,
               Dutch Antilles and Aruba, Other Non-
               Western Country, Dutch but born elsewhere,
               Other Western Country, East-European
               Country, and Dutch East Indies.
Region   GBA   Based on the place of residence (i.e., the city   Measured as of
               where someone is registered), we create 40        January 1996; 40
               regional dummies that correspond to the           dummy (0/1)
               COROP regions as defined by the                   variables
               Coordination Commission Regional Research
               Programme (see
               http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COROP for more
               information).




                                                                                    53
