NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MISMATCH UNEMPLOYMENT
Ayșegül Șahin
Joseph Song
Giorgio Topa
Giovanni L. Violante
Working Paper 18265
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18265
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We thank Grant Graziani, Dan Greenwald, Victoria Gregory, Scott Nelson, and Christina Patterson
who provided excellent research assistance at various stages of the project. We also wish to thank
Michele Boldrin, Björn Brügemann, Steve Davis, Mark Gertler, John Haltiwanger, Marianna Kudlyak,
Ricardo Lagos, Rob Shimer, and many seminar participants for helpful comments. We are especially
grateful to June Shelp, at The Conference Board, for her help with the HWOL data. The opinions expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ayșegül Șahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mismatch Unemployment
Ayșegül Șahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 18265
August 2012
JEL No. E24,J24,J61,J62,J63,J64
ABSTRACT
We develop a framework where mismatch between vacancies and job seekers across sectors translates
into higher unemployment by lowering the aggregate job-finding rate. We use this framework to measure
the contribution of mismatch to the recent rise in U.S. unemployment by exploiting two sources of
cross-sectional data on vacancies, JOLTS and HWOL, a new database covering the universe of online
U.S. job advertisements. Mismatch across industries and occupations explains at most 1/3 of the total
observed increase in the unemployment rate, whereas geographical mismatch plays no apparent role.
The share of the rise in unemployment explained by occupational mismatch is increasing in the education
level.
Ayșegül Șahin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research & Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
Aysegul.Sahin@ny.frb.org

Giorgio Topa
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research & Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
giorgio.topa@ny.frb.org

Joseph Song
Columbia University
jks2165@columbia.edu

Giovanni L. Violante
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1119
and NBER
glv2@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
The U.S. unemployment rate rose from an average value of 4.6% in 2006 to its peak of 10%
in October 2009, as the economy experienced the deepest downturn in the postwar period.
Two years after its peak, the unemployment rate still hovered above 8%. This persistently
high rate has sparked a vibrant debate among economists and policymakers. The main point
of contention is the nature of these sluggish dynamics and, therefore, the appropriate policy
response.
A deeper look at worker flows into and out of unemployment shows that, while the inflow rate has now returned to its pre-recession level, the job-finding rate is still half of what
it was in 2006. Any credible theory accounting for the recent dynamics in unemployment
must therefore operate through a long-lasting decline in the outflow rate. One such theory
is that the recession has produced a severe sectoral mismatch between vacant jobs and unemployed workers: idle workers are seeking employment in sectors (occupations, industries,
locations) different from those where the available jobs are. Such misalignment between the
distribution of vacancies and unemployment across sectors of the economy would lower the
aggregate job-finding rate.
The mismatch hypothesis is qualitatively consistent with three features of the Great Recession. First, over the past three years the U.S. Beveridge curve (i.e., the empirical relationship between aggregate unemployment and aggregate vacancies) has displayed a marked
rightward movement indicating that, for a given level of vacancies, the current level of unemployment is higher than that implied by the historical data. 1 Put differently, aggregate
matching efficiency has declined.2 Second, around half of the job losses in this downturn
were concentrated in construction and manufacturing.3 To the extent that the unemployed
in these battered sectors do not search for (or are not hired in) jobs in the sectors which
1

See, among others, Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2010), Hall (2010), Daly, Hobijn, Şahin, and Valletta (2011),
Barlevy (2011), and Veracierto (2011). According to these studies, at the current level of vacancies, the prerecession U.S. unemployment-vacancies relationship predicts an unemployment rate between 2 and 3 percentage points lower than its current value.
2
According to Barlevy (2011) and Veracierto (2011), the size of this drop from its pre-recession level is
between 15% and 25%, depending on the exact methodology used in the calculation.
3
According to the Current Employment Statistics (CES), also known as the establishment survey, payroll
employment declined by 7.4 million during the recession and construction and manufacturing sectors accounted
for 54% of this decline.

1

largely weathered the storm (e.g., health care), mismatch would arise across occupations and
industries. Third, house prices experienced a sharp fall, especially in certain regions (see
e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2011). Homeowners who expect their local housing markets to recover
may choose to forego job opportunities in other locations to avoid large capital losses from
selling their house. Under this “house-lock”conjecture, mismatch between job opportunities
and job seekers would arise mostly across locations.
In this paper, we develop a theoretical framework to conceptualize the notion of mismatch unemployment, and use this framework to measure how much of the recent rise in the
U.S. unemployment rate is attributable to mismatch. We envision the economy as comprising
a large number of distinct labor markets or sectors (e.g., segmented by industry, occupation,
geography, or a combination of these attributes). Each labor market is frictional, i.e., its
hiring process is governed by a matching function. To assess the existence of mismatch in
the data, we ask whether, given the observed distribution of productive efficiency, matching efficiency, and vacancies across labor markets in the economy, unemployed workers
are “misallocated, ”i.e., they search in the wrong sectors. Answering this question requires
comparing the actual allocation of unemployed workers across sectors to an ideal allocation. The ideal allocation that we choose as our benchmark is the one that would be selected
by a planner who faces no impediment in moving idle labor across sectors except for the
within-market matching friction. We show that optimality for this planner dictates that (productive and matching) efficiency-weighted vacancy-unemployment ratios be equated across
sectors. By manipulating the planner’s optimality condition, we construct a mismatch index
that measures the fraction of hires lost every period because of misallocation of job seekers.
Through this index, we can quantify how much lower the unemployment rate would be in
the absence of mismatch. The difference between the observed unemployment rate and this
counterfactual unemployment rate is mismatch unemployment. 4
Our measurement exercise requires disaggregated data on unemployment and vacancies.
The standard micro data sources for unemployment and vacancies are, respectively, the Cur4

Our focus is on mismatch unemployment intended as unemployed searching in the “wrong” sector. A
separate literature uses the term “mismatch” to denote the existence of employed individuals working on the
“wrong” job—meaning a sub-optimal joint distribution of worker skills and firm’s capital. See, for example,
Eeckhout and Kircher (2011).

2

rent Population Survey (CPS) and the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS).
Unfortunately, JOLTS only allows disaggregation of vacancies by 2-digit industries and very
broad geographical area (4 Census regions).5 In this paper, we introduce a new source of
micro data, the Conference Board’s Help Wanted OnLine (HWOL) database, designed to
collect the universe of online job advertisements in the U.S. economy. Through this novel
data set, we are able perform our empirical analysis at the 2- and 3-digit occupational level, at
a more detailed geographical level (states and counties), and even by defining labor markets
as a combination of occupation and location. 6
Our empirical analysis yields the following main results. We find no significant role
for geographical mismatch across U.S. states or counties. Mismatch at the 2-digit industry
and 2- and 3-digit occupation level increased markedly during the recession, but declined
throughout 2010, an indication of a cyclical pattern in mismatch. A similar, but milder,
hump shape in mismatch is observed around the 2001 recession. We calculate that an additional four percent of monthly hires were lost during the Great Recession because of the
misallocation of vacancies and job seekers across occupations and industries. As a result, our
counterfactual analysis indicates that mismatch unemployment at the 2-digit industry level
can account for 0.75 percentage points out of the 5.4 percentage point total increase in the
U.S. unemployment rate from 2006 to October 2009. At the 3-digit occupation level, the
contribution of mismatch unemployment rises just beyond one and a half percentage points.
When we compute occupational mismatch separately for different education groups, we find
its contribution to the observed increase in the unemployment rate is almost twice as large
for college graduates than for high-school dropouts.
In an extension of the baseline analysis, we allow the misallocation of unemployed workers across sectors to also affect the vacancy creation decisions of firms: the presence of jobseekers in declining sectors makes it easier to fill jobs in those sectors and, therefore, distorts
firms’ incentives in the direction of, inefficiently, creating vacancies in the wrong markets.
We show that this channel depresses aggregate vacancy creation relative to the planner’s
5

Note that industry classification in the JOLTS is slightly different than the 2-digit NAICS classification.
See Table B1 for a complete list of industries in the JOLTS.
6
The HWOL micro data would allow an even more disaggregated analysis. The binding constraint is determined by the small sample of unemployed workers in the monthly CPS.

3

solution, giving a further boost to mismatch unemployment. When this additional force is
factored into our counterfactuals, the contribution of mismatch to the observed rise in the
unemployment rate grows by a maximum of two thirds of a percentage point. We therefore
conclude that, at the analyzed level of disaggregation, mismatch can explain at most 1/3 of
the recent rise in the U.S. unemployment rate since 2006.
We now return briefly on the nature of our measurement exercise. Formalizing mismatch
unemployment as “distance from a benchmark allocation” follows, in essence, the same
insights of the vast literature on misallocation and productivity (Lagos, 2006; Restuccia and
Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Jones, 2011; Moll, 2011) and of that on wedges
(Chari, Kehoe, McGrattan, 2007). Our implementation has two distinctive features. First,
we do not need to solve for equilibrium allocations (and, hence, make specific assumptions
about firms’ and workers’ behavior, their information set, price determination, etc.) We
simply take the empirical joint distribution of unemployment and vacancies across sectors as
the equilibrium outcome. 7 Second, we construct the counterfactual distribution (in absence
of mismatch) from a simple planner’s problem which can be solved analytically.
The key strength of these two features combined is that finer disaggregation in the available micro data poses no threat to the feasibility of the exercise. The approach we propose
is robust and easily implementable, even with a high number of labor markets, and multiple sources of heterogeneity, idiosyncratic shocks, and aggregate fluctuations. The limit is
that one cannot separately quantify the, possibly many, sources behind misallocation, as this
would require specifying and numerically solving a complex structural equilibrium model.
Factors explaining the discrepancy between the empirical and planner’s distribution of unemployment across sectors include moving (e.g., retraining or migration) costs, relative wage
rigidity, or certain government policies that may hamper the reallocation of idle labor from
shrinking to expanding sectors. Since moving costs are characteristics of the physical environment that would also feature in a planner’s problem, while our benchmark planner’s
allocation is derived under costless between-sector mobility, our calculations on the role of
mismatch are an upper bound.8 In light of this remark, the finding that mismatch accounts
7

The extension to endogenous vacancy requires a minimal set of, mostly standard, assumptions that are
discussed in Section 7.
8
In the measurement exercise, when needed, we also make choices that preserve this upper-bound nature of

4

for at most 1/3 of the rise in U.S. unemployment appears even more compelling.
The model underlying our measurement exercise is a multi-sector version of the standard
aggregate search/matching model (Pissarides, 2000). This stands in contrast to the model
of Shimer (2007), who proposed an alternative environment to measure mismatch between
firms and workers across labor markets. The crucial difference between the two models is
the notion of a vacancy or, equivalently, at which point of the meeting process vacancies are
measured. In the matching model, firms desiring to expand post vacancies: a vacancy is a
manifestation of a firm’s effort to hire. In Shimer’s model, firms unsuccessful in meeting
workers are left with idle jobs: a vacancy is therefore a manifestation of a firm’s failure
to hire. Both notions are theoretically correct. Since both models are parameterized using
the same micro-data on vacancies, the key question is whether existing job-openings data
from JOLTS and HWOL are more likely to represent firms’ hiring effort or hiring failure.
The short duration of job openings in JOLTS (2-4 weeks according to Davis, Faberman, and
Haltiwanger, 2010) seems somewhat more consistent with the former view, but better data is
needed to shed light on this critical point.
The notion of vacancy we adopt is common to the entire search/matching approach to the
study of unemployment. Within this class, the closest paper to ours is Jackman and Roper
(1987): in a static matching model with many sectors, they show that distributing unemployment across sectors so that sectoral labor-market tightnesses are equalized maximizes aggregate hires, and they propose the use of mismatch indexes to summarize deviations from this
allocation.9 At that time, economists were struggling to understand why high unemployment
was so persistent in many European countries. 10 Padoa-Schioppa (1991) contains a number
the calculation.
9
This idea goes back, at least, to Mincer (1966, page 126) who writes: “To detect the existence, degree,
and changes in structural unemployment, (U, V) maps may be constructed for disaggregations of the economy
in the cross-section, by various categories, such as industry, location, occupation, and any other classification
of interest. For example, each location is represented by a point in the (U, V) map, and a scatter diagram
showing such information for all labor markets may show a clear positive correlation. This would indicate
that unemployment is largely nonstructural with respect to location, that is to say, that adjustments require
movements within local areas rather than the more difficult movements between areas. In contrast, a negative
relation in the scatter would indicate the presence of a structural problem. The scatters may, of course, show
identifiable combinations of patterns. Observations of changes in these cross sectional patterns over time will
show rotations and shifts, providing highly suggestive leads for diagnoses of the changing structure of labor
supplies and demands.”
10
The conjecture was that the oil shocks of the 1970s and the concurrent shift from manufacturing to services

5

of empirical studies for various countries and concludes that mismatch was not an important
explanation of the dynamics of European unemployment in the 1980s. 11 Our paper contributes to reviving this old literature by extending it in several directions: (i) we develop
a dynamic, stochastic, environment with numerous sources of heterogeneity, (ii) we explain
how to construct counterfactual measures of unemployment, absent mismatch, (iii) we incorporate the effect of misallocation on vacancy creation, and (iv) we perform our measurement
at a much more disaggregated level, thanks to new micro data.
Beyond the present paper, a small but rapidly growing literature attempts to quantify
whether mismatch played a substantive role in the Great Recession. Examples, which we
discuss in some detail in the paper, are Barnichon and Figura (2011), Dickens (2010), Herz
and van Rens (2011), and Jaimovich and Siu (2012).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical
framework. Section 3 derives the mismatch indexes and explains how we compute our counterfactuals. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 performs the empirical analysis. In
section 6 we verify the robustness of our results to measurement errors in unemployment
and vacancy counts. Section 7 analyzes the case in which mismatch also affects vacancy
creation. Section 8 concludes. Appendix A contains the proofs of our theoretical results and
Appendix B contains more detail about the data and our measurement exercise.

2 Environment and planner problem
We begin by describing our benchmark economic environment and deriving the planner’s
optimal allocation rule of unemployed workers across sectors—the crucial building block of
our theoretical analysis. In Section 2.2, we carry out a number of extensions and demonstrate
that the benchmark planner’s allocation rule generalizes in a very intuitive way. Throughout
these derivations, we maintain the assumption that the evolution of the vacancy distribution
induced structural transformations in the labor market that permanently modified the skill and geographical map
of labor demand. From the scattered data available at the time, there was also some evidence of shifts in the
Beveridge curve for some countries.
11
Subsequent explanations of European unemployment based on the interaction between technological
changes and rigid labor market institutions were more successful quantitatively (e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent,
1998; Mortensen and Pissarides, 1999; Hornstein, Krusell and Violante, 2007).

6

is exogenous. We relax this assumption in Section 7.

2.1 Benchmark environment
Time is discrete. The economy is comprised of a large number I of distinct labor markets
(sectors) indexed by i. New production opportunities, corresponding to job vacancies (v i ) ,
arise exogenously across sectors.12 The economy is populated by a measure one of riskneutral individuals who can be either employed in sector i (e i ) or unemployed and searching
I

(ei + ui ) = 1. On-the-job search is ruled out, and an unemin sector i (ui ). Therefore,
i=1

ployed worker, in any given period, can search for vacancies in one sector only.
Labor markets are frictional: new matches, or hires, (hi ) between unemployed workers
(ui ) and vacancies (vi ) in market i are determined by the matching function Φ· φ i · m (ui , vi ),
with m strictly increasing and strictly concave in both arguments and homogeneous of degree
one in (ui, vi ). The term Φ · φi measures matching efficiency (i.e., the level of fundamental
frictions) in sector i, with Φ denoting the aggregate component and φ i the idiosyncratic
sectoral-level component. The number of vacancies and matching efficiency are the only
two sources of heterogeneity across sectors in our baseline model.
All existing matches produce Z units of output in every sector. Matches are destroyed exogenously at rate Δ, also common across sectors. Aggregate shocks Z, Δ and Φ, and the vector of vacancies v = {vi } are drawn from conditional distribution functions Γ Z,Δ,Φ (Z  , Δ , Φ ; Z, Δ, Φ)
and Γv (v ; v, Z , Δ , Φ ). The notation shows that we allow for autocorrelation in {Z, Δ, Φ, v},
and for correlation between vacancies and all the aggregate shocks. The sector-specific
matching efficiencies φi are independent across sectors and are drawn from Γφ (φ ; φ), where
φ = {φi }. The vector {Z, Δ, Φ, v, φ} takes strictly positive values.
Within each period, events unfold as follows. At the beginning of the period, the aggregate shocks (Z, Δ, Φ), vacancies v, and matching efficiencies φ are observed. At this
stage, the distribution of active matches e = {e 1 , . . . , eI } across markets (and hence the
total number of unemployed workers u) is also given. Next, unemployed workers choose
a labor market i without any impediment to labor mobility. Once the unemployed workers
12

We explain in Section 7 that assuming that vacancies are exogenous is equivalent to a model where the job
creation margin is endogenous, and the elasticity of the cost of creating vacancies is infinitely large.

7

are allocated, the matching process takes place and hi = Φφi m (ui , vi ) new hires are made
in each market. Production occurs in the ei (pre-existing) plus hi (new) matches. Finally, a
fraction Δ of matches are destroyed exogenously in each market i, determining next period’s
employment distribution {e i } and stock of unemployed workers u .
Planner’s solution

In Appendix A.1 we prove that the planner’s optimal rule for the

allocation of unemployed workers across sectors in this economy can be written as
 
 
 
v1
vi
vI
= ... = φi mui
= ... = φI muI
,
φ1 mu1
∗
∗
u1
ui
u∗I

(1)

where we have used the “*” to denote the planner’s allocation. This condition states that the
planner allocates more job seekers to labor markets with more vacancies and higher matching
efficiency.

2.2 Generalizations
We develop two generalizations of our benchmark model where productivities and destruction rates are heterogeneous across sectors. First, we allow for sector-specific shocks that are
uncorrelated across sectors and independent of the aggregate shock (in the spirit of Lilien,
1982). Second, we lay out an alternative model of sectoral cycles where sectoral productivity
fluctuations are driven by the aggregate shock because different sectors have different elasticities to this common factor (in the spirit of Abraham and Katz, 1986). Throughout these
two extensions, we also allow the planner to choose the size of the labor force subject to paying a fixed cost of search for each job-seeker in the unemployment pool, but we keep worker
separations exogenous. Finally, we allow the planner to choose whether to endogenously
dissolve some existing matches and show that, under some conditions, it never chooses to do
so. All the derivations for these extensions are contained in Appendix A.2-A.4.
2.2.1 Heterogeneous productivities and job destructions
Let labor productivity in sector i be given by Z · z i , where each component zi is strictly
positive, i.i.d. across sectors and independent of Z. Similarly, denote the idiosyncratic
component of the exogenous destruction rate in sector i as δ i . Then, the survival probability of a match is (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ). It is convenient to proceed under the assumption that
8

{Z, 1 − Δ, zi , 1 − δi } all follow independent unit root processes, which amounts to simple
restrictions on the conditional distributions Γ Z,Δ,Φ , Γz , and Γδ .13 Appendix A.2 proves that
the planner’s optimal allocation rule of unemployed workers equates
 
vi
zi
φimui
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
u∗i

(2)

across markets. This rule establishes that the higher vacancies, matching efficiency, and
expected discounted productive efficiency in market i, the more unemployed workers the
planner wants searching in that market. In particular, expected output of an unemployed
worker in sector i is discounted differently by the planner in different sectors because of the
heterogeneity in the expected duration of matches.
2.2.2 Heterogeneous sensitivities to the aggregate shock
In a classic paper disputing Lilien’s (1982) sectoral-shift theory of unemployment, Abraham and Katz (1986) argue that, empirically, sectoral employment movements appear to be
driven by aggregate shocks with different sectors having different sensitivities to the aggregate cycle. Here we show how the planner’s allocation rule (2) changes under this alternative
interpretation of the source of sectoral labor demand shifts.
Let productivity in sector i be zi = exp (ζi ) Z ηi where ζi is a parameter rescaling the
average productivity of the sector relative to that of the aggregate economy Z, and η i is a
parameter measuring the elasticity of sectoral productivity to the aggregate shock Z. Let
log Z follow a unit root process with innovation  distributed as N (−σ  /2, σ ). In Appendix
A.3, we show that the planner will allocate unemployed workers to equalize
 
vi
exp (ζi ) Z ηi
 φi mui

σ
u∗i
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) 2

(3)

across sectors. The new term in the denominator captures that the drift in future productivity in sector i varies proportionately with η i because of the log-normality assumption.
In essence, this sectoral drift changes the effective rate at which the planner discounts the
future.
We can allow the vector x = {Z, 1 − Δ, z i , 1 − δi } to have the more general linear conditional mean
function of the type E [x  ] = ρx x. However, the derivations are more convoluted, and we do not make use of
this more general assumption in the empirical analysis.
13

9

Understanding the nature of sectoral fluctuations goes beyond the scope of this paper.
The main lesson of this generalization is that our approach is valid under alternative views
of what drives sectoral fluctuations: different views lead to different measurements of the
sectoral component of productivity in the planner’s allocation rule.
2.2.3 Endogenous separations
Consider the environment of Section 2.2.1 and allow the planner to move workers employed
in sector i into unemployment or out of the labor force at the end of the period, before
choosing the size of the labor force for next period. In Appendix A.4 we demonstrate that,
if the planner always has enough individuals to pull into (out of) unemployment from (into)
out of the labor force, it will never choose to separate workers who are already matched
and producing. The planner’s allocation rule remains exactly as in equation (2) and all
separations are due to exogenous match destructions.

3 Mismatch index and counterfactual unemployment
We now use the planner’s allocation rule to derive an index measuring the severity of labor
market mismatch between unemployed workers and vacancies. From this point onward we
must state an additional assumption, which is well supported by the data as we show below:
the individual-market matching function m (u it , vit ) is Cobb-Douglas, i.e.,
hit = Φt φit vitα u1−α
it ,

(4)

where hit are hires in sector i at date t, and α ∈ (0, 1) is the vacancy share common across all
sectors.14 Next, we describe how to use these indexes to construct counterfactuals to measure
how much of the recent rise in U.S. unemployment is due to mismatch.

3.1 Mismatch index
Our mismatch index measures the fraction of hires lost because of misallocation, or (1 − h t /h∗t )
where ht denotes the observed aggregate hires and h∗t the planner’s hires.
14

At this point we to abandon the recursive formulation and introduce time t explicitly.

10

Consider first the benchmark environment of Section 2.1. From (4), summing across
markets, the aggregate number of new hires can be expressed as:
 I
  vit α  uit 1−α
α 1−α
.
φit
ht = Φt vt ut ·
v
u
t
t
i=1

(5)

The optimality condition dictating how to allocate unemployed workers between market i
and market j is:
vit
=
u∗it



φjt
φit

 α1

·

vjt
.
u∗jt

(6)

The optimal number of hires that can be obtained by the planner allocating the u t available
unemployed workers across sectors is
h∗t

=

Φt vtα u1−α
t

 I



φit

i=1

vit
vt

α 

u∗it
ut

1−α
.

(7)

Substituting the optimality condition (6) in equation (7) , the optimal number of new hires
α
I
1

vit
∗
α 1−α
α
φit vt
, a CES aggregator of the sectorbecomes ht = Φt φ̄t vt ut , where φ̄t =
i=1

level matching efficiencies weighted by their vacancy share. Therefore, we obtain an expression for the mismatch index

ht
Mφt = 1 − ∗ = 1 −
ht
i=1
I



φit
φ̄t



vit
vt

α 

uit
ut

1−α
.

(8)

Mφt measures the fraction of hires lost in period t because of misallocation. This index answers the question: if the planner had u t available unemployed workers and used its optimal
allocation rule, how many additional jobs would it be able to create? These additional hires
are generated because, by better allocating the same number of unemployed, the planner can
increase the aggregate job-finding rate and achieve more hires compared to the equilibrium,
which we will call the “direct effect” of mismatch. It is useful to note that, in addition to this
direct effect, u∗t is in general lower than ut which, for any given allocation rule, translates
into a higher aggregate job-finding rate and more hires, which we will call the “feedback”
effect. Mφt measures only the direct effect of mismatch on hires, but the counterfactual of
Section 3.2 fully incorporates the feedback effect as well.
From (8) and (5) one can rewrite the aggregate matching function as
ht = (1 − Mφt ) · φ̄t · Φt vtα u1−α
t
11

(9)

which makes it clear that higher mismatch lowers the (measured) aggregate efficiency of the
matching technology and reduces the aggregate job-finding rate because some unemployed
workers search in the wrong sectors (those with few vacancies). The term φ̄t can also contribute to a reduction in aggregate matching efficiency when the vacancy shares of the sectors
with high φ fall.15
In Appendix A.5, we show three useful properties of the index. First, M φt is between
zero (no mismatch) and one (maximal mismatch). Second, the index is invariant to “pure”
aggregate shocks that shift the total number of vacancies and unemployed up or down, but
leave the vacancy and unemployment shares across markets unchanged. Third, M φt is increasing in the level of disaggregation. This last property suggests that every statement about
the role of mismatch should be qualified with respect to the degree of sectoral disaggregation
used.
Consider now the economy of Section 2.2.1, where labor markets also differ in their
level of productive efficiency. It is useful to define “overall market efficiency” as xit ≡
φit zit / [1 − β (1 − Δt ) (1 − δit )].16 Following the same steps, we arrive at the index
Mxt = 1 −

  α  1−α
I 

φi
vit
uit
i=1

where
φ̄xt

=

I

i=1


φit

xit
x̄t

 1−α

α

vt

φ̄xt
vit
vt


, with x̄t =

ut
 I

i=1

1
α

xit

,


(10)

vit
vt



α

.

(11)

φ̄xt is an aggregator of the market-level overall efficiencies weighted by their vacancy share.
In the absence of heterogeneity with respect to matching efficiency, productivity, or job
I
α
1−α

vit
uit
. In what follows, we will
destruction, the index becomes M t = 1 −
vt
ut
i=1

also use the notation (Mzt , Mδt ) to denote mismatch indexes for an economy where the
only source of heterogeneity is productivity and job destruction rates, respectively.
15

Barnichon and Figura (2011) show that the variance of labor market tightness across sectors, suggestive
of mismatch between unemployment and vacancies, can also be analytically related to aggregate matching
efficiency and, hence, can be a source of variation in the job-finding rate.
16
To construct a mismatch index for the economy
substituting

 of Section 2.2.2, it suffices

zit / [1 − β (1 − Δt ) (1 − δit )] with the term exp (ζi ) Ztηi / 1 − β (1 − Δt ) (1 − δit ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2ε
in all the derivations below.

12

3.2 Mismatch unemployment
This misallocation index allows us to construct the counterfactual unemployment rate, u ∗t , in
the absence of mismatch. The actual aggregate job-finding rate in the economy at date t can
be written as

 α
vt
ht
= (1 − Mxt ) φ̄xt Φt
.
ft =
ut
ut
Let u∗t be counterfactual unemployment under the planner’s allocation rule. The optimal
number of hires at date t when u∗t unemployed workers are available to be allocated across
sectors is φ̄xt Φt vtα (u∗t )1−α . Therefore, the optimal job-finding rate (in absence of mismatch)
is


ft∗

= φ̄xt Φt

vt
u∗t

α

 α
1
ut
= ft ·
·
(1 − M )
u∗t
  xt   

Direct Effect

(12)

Feedback

There are two sources of discrepancy between counterfactual and actual job-finding rate. The
first term in (12) captures the fact that a planner with ut available job-seekers to move across
sectors would achieve a better allocation and a higher job-finding rate. This effect, which we
call the “direct” misallocation effect, is summarized by the mismatch index, as explained.
The second term captures a “feedback” effect of misallocation: no mismatch means lower
unemployment (u∗t < ut ) which, in turn, increases the probability of meeting a vacancy for
job-seekers. This feedback effect explains why, even if after a period of higher than average
mismatch Mxt returns to its average, mismatch unemployment can remain above average
for some time, as it takes time for the additional unemployed to be reabsorbed—a pattern we
see in our empirical analysis.
Given an initial value for u∗0 , the dynamics of the counterfactual unemployment rate can
be obtained by iterating forward on equation
u∗t+1 = st + (1 − st − ft∗ ) u∗t ,

(13)

where st is the separation rate. Our strategy takes the sequences for separation rates {st }
and vacancies {vt } directly from the data when constructing the counterfactual sequence of
{u∗t } from (13) , an approach consistent with the theoretical model where vacancy creation
and separations are exogenous to the planner.17
17

We avoid the term “constrained efficient” unemployment, because in the extended models of Section 2.2

13

The gap between actual unemployment u t and counterfactual unemployment u ∗t is mismatch unemployment. This calculation addresses the key question of interest: what is the
contribution of mismatch unemployment to the recent rise in the aggregate U.S. unemployment rate? In the rest of the paper we address this question directly. 18

4 Data and sectoral matching functions
We begin this section by describing the data sources. Next, we analyze the issue of specification and estimation of the matching function.
We focus on four major definitions of labor markets: the first is a broad industry classification; the second is an occupation classification, based on both the 2-digit and 3-digit
standard occupational classification (SOC) system; the third is a geographic classification,
based on U.S. counties and metropolitan areas (MSA’s); finally, we also study occupational
mismatch within four skill categories, based on educational attainment. 19 As discussed in
Section 3, our analysis requires information about vacancies, hires, unemployment, productivity, matching efficiency, and job destruction rates across different labor markets.

4.1 Data description
At the industry level, we use vacancy data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
(JOLTS), which provides survey-based measures of job openings and hires at a monthly
frequency, starting from December 2000, for seventeen industry classifications. 20 At the
occupation, education and county level, we use vacancy data from the Help Wanted OnLine
the planner also controls labor force participation decisions. Therefore, we prefer to interpret u ∗t as the counterfactual unemployment rate under the planner’s allocation rule of unemployed workers across sectors, abstracting from possible discrepancies between the planner’s labor force participation choice and the corresponding
equilibrium outcome observed in the data.
18
In a previous version of this paper, we also reported results for an alternative mismatch index equal to
the sum across sectors of the absolute deviations between unemployment and vacancy shares. However, this
index is much less useful because it only quantifies the number of job-seekers searching in the wrong sectors,
but not how such misallocation lowers the job-finding rate. For this reason, this alternative index cannot be
used to construct a proper measure of mismatch unemployment. Dickens (2011) studies mismatch in the U.S.
labor market with JOLTS data using this index in its simple form, i.e., without allowing for heterogeneity in
productive and matching efficiency across sectors.
19
See Tables B1-B3 in Appendix B for a list of industry and occupation classifications used in the empirical
analysis.
20
Since the JOLTS is a well known and widely used survey, we do not provide further details. For more
information, see http://www.bls.gov/jlt/. See also Faberman (2009).

14

(HWOL) dataset provided by The Conference Board (TCB).21 This is a novel data series
that covers the universe of online advertised vacancies posted on internet job boards or in
newspaper online editions.22 The HWOL database started in May 2005 as a replacement
for the Help-Wanted Advertising Index of print advertising maintained by TCB. It covers
roughly 16,000 online job boards and provides detailed information about the characteristics
of advertised vacancies for between three and four million active ads each month.
Each observation in the HWOL database refers to a unique ad and contains information
about the listed occupation at the 6-digit level, the geographic location of the advertised vacancy down to the county level, whether the position is for full-time, part-time, or contract
work (essentially self-employed contractors or consultants: e.g., computer specialists, accountants, auditors), the education level required for the position, and the hourly and annual
mean wage.23 For a subset of ads we also observe the industry NAICS classification, the
sales volume and number of employees of the company, and the actual advertised salary
range. The vast majority of online advertised vacancies are posted on a small number of job
boards: about 70% of all ads appear on nine job boards, and about 60% are posted on only
five job boards.24
It is worth mentioning some measurement issues in the HWOL data: first, the same ad
can appear on multiple job boards. To avoid double-counting, a sophisticated unduplication
algorithm is used by TCB that identifies unique advertised vacancies on the basis of the
combination of company name, job title/description, city or state. Second, the growing use
of online job boards over time may induce a spurious upward trend. When we compare
JOLTS data to HWOL data below, we do not find large discrepancies between the two time
series, suggesting that this problem is not serious, perhaps because the bulk of the shift from
newspaper to online ads took place before 2005. Third, the dataset records one vacancy per
ad. There is a small number of cases in which multiple positions are listed, but the convention
21
Note that our analysis is based on data for the December 2000-June 2011 period for the JOLTS and May
2005-June 2011 for the HWOL.
22
The data are collected for The Conference Board by Wanted Technologies.
23
The education and wage information is imputed by TCB. Education is imputed from BLS data on the education content of detailed 6-digit level occupations. Wages are imputed using BLS data from the Occupational
Employment Statistics (OES), based on the occupation classification.
24
The five largest job boards are: CareerBuilder, Craigslist, JOBcentral, Monster, and Yahoo!HotJobs.

15

6

JOLTS
HWOL
HWOL - no contract

Number of Vacancies (millions)

5

4

3

2

1
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 1: Comparison between the JOLTS and the HWOL (The Conference Board Help
Wanted OnLine Data Series).
of one vacancy per ad is used for simplicity. Finally, there are some cases in which multiple
locations (counties within a state) are listed in a given ad for a given position. Here, we follow
the convention that if the counties are in the same MSA the position is taken to represent a
single vacancy, but if they appear in different MSA’s they reflect distinct vacancies.
A comparison across our two data sources for vacancies shows that the aggregate trends
from the HWOL database are roughly consistent with those from the JOLTS data: in Figure
1, we plot JOLTS vacancies and HWOL ads at the national level. The total count of active
vacancies in HWOL is below that in JOLTS until the beginning of 2008, and is above from
2008 onwards. As we show in Figure B1 in the Appendix, this difference is most pronounced
in the South, and may reflect the growing penetration of online job listings over time. The
average difference between the two aggregate series is about 16% of the JOLTS total. The
correlation between the two aggregate series is very high, 0.89, indicating that the patterns
over time are very similar. We report additional comparisons between the JOLTS and HWOL
vacancy series in Appendix B.1.25
25

In the figures we also plot vacancy counts from HWOL excluding contract work, to make the series more
comparable to the JOLTS measure of vacancies. JOLTS only reports vacancies posted by establishments for
their own direct employees and excludes self-employed outside contractors and consultants which are instead
covered by HWOL (see the Appendix for further detail). In all our analyses with HWOL data we consider all
vacancies, including contract work.

16

We calculate unemployment counts from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the
same industry, occupation, and education classifications that we use for vacancies. 26 For geography, we use the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) which provides monthly
estimates of total unemployment at the county and MSA level. 27 The CPS reports the industry and occupation of unemployed workers’ previous jobs. In keeping with the upper bound
nature of our calculation, we begin by assuming that all unemployed workers search only in
the sector that they had last worked in. We later relax this assumption. The small sample
size of the CPS limits the level of disaggregation of our analysis, and prevents us from using
HWOL ads data to their full effect.28
We use various proxies for productivity, depending on data availability. At the industry
level, we compute labor productivity by dividing gross GDP per year for each industry from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (annual data) by average employment in that industry from
the Establishment Survey.29 At the occupation level, for lack of a better proxy, we use annual
data on average hourly wages from the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES). 30 Similarly, at the county level, we use median weekly wage earnings from the Quarterly Census
of Employment and Wages (QCEW).31 We recognize that wage levels might be affected by
factors other than productivity like unionization rates, compensating differentials, monopoly
rents, etc. To partially address this issue, we normalize the average wage for each occupation
to unity at the beginning of our sample and focus on relative wage movements over time. We
also apply the same normalization to industry-level productivity measures for consistency.
We calculate job destruction rates at the industry level from the Business Employment
Dynamics (BED) as the ratio of gross job losses to employment. 32 Since the BED is quarterly, we assume that the destruction rate is the same for the three months corresponding to a
specific quarter and impute the corresponding monthly destruction rates. Since job destruc26

Industry affiliations are not available for all unemployed workers in the CPS. From 2000-2010, on average
about 13.3% of unemployed do not have industry information. Only about 1.5% of unemployed are missing
occupation information. Some of these workers have never worked before and some are self-employed.
27
See http://www.bls.gov/lau/ for more information on LAUS.
28
The average number of unemployed in the CPS for the May 2005 to June 2011 period is 4,557 with a range
of 2,808 to 12,436.
29
http://www.bea.gov/industry/
30
See http://www.bls.gov/oes/
31
See http://www.bls.gov/cew/
32
http://www.bls.gov/bdm/

17

tion rates by occupation are not available, we compute the employment to unemployment
transition rates by occupation in the last job from the CPS semi-panel. Figures B3 and B4
in the appendix show the evolution of productivity and job destruction rates for selected
industries and occupations.
The calculation of market-specific matching efficiency parameters, φi , and vacancy share
α is more involved. We describe its details below.

4.2 Matching function estimation
In order to compute market-specific matching efficiency parameters, φi , and vacancy share
α, we estimate aggregate and sector-specific matching functions using various specifications
and data sources. The estimation of matching functions is subject to an endogeneity issue,
as shocks to unobserved matching efficiency may affect the number of vacancies posted
by firms—much like TFP shocks affect firm’s choice of labor input. In a recent paper,
Borowczyk-Martins, Jolivet and Postel-Vinay (2012) show that the most important movements in matching efficiency inducing a bias in the simple OLS estimator are low-frequency
ones and, as a result, modeling the dynamics of matching efficiency through time-varying
polynomials and structural breaks goes a long way towards solving the problem. This is the
approach we take here. At the aggregate level, we estimate:
 
 
vt
ht

= const + γ QT Tt + α log
+ t ,
log
ut
ut

(14)

where QT Tt is a vector of four elements for the quartic time trend which is meant to capture
shifts in aggregate matching efficiency.
At the sectoral level, we are interested in the sector-specific component of matching
efficiency orthogonal to common aggregate movements in aggregate matching efficiency.
Therefore, at the industry and 2-digit occupation level, we perform the following panel regression:
 
 
 post 
vit
hit
pre

= γ QT Tt + χ{t≤07} log (φi ) + χ{t>07} log φi
+ it , (15)
+ α log
log
uit
uit
where χ{t>07} is an indicator for months after December 2007, the official start of the recession, to absorb sector-specific shifts in matching efficiency.
18

At the industry level, we use vacancies and hires from JOLTS, and unemployment counts
from the CPS. At the occupation level, we use vacancies from HWOL but do not have a direct
measure of hires as in JOLTS. Therefore, we construct hires from the CPS using flows from
unemployment into a given occupation i for people who are surveyed in adjacent months.
Because these monthly flows are quite noisy, we use a 3-month moving average of the data,
and aggregate occupations into five broad occupation groups. For comparison purposes, we
replicate the analysis at the industry level using the constructed “CPS hires” as well. 33 At
the aggregate level, we perform the estimation using both JOLTS and HWOL vacancies, and
both JOLTS and CPS hires.
We report our estimates for the vacancy share α, using our various specifications, in
Table 1. In the aggregate regressions, the estimated vacancy share varies between 0.32 and
0.65; in the panel regressions, the estimates are a bit lower varying between 0.24 and 0.53.
To construct our mismatch indices, and in our calculation of mismatch unemployment, we
pick a value of α = 0.5, for various reasons. First, it is the midpoint of our estimates with
aggregate data. Second, our mismatch indices are typically highest for α = 0.5; therefore,
in the spirit of reporting an upper bound for mismatch unemployment, we use this value. 34
Finally, 0.5 is roughly in the middle of the range of estimates used in other recent papers in
the matching literature.35
The estimated quartic time trend drops during the recession in all our specifications,
consistent with a deterioration of aggregate matching efficiency. With regard to sectoral
matching efficiency, in what follows we use the estimates obtained with JOLTS hires for the
industry level mismatch analysis, and those with CPS hires for the occupation level analysis.
In all cases, we use the pre-recession matching efficiency parameter estimates, and verify
the robustness of our findings to this choice. 36
These estimation results assume a Cobb-Douglas specification for the matching function,
33

See Tables B6 and B7 in Appendix B for the details of these groupings.
In Appendix B, we report a sensitivity analysis using values of α ranging from 0.3 to 0.7.
35
A few examples are α = 0.5 in Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010), α = 0.28 in Shimer (2005),
α = 0.54 in Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), α between 0.66 and 0.72 in Barnichon and Figura (2011).
36
The estimated matching efficiency parameters φ i pre- and post-recession are reported in Appendix B, Tables B5-B7. Beyond movements in the common component Φ t , changes over time in sector-specific matching
efficiencies are small. In Appendix B.3, we document that the mismatch unemployment calculations using both
pre- and post-recession φ i ’s are virtually identical to the baseline.
34

19

Aggregate regressions
Panel regressions
JOLTS
HWOL
Industry (JOLTS) Occupation (HWOL)
0.654
0.532
JOLTS Hires
(0.010)
(0.013)
Sample Size
126
2142
0.318
0.332
0.241
0.279
CPS Hires
(0.017)
(0.038)
(0.014)
(0.016)
Sample Size
126
72
404
370
Table 1: Estimates of the vacancy share α using the JOLTS and HWOL datasets. S.E. in
parenthesis.
in accordance to our theoretical model. For robustness, we have also estimated a more
flexible CES function. We find that, depending on the specification, the elasticity parameter
is either not significantly different than unity, or very close to unity (the Cobb-Douglas case).
The estimated vacancy share and matching efficiency parameters are also very similar to the
Cobb-Douglas case. The details are reported in Table B4 in Appendix B.

5 Results
5.1 Industry-level mismatch
From our definition of mismatch, it is clear that there is a close association between mismatch
indexes and the correlation between unemployment and vacancy shares across sectors. The
planner’s allocation rule implies a perfect correlation between unemployment shares and
(appropriately weighted) vacancy shares. A correlation coefficient below one is a signal of
mismatch, and a declining correlation is a signal of worsening mismatch.
Figure 2 plots the time series of this correlation coefficient across industries over the
sample period. In particular, we report two different correlation coefficients motivated by
the definitions of the mismatch indexes we derived in Section 3: 1. ρ: between (u it /ut ) and
1

(vit /vt ) and 2. ρx : between (uit /ut ) and (xi /x̄t ) α (vit /vt ). Both series behave very similarly.
The basic correlation coefficient (ρ) drops from 0.75 in early 2006 to 0.45 in mid 2009 and
recovers thereafter, indicating a rise in mismatch during the recession. 37
37

It is also useful to examine the evolution of vacancy and unemployment shares of different industries. In
Figure B5, we plot the vacancy and unemployment shares for a selected set of industries using the JOLTS

20

1
0.9

ρ
ρx

Correlation Coefficient

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Figure 2: Correlation coefficient between u and v shares across industries.
The left panel of Figure 3 plots the unadjusted index, M t and the one adjusted for heterogeneity, Mxt .38 This figure shows that, before the last recession (in mid 2006), the fraction
of hires lost because of misallocation of unemployed workers across industries ranged from
two to three percent per month, depending on the index used. At the end of the recession, in
mid 2009, it had increased to roughly 7-8 percent per month, and it has since dropped again
to almost its pre-recession level. To sum up, both indexes indicate a sharp rise in mismatch
between unemployed workers and vacant jobs across industries during the recession, and a
subsequent fairly rapid decline.
How much of the observed rise in the unemployment rate can be explained by mismatch?
The right panel of Figure 3 shows mismatch unemployment (i.e., the difference between the
actual and the counterfactual unemployment rates) at the industry level for the 2001-2011
definition in the Appendix. The shares have been relatively flat in the 2004-2007 period. However, starting
in 2007, vacancy shares started to change noticeably. Construction and durable goods manufacturing were
among the sectors which experienced a decline in their vacancy shares while the health sector saw its vacancy
share increase. Concurrently, unemployment shares of construction and durable goods manufacturing went up
while the unemployment share of the health sector decreased. Interestingly starting from 2010, unemployment
and vacancy shares of sectors began to normalize and almost went back to their pre-recession levels, with
the exception of the construction sector. The vacancy share of the construction sector remains well below its
pre-recession level.
38
Note that all mismatch indexes throughout the paper are HP filtered to eliminate high frequency movements
and better visualize the variation in the indexes. To facilitate the comparison across different definitions of labor
markets, we plot all the mismatch indexes and mismatch unemployment rates using the same vertical distance
on the y axis, 0.15 and 2.5 percentage points, respectively.

21

0.14
0.13

M
Mx

0.12
0.11
0.1
Mismatch Index

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.15

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

u − u∗∗
u − ux

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure 3: Mismatch index Mt and Mxt by industry (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).
period, as implied by the homogeneous and heterogenous indexes. Table 2 shows the change
in mismatch unemployment between October 2009 and the average of 2006. 39 The main
finding is that worsening mismatch across these seventeen industries explains between 0.59
and 0.75 percentage points of the rise in U.S. unemployment from 2006 to its peak, i.e., at
most 14 percent of the increase.40 Mismatch unemployment has declined since early 2010,
but remains above its pre-recession levels.
In Section 2.2.2, we have shown how the planner’s allocation rule changes under the
Abraham-Katz interpretation of sectoral employment movements driven by aggregate shocks
with different sectors having different sensitivities to the aggregate cycle. Here we recalculate the mismatch index Mxt using the derivation in Section 2.2.2. We call this index M AK
xt
since it relates to Abraham and Katz’s critique of Lilien’s sectoral shift hypothesis. Figure 4
shows the mismatch index and the corresponding mismatch unemployment computed using
the benchmark specification and this alternative interpretation. As the figure shows, the two
indexes are very similar.
39

Note that the average unemployment rate was 4.6% in 2006 and 10.0% at its peak in October 2009, indicating a 5.4 percentage point increase. Throughout the paper we compare the average of 2006 with the unemployment peak (October 2009) when we discuss the role of mismatch in the increase in the unemployment
rate.
40
To examine the robustness of our findings, we present various additional results in Appendix B.3 and find
that the contribution of mismatch to the rise in the unemployment rate varies between 0.52 and 0.88 percentage
points.

22

Industry

2-digit Occupation

3-digit Occupation
Routine/Cognitive
County

Index
M
Mx
MAK
x
Madj
∗
Mvx (ε = 0.5)
∗
Mvx (ε = 1.0)
∗
Mvx (ε = 2.0)
M
Mx
Madj
v∗
Mx (ε = 0.5)
∗
Mvx (ε = 1.0)
∗
Mvx (ε = 2.0)
M
Mx
MRC
M
Mz

u06 − u∗06
0.26
0.25
0.28
0.25
0.70
0.36
0.27
0.85
0.42
0.84
1.08
0.74
0.58
1.33
0.79
0.41
0.32
0.32

u10.09 − u∗10.09
1.01
0.84
0.89
0.89
1.91
1.25
0.95
2.00
1.02
2.00
2.60
1.81
1.41
2.91
1.73
1.07
0.46
0.45

Δ(u − u∗ )
0.75
0.59
0.61
0.65
1.21
0.89
0.68
1.14
0.60
1.16
1.52
1.07
0.83
1.58
0.94
0.67
0.14
0.13

Δ(u − u∗ )/Δu
13.9%
10.9%
11.2%
11.9%
22.3%
16.5%
12.7%
21.3%
11.1%
21.4%
28.1%
19.7%
15.3%
29.3%
17.4%
12.3%
2.6%
2.5%

Table 2: Changes in mismatch unemployment at the industry, occupation, and county levels.
All the differences are calculated as the difference between October 2009 and the average of
2006. Note that Δu = 5.4 percentage points.

5.2 Occupation-level mismatch
We now present our results on mismatch between vacancies and unemployment across 2and 3-digit occupations. Recall that the HWOL ads data used for these calculations begin in
May 2005 and the latest observation is June 2011.
Figure 5 plots the correlation between vacancy and unemployment shares across 2-digit
SOC’s. As for the industry-level analysis, we document a significant decline for both measures during the recession and a subsequent pick-up starting in mid-2009. 41
Figure 6 plots the Mt and Mxt indexes (left panels) and the resulting mismatch unem41

Figure B10 in the Appendix shows the unemployment and vacancy shares of selected 2-digit SOC’s. As the
figure indicates, the shares have changed noticeably during the most recent downturn. Business and financial
operations, production and construction/extraction were among the occupations that experienced a decline in
their vacancy shares and an increase in their unemployment shares. Concurrently, vacancy shares of health-care
practitioner and sales and related occupations went up and the corresponding unemployment shares declined.
Starting from 2010, similar to the JOLTS data, unemployment and vacancy shares began to normalize.

23

0.14
0.13

Mx
MAK
x

0.12
0.11
0.1
Mismatch Index

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.15

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

u − u∗x
u − u∗x AK

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure 4: Mismatch indexes Mxt by industry (left panel) and corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel) for the baseline specification and with the specification with
heterogenous sensitivities to aggregate shocks.
ployment (right panels) for 2 and 3-digit SOC’s. 42 The homogeneous Mt index rises by
almost 0.04 over the same period for 2-digit occupations. Similar to the pattern observed
for industries, the rise in mismatch leads the recession by over a year. As seen in the figure
and in Table 2, based on the Mt index, around 1.1 percentage points (or around 21%) of the
recent surge in U.S. unemployment can be attributed to occupational mismatch measured at
the 2-digit occupation level. At the 3-digit level, the portion of the increase in unemployment
attributable to mismatch is around 1.6 percentage points (or roughly 29% of the rise in the
unemployment rate).
The efficiency-weighted Mxt index is lower than the unadjusted index and features a
smaller rise, implying around 2% of additional hires lost because of mismatch. This index
suggests that between 0.6 and 0.9 percentage points of the rise in the unemployment rate (or
between 11% and 17% of the increase) was due to mismatch at the 2-digit and 3-digit SOC
levels, respectively. Therefore, similar to what we found for industries, the index weighted
by matching and productive efficiency implies a smaller role for mismatch unemployment. 43
42

There are 22 2-digit SOC’s and 93 3-digit SOC’s. We use all the 2-digit categories with the exception
of Farming, Fishing, and Forestry. We exclude 3-digit SOC’s that exhibit fewer than 10 observations in the
CPS unemployment counts at least once in the sample period. These small cells account for 60% of the 3-digit
SOC’s, but represent only 15.6% of unemployed workers in the CPS.
43
Table B9 and Figures B11-B12 in Appendix B.3 summarizes various additional results for robustness
purposes and shows that our findings on occupation level mismatch are quite robust.

24

1
0.9

ρ
ρx

0.8

Correlation

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 5: Correlation coefficient between u and v shares for 2-digit occupations.
We also consider a different occupation classification to relate our analysis to the literature on job polarization. Job polarization refers to the increasing concentration of employment in the highest- and lowest-wage occupations, as job opportunities in middle-skill occupations disappear, as documented by Autor et al. (2003) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011). To
capture the effect of job polarization on mismatch, we classify 2-digit occupations into four
categories: routine cognitive, routine manual, non-routine cognitive and non-routine manual.
We call this classification “Routine/Cognitive” and denote the index with M RC .44 Figure 7
shows the mismatch index across these four occupation groups as well as the homogeneous
index calculated at the 2-digit level and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates.
The level of the index is lower across these four occupational categories which suggests
additional mismatch within these four categories. Despite the gap in the level of the two indices, the behavior of the MRC index is very similar to the occupational mismatch index M
computed using 2-digit occupations. In essence, the vacancy (unemployment) share dropped
(rose) faster for routine-non cognitive occupations relative to the other groups, accounting
for at least half of the increase in mismatch unemployment across 2-digit occupations.
Jaimovich and Siu (2012) link the job polarization hypothesis to jobless recoveries by
44

We classify occupations at the 2-digit level instead of directly using Acemoglu and Autor’s classification.
While their way of classifying occupations is more detailed, our classification broadly captures this distinction
and is more comparable with the rest of our analysis. See Table B2 in the Appendix for our classification of
occupations into these four groups.

25

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0.22
Mismatch Index

0.2

M
Mx

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

Mismatch Index

0.12

M
Mx

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.14

2.5
2

u − u∗
u − u∗x

1.5
1
0.5
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

3.1
2.6

u − u∗
u − u∗x

2.1
1.6
1.1
0.6
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure 6: Mismatch indexes Mt and Mxt by 2-digit occupation (upper left panel) and 3digit occupation (lower left panel). Corresponding mismatch unemployment rates for 2-digit
occupation (upper right panel) and 3-digit occupations (lower right panel).
analyzing employment changes during recessions and recoveries for different occupation
classifications. They show that employment declined more in routine occupations during the
most current downturn.45 This relatively large decline is in line with the increase in mismatch
during the recession. They also show that employment remained stagnant in all occupational
categories during the recovery period, which is consistent with the decline in mismatch after
the recession.

5.3 Geographical mismatch
We perform our geographical analysis for U.S. counties using the HWOL data on online job
ads coupled with LAUS data on the unemployed. We focus on counties whose population
is at least 50,000 and group together counties in the same metropolitan area to capture the
notion of local labor markets. The procedure gives a total of 280 local labor markets. 46
45

See the bottom panel of Figure 6 in Jaimovich and Siu (2012), p. 12.
We also compute geographic mismatch for the 50 U.S. states using the HWOL data on online job ads
coupled with CPS data on the unemployed. The JOLTS provides limited geographic information, enabling us
to study mismatch only across the four broad Census regions. Our conclusions from these state- and region46

26

0.15

2.5

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

M - 2 digit
MRC

Mismatch Index

0.1

0.05

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
2005

2012

u − u∗ - 2 digit
u − u∗ - RC

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 7: Mismatch indexes M across four occupations groups and 2-digit occupations (left
panel) and corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).
Figure 8 shows the mismatch indexes M t and Mzt and the corresponding mismatch
unemployment rates. We find that geographic mismatch is very low (about one fifth of the
size of the index for 3-digit occupations, even though the number of active sectors is much
higher) and is essentially flat over the sample period under consideration. Unsurprisingly, the
rise in mismatch unemployment according to this index is around one tenth of a percentage
point, implying that geographical mismatch—across U.S. counties and MSAs—played a
negligible role in the recent dynamics of U.S. unemployment. This finding is consistent with
other recent work that investigated the role of housing market related problems on the labor
market using different methods.47
In Appendix B.3 we also examine mismatch defining labor markets as a combination of
occupation and location. Since the small sample size of the CPS does not allow us to disaggregate the unemployment data by county and occupation, we define labor markets as the
interaction of 2-digit occupations and the nine Census divisions. 48 The resulting mismatch
based analyses are fully aligned with the county-based study.
47
See, for example, Farber (2012), Karahan and Rhee (2012), Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2010), Nenov
(2012), and Schulhofer-Wohl (2010). A related concern regarding geographic mobility is the apparent observation that the rate of interstate migration in the U.S. reached a postwar low. However, Kaplan and SchulhoferWohl (2010) show that this is largely a statistical artifact arising from a change in survey procedures for missing
values. After removing this spurious effect, they find that the annual interstate migration rate follows a smooth
downward trend from 1996 to 2010.
48
Due to the small sample, we compute this index with quarterly data. To facilitate the comparison, we also
compute Mt for 2-digit occupations at the quarterly frequency and report it in Table B9.

27

2.5

M
Mz

0.14

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.12

Mismatch Index

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

2

u − u∗∗
u − uz

1.5

1

0.5

0.02

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2005

2012

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 8: Mismatch indexes Mt and Mzt by county (left panel) and corresponding mismatch
unemployment rates (right panel).
indexes and mismatch unemployment are presented in Figure B13 and Table B9. The evolution of both the index and the level of mismatch unemployment is very similar to those
computed at the 2-digit occupation level.

5.4 Mismatch within education groups
Is occupational mismatch a more relevant source of unemployment dynamics for less skilled
or for more skilled workers? To answer this question, we define four education categories
(less than high school diploma, high school diploma or equivalent, some college or Associate’s degree, Bachelor’s degree or higher) and analyze mismatch by 2-digit occupation
within each of these four education groups.
As noted before, each job listing recorded in HWOL constitutes an individual observation
with a 6-digit occupation classification. The BLS provides information on the distribution
of workers employed in each 6-digit occupation broken down by their educational attainment.49 We allocate the total count of vacancies from HWOL in a given month for a given
6-digit occupation to each of the four education groups we consider, proportionally to the
educational attainment distributions from the BLS. 50 Finally, we aggregate up to the 2-digit
49
This information comes from the American Community Survey microdata from 2006-08. See the BLS
website at http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep table 111.htm; see also http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep education tech.htm
for additional details.
50
For robustness, we have also experimented with other allocation rules, for instance not imputing vacancies

28

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

2.5

2

Less Than HS
HS Graduate
HS Graduate
College

1.5

1

0.5

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 9: Mismatch unemployment rates measured at the 2-digit occupation level for different education groups.
occupation level to obtain vacancy counts for each occupation by education cell. The CPS
provides information on the education level of the unemployed.
Figure 9 shows mismatch unemployment measured at the 2-digit occupation level for
different education groups.51 Note that unemployment dynamics differ greatly by education:
for workers with less than a high school degree, the unemployment rate rose from about
7% in 2006 to about 15.3% in 2010, an increase of about 8.5 points. The increase in the
unemployment rate over the same time period for high school graduates and those with
some college was, respectively, 6.9 and 5.3 percentage points. For college graduates, the
unemployment rate went from 2% to 4.7%, an increase of only 2.7 percentage points over
the same period.
The counterfactual exercises summarized in Table 3 reveal a very clear pattern: the contribution of occupational mismatch to the rise in unemployment between 2006 and 2010
grows as we move from the lowest to the highest education category. In particular, for
the less than high school group, mismatch explains a little less than one percentage point
of a given 6-digit SOC to an education level that accounts for less than 15% of the workers in that occupation.
The results are very similar.
51
Figures B14 in the Appendix illustrate our findings on occupational mismatch within each broad education
category. The occupational mismatch index rose within all four education groups, but more so in the “some
college” and “college” categories.

29

Less than High School
High School Degree
Some College
College Degree

u06 − u∗06
0.71
0.60
0.71
0.38

u10.09 − u∗10.09
1.69
1.50
1.68
1.03

Δ(u − u∗ )
0.98
0.89
0.97
0.65

Δu
8.5 ppts
6.9 ppts
5.3 ppts
2.7 ppts

Δ(u − u∗ )/Δu
11.5%
12.9%
18.2%
23.9%

Table 3: Changes in mismatch unemployment for different education groups. All the changes
are calculated as the difference between October 2009 and the average of 2006. Note that
Δu = u10.09 − u06 and that Δu varies by education.
(12%) of the 8.5 percentage point increase in unemployment for that group. For high school
graduates, mismatch explains 0.89 (13%) out of the 6.9 percentage point increase in unemployment. For those with some college, mismatch explains about 1.0 (18%) out of a 5.3
percentage point rise in unemployment, and for college graduates 0.65 (24%) out of the 2.7
percentage point observed increase. Thus, the fraction of the rise in unemployment that can
be attributed to the rise in occupational mismatch increases monotonically with education
from about one eighth to roughly one quarter of the increase for each group.

6 Robustness on job-seeker and vacancy measures
In our empirical implementation, we have so far assumed that the number of job seekers in
sector i is given by the number of unemployed workers whose last job was in sector i. There
are two potential sources of bias that might affect our mismatch measures. The first is the
assumption that each unemployed worker is searching in the same industry or occupation
as the one where she was last employed. Second, our unemployment counts do not include
discouraged workers. Since some workers get discouraged from job search and drop out of
the labor force temporarily during periods of high unemployment, we might underestimate
the true number of potential job seekers in some sectors.
Finally, it is possible that vacancies are measured with error since not all hires occur
through formal advertisement (see, e.g., Galenianos, 2012, for an analysis of hiring through
referrals). In this section, we verify the robustness of our findings to these measurement
issues.

30

0.14

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.12

0.1
Mismatch Index

2.5

M
Madj

0.08

0.06

0.04

u − u∗∗
u − u adjusted

2

1.5

1

0.5

0.02

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure 10: Mismatch index using unadjusted (M) and adjusted M adj unemployment counts
by industry (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).

6.1 Adjustment for direction of search
The number of unemployed workers searching for jobs in a particular sector does not necessarily coincide with the number of workers whose last employment was in that sector. Here,
we propose an alternative calculation of the number of job-seekers in each industry or occupation by exploiting the semi-panel dimension of the CPS. Since respondents in the CPS
are interviewed for several consecutive months, we can track unemployed workers who find
new employment from one month to the next and record: 1. industry (and occupation) of the
job prior to the workers unemployment spell; 2. industry (and occupation) of the new job.
We then create annual transition matrices (from sector i to sector j) by aggregating monthly
flows.52 We then infer the number of job seekers in each sector using a simple statistical
algorithm, whose key assumption is that every unemployed searching for a job in sector j
has the same probability of being hired, independently of the sector of origin, except when
coming from sector j itself in which case she is allowed to have a higher job-finding rate.
The method is outlined in detail in Appendix B.4.
We first report our results by industry. The left panel of Figure 10 shows the mismatch
index calculated using the adjusted unemployment counts, which we call M adj , as well the
unadjusted M index. The adjustment causes the level of the index to decrease somewhat dur52

In implementing this procedure, we closely follow Hobijn (2012).

31

2.5

M
Madj

0.19

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.17

Mismatch Index

0.15

0.13

0.11

0.09

u − u∗∗
u − u adjusted

2

1.5

1

0.5

0.07

0.05
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2005

2012

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 11: Mismatch index M t using adjusted and unadjusted unemployment counts by
occupation (left panel) and corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).
ing the sample period. Similarly, as shown in the right panel of Figure 10, the counterfactual
unemployment rate implied by the adjusted counts is slightly lower than our baseline case.
However in terms of accounting for the increase in the unemployment rate both indexes have
similar quantitative implications. When using the adjusted counts, 0.65 percentage points of
the roughly 5.4 percentage point rise in the U.S. unemployment rate is due to industry-level
mismatch (compared to 0.75 percentage points without the adjustment).
Figure 11 reports our analysis by occupation. Again, the behavior of the adjusted M adj
index and of the resulting mismatch unemployment is very similar to the case without adjustment. In contrast to the industry-level analysis, the adjusted index for occupations is slightly
higher than in the baseline case. Quantitatively, the contribution of mismatch to the rise in
the U.S. unemployment rate is virtually the same when using adjusted unemployment counts
by occupation (see Table 2).

6.2 Adjustment for discouraged workers
According to the CPS, an individual is unemployed if he or she does not have a job, has
actively looked for employment in the past four weeks and is currently available to work.
However, it is possible that some workers get discouraged from unsuccessful job search and

32

drop out of the labor force temporarily during periods of high unemployment. 53 If workers
from certain occupations or industries are more likely than others to get discouraged, our
mismatch measures may be biased. For example, if a high fraction of the unemployed whose
prior occupation was construction-related drop out of the labor force and stay on the sidelines
(to re-enter the labor force at a later stage), the number of unemployed construction workers
is an under-estimate of the true number of potential job seekers in the construction sector. In
this example, actual mismatch would be larger.
To examine the size of this bias, we calculate the unemployment to non-participation
(UN) and unemployment to discouraged (UD) flow rates conditional on workers’ previous
occupations and industries. Tables B10 and B11 in the Appendix show that the rates at which
unemployed workers flow into the discouraged worker state are very similar across industries
and occupations. As a consequence, adjusting the unemployment counts by including discouraged workers affects the unemployment shares of different industries and occupations
only marginally. As a robustness check, we recomputed the basic mismatch index M t using
an extended definition of unemployment where we include workers who flow from unemployment to discouragement. The difference between the modified mismatch index and the
original index is quantitatively insignificant (a difference of 0.0002 on average).

6.3 Measurement error in vacancies
Suppose that true vacancies (Vit ) in market i are proportional to the observed vacancies (vit )
1

by a factor υiα which captures the importance of informal hiring channels in that sector.
1

Therefore, Vit = υiα · vit . In Appendix B.5, we show that the fixed matching-efficiency
effect φi absorbs this factor as well. For example, markets where vacancies are severely
underreported (i.e., υi >> 1) look like markets with higher matching efficiency.
For the purpose of calculating the planner’s allocation rule needed for the mismatch indexes, it makes no difference whether φi is high in a sector because pure matching efficiency
is high or because actual vacancies are larger than the observed ones: in both cases, the plan53

The Current Population Survey classifies as discouraged workers those individuals “not in the labor force
who want and are available for a job and who have looked for work sometime in the past 12 months (or since
the end of their last job if they held one within the past 12 months), but who are not currently looking because
they believe there are no jobs available or there are none for which they would qualify.”

33

ner would like to allocate many job-seekers in that sector. Therefore, our analysis remains
unchanged as long as we appropriately correct mismatch indexes with the estimated fixed
effects of the sectoral matching functions, as in (8).

7 Endogenous vacancy distribution
In this section, we relax the assumption of exogeneity of the distribution of vacancies maintained so far. Why would endogenizing vacancies affect our calculations? If, in equilibrium,
too many job-seekers search in the sectors with low matching and productive efficiency,
private firms’ job creation decisions are distorted: an excessive number of vacancies will
be posted in those sectors (because of the higher probability of recruitment) compared to
the choice of a planner who allocates vacancies and job seekers purely based on relative
efficiency across sectors. The result is a lower number of aggregate vacancies and a lower
aggregate job-finding rate in equilibrium—another “feedback” effect of mismatch stemming,
this time, from the vacancy side.
We begin by stating some additional assumptions on the equilibrium data generating
process needed to measure the cost of vacancy creation. We then proceed to explain formally
this additional feedback effect of mismatch. Finally, we present our findings. Appendix A.6
contains more details on all the derivations.

7.1 Measurement of the vacancy creation cost
Let the cost, in terms of final good, of creating vi vacancies in sector i be
Ki (vi ) = κεi ·

vi1+ε
,
1+ε

(16)

with ε ∈ (0, ∞) to guarantee convexity of the Ki function.54 With this isoelastic specification, ε measures the elasticity of vacancy creation, i.e., how the (log of the) the marginal cost
increases with the (log of the) number of vacancies. The variable κi shifts the cost of vacancy
creation across sectors and over time. We let κi be i.i.d. across sectors and independent of
54

Because of constant returns in the sector-specific matching function, it is the convexity of the cost function
that prevents concentrating all vacancies and unemployed workers in the sector with the highest efficiency.
We follow the convention, common in this literature, that this cost has to be paid every period the vacancy is
maintained open.

34

the other idiosyncratic shocks, and denote its conditional distribution as Γ κ (κ , κ) .55 The
choice of how many vacancies to post takes place before the allocation of unemployment
across sectors, but after observing sectoral and aggregate states.
The first challenge we face is how to estimate the marginal cost elasticity ε and the timevarying sector-specific vector {κi }. For the cost elasticity, we resort to existing estimates
suggesting that ε is between one and two (Yashiv, 2007; Merz and Yashiv, 2007; Coşar,
Guner, and Tybout, 2010). Up to this point, we could abstain from modeling behavior and
choices of firms and workers in equilibrium. However, measurement of {κ i } requires imposing a minimal amount of structure on the equilibrium data generating process. Three
assumptions suffice: 1) free entry of vacancies in each sector; 2) no within-market congestion externality, in the spirit of Hosios (1990); and 3) a bargaining protocol between firms
and workers such that the firm obtains a share λ, and the worker a share (1 − λ), of the expected discounted output flow—in particular, outside options do not matter for the bargaining
outcome (as in Shaked and Sutton, 1984; Acemoglu, 1996). 56
This choice of bargaining protocol is convenient because, in the absence of within-sector
congestions, it enables us to remain agnostic about the determination of the equilibrium value
of unemployment for a worker—therefore reducing to a bare minimum the structure needed
on the equilibrium model—and because it isolates mismatch unemployment as the unique
source of discrepancy between the efficient and equilibrium distributions of vacancies. 57
To clearly see this last point, we must compare the equilibrium condition for vacancy
creation in sector i to that of the planner. We begin from the equilibrium condition in the
economy of Section 2.2.1 with heterogeneity in {φ i , zi , δi , κi }:
 α−1
Zzi
vi
ε
ε
λ
κi (vi ) = Φφi
ui
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )

(17)

stating that the marginal cost of a vacancy in sector i (the left hand side), also heterogeneous
55

We could also introduce an aggregate cost-shifter, common across all sectors. Since the results in this
section would be unaffected, we omit it to simplify the notation.
56
The extensive form game corresponding to this bargaining outcome is spelled out in Acemoglu (1996,
Appendix 1). The key assumption is that if, once the pair is formed, a party wants to quit the bargaining, it can
rematch within the period within the same sector (i.e., with an identical partner) by paying a small fixed cost.
57
With the more common Nash bargaining protocol, another discrepancy would arise between the equilibrium value of unemployment and the net shadow value of an additional unemployed worker for the planner
μ − ξ, see equation (A14).

35

across sectors, is equated to its expected marginal gain for the firm (the right hand side).
Note that the individual firm takes the sectoral meeting probability as given. Note that, as
ε → ∞, vi = κi , i.e., vacancies are entirely cost-determined. This special case corresponds
to the economy of Section 2.
All variables in condition (17) are observable, except for κi and ε. For a given value
of the elasticity ε, we derive the sequence for κi that makes that condition hold exactly at
every date in each sector. This strategy amounts to attributing, residually, fluctuations in
vacancies to variation in the cost of job creation, once exogenous variation in productivity
and separation rates have been accounted for.58

7.2 Comparison between equilibrium and planner FOCs
In Appendix A.6, we show that the planner problem of Section 2.2.1, augmented with a
vacancy creation decision where the planner faces the cost function (16), yields the firstorder condition


κεi

(vi∗ )ε

= Φφi

vi∗
u∗i

α−1
α

Zzi
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )

(18)

equating the marginal cost of a vacancy to its marginal gain, in turn equal to the expected discounted value of output conditional on matching times the marginal decline in the probability
of meeting an unemployed worker allocated to sector i.
A comparison of equations (17) and (18) is instructive. With λ = α within-market
congestion externalities are ruled out and the only reason why equilibrium vacancies in sector
i differ from their efficient counterpart is that the number of unemployed workers is the
“wrong” one, i.e., the only reason is mismatch unemployment. If in equilibrium an excessive
number of unemployed workers search for jobs in declining sectors, firms would create more
vacancies than the planner in those sectors, amplifying the initial source of misallocation.
58

It is well known that productivity shocks alone are unable to explain fluctuations in vacancies in a matching model with standard parameterization (Shimer, 2005). Investigating the fundamental sources of vacancy
fluctuations is beyond the scope of this paper. We limit ourselves to point out that recent papers (e.g., PetroskyNadeau, 2009) have emphasized the role of credit shocks and asymmetric information in lending for the observed collapse of job creation during the last recession. In these models, this mechanism works through the
free entry condition, precisely as a source of fluctuations in κ i . A planner subject to the same asymmetric
information would face the same fluctuations in κ i .

36

Combining equations (17) and (18), and maintaining the assumption λ = α, we arrive at
vi
=
vi∗



ui
u∗i

1−α
 1−α+ε

which demonstrates that the extent to which mismatch unemployment, i.e. deviations of u i
from u∗i , translate into misallocation of vacancies in equilibrium (i.e., deviation of v i from vi∗ )
depends on the value of the elasticity ε. If the marginal cost function is steep (ε high), large
differences in the ratio (ui/u∗i ) and, therefore, in meeting probabilities and expected output
gains, translate into small differences in the ratio (v i /vi∗ ) . In this case, planner’s vacancies
are close to equilibrium vacancies, as assumed in our benchmark analysis. We will provide
results for a very broad range of values for ε, and in keeping with the upper bound nature of
our exercise, we set ε = 1 in our baseline.
In Appendix A.6, we lay out a simple algorithm to compute the planner’s optimal allocation of vacancies across sectors {vit∗ }, and we explain how to modify the calculation of
counterfactual unemployment to take into account this additional margin of choice for the
planner. It is instructive to examine the relationship between the planner and the equilibrium
aggregate job-finding rate in this economy:
 α
1
ut
∗
·
ft = ft ·
x
(1 − M )
u∗t
  t 
 

Direct Effect

Feedback through u


·


φ̄∗xt
φ̄xt

  ∗ α
vt
·
,
vt



(19)

Feedback through v

where φ̄xt is given by equation (11) and φ̄∗xt is the same aggregator, but with the planner’s
vacancy shares vit∗ /vt∗ instead of the observed shares. Compared to (12), the equation above
features an additional feedback effect of mismatch that operates through vacancies and has
two components. Mismatch reduces the aggregate job-finding rate by (i) distorting the distribution of vacancy shares across sectors, and (ii) lowering total vacancies.

7.3 Results
We first estimate the vacancy cost creation parameters κi by sector. Next, we compute the
distribution of planner’s vacancies and the implied planner’s aggregate job-finding rate with
endogenous vacancies (19), which we then feed into the law of motion for the unemployment
rate to perform our counterfactual exercise. Our estimates of the vacancy cost parameter κ
37

Total Vacancies (Million)

5

4

3

2.5

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

v∗
v ( = 0.5)
v∗ ( = 1)
v∗ ( = 2)

2
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

2

u − u∗
u − u∗
u − u∗
u − u∗

using
using
using
using

v
v∗ ( = 0.5)
v∗ ( = 1)
v∗ ( = 2)

1.5

1

0.5

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure 12: Aggregate vacancies and (left panel) and corresponding mismatch unemployment
rates (right panel) at the industry level using endogenous vacancies specification with JOLTS.
increase for almost all industries and occupations during the recession, therefore contributing
to the observed drop in vacancies. Figure B17 in Appendix B.3 plots the estimated sequences
of κi in some selected industries for the case ε = 1.
Table 2 summarizes the results.59 We first present our analysis by industry. Figure 12
(left panel) plots aggregate vacancies vt∗ in the planner’s economy for different values of ε.
The main result is that quantitatively significant deviations between v t∗ and vt (the data) occur
only for low values of the cost elasticity ε. For ε ≥ 1, planner and equilibrium vacancies line
up closely. This finding is reflected into the calculation of mismatch unemployment (right
panel). For ε = 1, with endogenous vacancy creation, mismatch unemployment rises by 0.89
percentage points between 2006 and October 2009, i.e., an additional 0.3 percentage points
relative to the exogenous vacancy calculation.60 For ε = 0.5, mismatch unemployment is
generally higher, but its increase between 2006 and October 2009 is still about 1.2 percentage
points—not far from the case of unit elasticity.
Turning to occupations, for ε = 1, planner and equilibrium vacancies line up fairly
closely and, as Figure 13 indicates, the contribution of mismatch unemployment to the rise
in the U.S. unemployment rate between 2006 and October 2009 is 1.1 percentage points. 61
The indexes computed with endogenous vacancies have superscript v ∗ .
Figure B18 in the Appendix also reports our analysis with endogenous vacancies done with the M t index.
Here, mismatch unemployment rises by about 1.1 percentage points between 2006 and October 2009.
61
In the case of no heterogeneity in matching and productive efficiency across markets, that contribution
rises to 1.8 percentage points, or roughly one third of the total rise in unemployment as shown in Figure B19.
59
60

38

v∗
v ( = 0.5)
v ∗ ( = 1)
v ∗ ( = 2)

Total Vacancies (Millions)

7

6

5

4

2.5

u − u∗
u − u∗
u − u∗
u − u∗

using
using
using
using

v
v ∗ ( = 0.5)
v ∗ ( = 1)
v ∗ ( = 2)

2

1.5

1

0.5

3

2
2005

3

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

8

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2005

2012

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 13: Aggregate vacancies and (left panel) and corresponding mismatch unemployment
rates (right panel) at the occupation level using endogenous vacancies specification with the
HWOL (The Conference Board Help Wanted OnLine Data Series).
For ε = 0.5, it increases up to 1.5%, or 28% of the total rise in unemployment.
To summarize, as expected, the contribution of mismatch unemployment is larger when
the distribution of vacancies is endogenized. Nevertheless, our results of Section 5 derived
under exogenous vacancies (or infinite marginal cost elasticity) are close to those obtained
from the model with endogenous vacancy creation and unitary marginal cost elasticity, a
value supported by existing estimates. Our calculations also show that mismatch could have
played a major role in the recent rise of unemployment, by dampening aggregate vacancy
creation, only if one is willing to maintain that, the cost elasticity is very low (below 1/2).

8 Conclusion
How much did mismatch contribute to the dynamics of U.S. unemployment around the Great
Recession? To address this question, we developed a framework to coherently define and
measure mismatch unemployment. Plausible parameterizations of the model imply that mismatch can explain at most 1/3 of the recent rise in the U.S. unemployment rate. Our formalization of mismatch, and several choices made in our measurement exercise, mean that this
estimate should be considered as an upper bound.
While, admittedly, our approach does not put us in the best position to separately identify the many potential causes of mismatch, we argued that analyzing different layers of
39

disaggregation (e.g., occupation, industry, education, geography), as we do, is informative
nevertheless. The absence of an increase in geographical mismatch casts doubts on the
“house lock” hypothesis, a conclusion in line with existing research. The non-negligible role
played by occupational mismatch, especially for high-skilled workers, leaves room for explanations based on labor demand shifts combined with human capital specialization or with
relative wage rigidity. Alvarez and Shimer (2010), Birchenall (2010), Carrillo-Tudela and
Visscher (2010), and Herz and van Rens (2011) among others, have proposed models where
unemployed workers, in equilibrium, make explicit mobility decisions across distinct labor
markets. While less amenable to disaggregated measurement than our framework, these
models are, potentially, well suited to study the structural causes of mismatch. Of special interest is the finding of Herz and van Rens (2011) who argue that what hampered the mobility
of job-seekers towards the sectors with vacant jobs in the last recession was not moving or
retraining costs, but slow wage adjustment.
If mismatch only accounts for a portion of the persistently high unemployment rate, what
are the other economic forces at work? As we explained, both the aggregate vacancy rate and
aggregate matching efficiency are still well below their pre-recession level of 2006. Weak
aggregate demand combined with wage rigidity (Shimer, 2012), uncertainty about future
productivity (Schaal, 2012) and future economic policy (Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2011),
or selective restructuring by firms during recessions (Berger, 2012) do, qualitatively, imply a
slow recovery in job creation. The disincentive effects on job search effort from prolonged
extension of unemployment benefits (Farber and Valletta, 2011), and the diminished recruitment intensity on firm’s side (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger, 2012) are consistent with
the fall in aggregate matching efficiency. Going forward, disentangling these channels will
be paramount in achieving a comprehensive picture of the Great Recession.

40

References
[1] Abraham, K. and L.F. Katz (1986). “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy, 94, 507-522.
[2] Acemoglu, D. (1996). “A Microfoundation For Social Increasing Returns in Human
Capital Accumulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 779-804.
[3] Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
Employment and Earnings,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 4B, Chapter 12, pp. 1043-1171. Elsevier.
[4] Alvarez F. and R. Shimer (2010). “Search and Rest Unemployment,” Econometrica,
79:1, 75-122.
[5] Barnichon, R. and A. Figura (2011). “What Drives Matching Efficiency? A Tale of
Composition and Dispersion,” FRB Staff WP 2011-10.
[6] Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118,
1279-1333.
[7] Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2011). “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,” mimeo.
[8] Barlevy, G. (2011). “Evaluating the Role of Labor Market Mismatch in Rising Unemployment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Economic Perspectives, Vol. 35, Third
Quarter.
[9] Berger, D. (2012). “Countercyclical Restructuring and Jobless Recoveries,” mimeo.
[10] Birchenall, J. A. (2010). “A Competitive Theory of Mismatch,” mimeo, UCSB.
[11] Borowczyk-Martins, D., G. Jolivet, and F. Postel-Vinay (2012). “Accounting For Endogeneity in Matching Function Estimation,” mimeo.

41

[12] Carrillo-Tudela C. and L. Visscher (2010). “Search and Endogenous Reallocation over
the Business Cycle,” mimeo.
[13] Chari, V. V., P. Kehoe and E. McGrattan (2007). “Business Cycle Accounting,” Econometrica, 75, 781-836, 2007.
[14] Coşar, K. , N. Guner, and J. Tybout (2010). “Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage
Distributions in an Open Economy,” NBER Working Paper 16326.
[15] Daly, M., B. Hobijn, A. Şahin and R. Valletta (2011). “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?,” mimeo.
[16] Davis, S. J., Faberman, R. J., and J.C. Haltiwanger (2010). “The Establishment-Level
Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” NBER Working Paper 16265.
[17] Davis, S. J., Faberman, R. J., and J.C. Haltiwanger (2012). “Recruiting Intensity during
and after the Great Recession: National and Industry Evidence,” NBER Working Paper
17782.
[18] Dickens, W. T. (2010). “Has the Recession Increased the NAIRU?”, mimeo, Northeastern University and the Brookings Institution.
[19] Eeckhout, J. and P. Kircher (2011). “Identifying Sorting: In Theory,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(3), 872-906.
[20] Elsby, M., B. Hobijn, and A. Şahin (2010). “The Labor Market in the Great Recession,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2010, 1-48.
[21] Faberman, R. J. (2009). “Studying the Labor Market with the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey,” in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data Volume, edited by Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts, University of
Chicago Press.
[22] Farber H. S. (2012). “Unemployment in the Great Recession: Did the Housing Market Crisis Prevent the Unemployed from Moving to Take Jobs?,” American Economic
Review: Papers & Proceedings, 102(3), 520525
42

[23] Farber, H. S. and R. Valletta (2011). “Extended Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Duration in the Great Recession: The U.S. Experience,” mimeo.
[24] Galenianos, M. (2012). “Hiring Through Referrals,” mimeo.
[25] Hall, R.E. (2010). “The Labor Market in the Current Slump,” mimeo.
[26] Herz, B., and T. Van Rens (2011). “Structural Unemployment,” mimeo.
[27] Hobijn, B. (2012). “ Industry-Occupation Mix,” mimeo.
[28] Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G.L. Violante (2007). “Technology-Policy Interaction in
Frictional Labor Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 1089-1124.
[29] Hosios, A. (1990). “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and
Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 57, 279-298.
[30] Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2009). “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403-1448.
[31] Jackman, R. and S. Roper (1987). “Structural Unemployment,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 49, 9-36.
[32] Jaimovich, N. and H. Siu (2012). “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
Recoveries,” mimeo.
[33] Jones C.I. (2011). “Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics,”
mimeo.
[34] Kaplan, G., and S. Schulhofer-Wohl (2010). “Interstate Migration Has Fallen Less Than
You Think: Consequences of Hot Deck Imputation in the Current Population Survey,”
FRB Minneapolis Working Paper 681.
[35] Karahan, F. and S. Rhee (2012). “Geographical Reallocation and Unemployment during the Great Recession: The Role of the Housing Bust,” mimeo.
[36] Lagos, R. (2006). “A Model of TFP,” Review of Economic Studies 73, 983-1007.
43

[37] Lilien, D.M. (1982). “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment,” Journal of Political
Economy, 90, 777-793.
[38] Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (1998). “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
Journal of Political Economy 106, 514-550.
[39] Merz, M. and E. Yashiv (2007). “Labor and the Market Value of the Firm,” American
Economic Review, 97, 1419-1431.
[40] Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2011). “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate
Demand Channel,” mimeo.
[41] Mincer, J. (1966). “The Concept of Job Vacancies in a Dynamic Theory of the Labor
Market,” in The Measurement and Interpretation of Job Vacancies, Columbia University
Press.
[42] Moll, B. (2011). “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing
Undo Capital Misallocation?,” mimeo.
[43] Molloy, R. C. Smith, and A. Wozniak (2010). “Internal Migration in the U.S.: Updated
Facts and Recent Trends,” mimeo.
[44] Mortensen, D.T. and Nagypal (2007). “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10, 327-347, 2007.
[45] Mortensen, D.T. and C.A. Pissarides (1999). “Unemployment Responses to Skillbiased Technology Shocks: the Role of Labour Market Policy,” Economic Journal,
109(455), 242-265.
[46] Nenov, P. (2012). “Labor Market and Regional Reallocation Effects of Housing Busts,”
mimeo.
[47] Padoa-Schioppa F. (1991). Mismatch and Labour Mobility. Centre for Economic Policy
Research. Cambridge University Press.

44

[48] Petrovsky-Nadeau, N. (2009). “Credit, Vacancies and Unemployment Fluctuations,”
GSIA Working Paper 2009-E27.
[49] Pissarides C., Equilibrium Unemployment Theory (2nd edition), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
[50] Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008). “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
with Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707-720.
[51] Schaal, E. (2012). “Uncertainty, Productivity and Unemployment in the Great Recession,” mimeo.
[52] Schulhofer-Wohl, S. (2010). “Negative Equity Does Not Reduce Homeowners’ Mobility,” mimeo.
[53] Shaked, A. and J. Sutton (1984). “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilibrium
in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica, 52, 13511364.
[54] Shimer R. (2005). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 95, 25-49.
[55] Shimer R. (2007). “Mismatch,” American Economic Review, 97, 1074-1101.
[56] Shimer R. (2012). “Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries,” mimeo.
[57] Veracierto (2011). “ Worker Flows and Matching Efficiency,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Economic Perspectives, Vol. 35, Fourth Quarter.
[58] Yashiv, E. (2007). “Labor Search and Matching in Macroeconomics,” European Economic Review, 51, 1859-1895.

45

A PPENDIX N OT F OR P UBLICATION
A Theoretical Appendix
This Appendix formally derives all the theoretical results of Sections 2 and 7.

A.1

Heterogeneous matching efficiencies

We solve the planner’s problem of Section 2.1. The efficient allocation at any given date is
the solution of the following planner’s problem that we write in recursive form:
V (e; v, φ,Z, Δ, Φ) =
I

i=1

s.t.

max

{ui ≥0}

:

I


Z (ei + hi ) + βE [V (e ; v , φ , Z  , Δ , Φ )]

i=1

(ei + ui ) = 1

(A1)

hi = Φφi m (ui , vi )

(A2)

ei = (1 − Δ) (ei + hi )

(A3)

ΓZ,Δ,Φ (Z  , Δ , Φ ; Z, Δ, Φ) , Γv (v ; v, Z , Δ , Φ ) , Γφ (φ ; φ)

(A4)

The per period output for the planner is equal to Z (ei + hi ) in each market i. The first
I

constraint (A1) states that the planner has 1− ei unemployed workers available to allocate
i=1

across sectors. Equation (A2) states that, once the allocation {u i } is chosen, the frictional
matching process in each market yields Φφi m (ui , vi ) new hires which add to the existing e i
active matches. Equation (A3) describes separations and the determination of next period’s
distribution of active matches {e i } in all sectors. Line (A4) in the problem collects all the
exogenous stochastic processes the planner takes as given.
It is easy to see that this is a concave problem where first-order conditions are sufficient
for optimality. At an interior solution (u i > 0 for all i), the choice of how many unemployed
workers ui to allocate in market i yields the first-order condition
 
 
vi
vi






+ βE [Vei (e ; v , φ , Z , Δ , Φ )] (1 − Δ) Φφi mui
= μ,
ZΦφi mui
ui
ui

(A5)

where μ is the multiplier on constraint (A1). The right-hand side (RHS) of this condition
is the shadow value of an additional worker in the unemployment pool available to search.
46

The left-hand side (LHS) is the expected marginal value of an additional unemployed worker
allocated to sector i. The derivative of the sector-specific matching function m is written as
a function of local market tightness only (with a slight abuse of notation) because of its CRS
specification.
The Envelope condition with respect to the state e i yields:
Vei (e; v, φ,Z, Δ, Φ) = Z − μ + β(1 − Δ)E [Vei (e ; v , φ , Z  , Δ , Φ )] ,

(A6)

from which it is immediate to see, by iterating forward, that E [V ei (e ; v , φ , Z  , Δ , Φ )]
is independent of i, since productivity and the job destruction rate are common across all
sectors.62 Using this result into (A5) , the optimal rule for the allocation of unemployed
workers across sectors can be written as equation (1) in the main text.

A.2

Heterogenous productivities and destruction rates

We extend the baseline model of Section 2.1 as follows. Individuals (still in measure one)
can be either employed in sector i (ei ) , or unemployed and searching in sector i (u i ) , or
I

(ei + ui) ≤ 1. We normalize
out of the labor force. The aggregate labor force is  =
i=1

to zero utility from non participation, and let ξ > 0 denote the disutility of search for the
unemployed. Labor productivity in sector i is given by Z · z i , where each idiosyncratic component zi is strictly positive, i.i.d. across sectors and independent of Z. Let the conditional
distribution of the vector z = {zi } be Γz (z , z). The idiosyncratic component of the exogenous destruction rate in sector i is δi , i.i.d. across sectors and independent of Δ, Z and zi .
Let the conditional distribution of the vector δ = {δ i } be Γδ (δ  , δ) . The survival probability
of a match is then (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ). The vector {Z, Δ, Φ, z, v, φ, δ} takes strictly positive
values.
It is convenient to impose additional structure on some conditional distributions: as specified in the text, we assume that (Z, 1 − Δ, zi , 1 − δi ) all follow independent unit root processes. The timing of events is exactly as before, with the decision on the size of the labor
force for next period taken at the end of the current period. The recursive formulation of the
planner’s problem has three additional states compared to the problem of Section 2.1: the
62

We are also using the transversality condition lim t→∞ β t (1 − Δ)t E [Veit ] = 0.

47

current number of unemployed workers u, the vector of productive efficiencies z, and the
vector of destruction rates δ. The planner solves the problem:
I


V (u, e; z, v, φ, δ,Z, Δ, Φ) = max

{ui , }

s.t. :
I

ui ≤ u
i=1

Zzi (ei + hi ) − ξu + βE [V (u , e ; z , v, φ , δ  , Z  , Δ , Φ )]

i=1

(A7)

hi = Φφi m (ui , vi )

(A8)

ei = (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi )
I



ei
u =  −

(A9)
(A10)

i=1


ui ∈ [0, u] ,  ∈ [0, 1] ,

(A11)

ΓZ,Δ,Φ (Z  , Δ , Φ ; Z, Δ, Φ) , Γv (v ; v, Z , Δ , Φ , z ) , Γφ (φ ; φ) , Γz (z ; z) , Γδ (δ  , δ)

(A12)

where the conditional distributions in the last line are restricted as described above. The
choice of how many unemployed workers u i to allocate in the i market yields the first-order
condition
Zzi Φφi mui



vi
ui





+ βE −Vu (·) + Vei (·) (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) Φφi mui



vi
ui


= μ,

(A13)

where μ is the multiplier on constraint (A7). The Envelope conditions with respect to the
states u and ei yield:
Vu (u, e; z, v, φ, δ,Z, Δ, Φ) = μ − ξ



Vei (u, e; z, v, φ, δ,Z, Δ, Φ) = Zzi + β(1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) E Vei − Vu .

(A14)
(A15)

According to the first Envelope condition, the marginal value of an unemployed to the planner equals the shadow value of being available to search (μ) net of the disutility of search ξ.
The second condition states that the marginal value of an employed worker is its flow output
this period plus its discounted continuation value net of the value of search, conditional on
the match not being destroyed.
The optimal decision on the labor force size next period   requires
E [Vu (u , e ; z , v, φ , δ  , Z  , Δ , Φ )] = 0,
48

(A16)

i.e., the expected marginal value of moving a nonparticipant into job search should be equal
to its value as nonparticipant, normalized to zero. By combining (A16) with (A14), we note
that the planner will choose the size of the labor force so that the expected shadow value of
an unemployed worker E [μ ] equals search disutility ξ.63
Using (A16) into the Envelope condition (A15) under the additional assumption that all
the elements of the vector x = (Z, 1 − Δ, zi , 1 − δi ) are independent unit root processes,
and iterating forward, we arrive at:
 
E Vei =

Zzi
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )

which, substituted into equation (A13) yields
 
 
vi
β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
vi
+
= μ.
Zzi Φφi mui
Zzi Φφi mui
ui
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
ui

(A17)

(A18)

Rearranging, we conclude that the planner allocates idle labor to equalize
 
zi
vi
φimui
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
u∗i
across sectors, which is expression (2) in Section (2.2.1) in the main text.

A.3

Heterogeneous sensitivities to aggregate shock

Let productivity in sector i be zi = exp (ζi ) Z ηi and let log Z follow a unit root process
with innovation  independent of Δ and distributed as N (−σ  /2, σ ). Note that E [(Z  )ηi ] =


Z ηi exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2 . We maintain that (1 − Δ, 1 − δi ) also follow unit root processes.
The envelope condition (A15) becomes
 
Vei = exp (ζi ) Z ηi + β(1 − Δ)(1 − δi )E Vei .
which, solving forward and using the unit root assumption, yields


 
exp (ζi ) Z ηi exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2

.
E Ve i =
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2
 
Substituting the above expression for E Vei into (the appropriately modified) equation
(A13), yields
exp (ζi) Z Φφi mui
ηi

63






 
exp (ζi ) Z ηi exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2
vi
vi
 Φφi mui

+β (1 − δ)
= μ.
σ
ui
ui
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) 2

It is clear that our result is robust to allowing ξ to be stochastic and correlated with (Z, Δ, Φ).

49

Rearranging, we conclude that the planner allocates unemployed workers so to equalize
 
exp (ζi ) Z ηi
vi

 φi mui
,
σ
u∗i
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) 2
across sectors, which is expression (3) in Section (2.2.2) in the main text. A necessary


technical condition we must impose is β (1 − Δ) (1 − δ i ) exp ηi (ηi − 1) σ2 < 1 for all i.

A.4

Endogenous separations

Consider the environment of Section 2.2.1 and allow the planner to move workers employed
in sector i into unemployment (or out of the labor force) at the end of the period, before
choosing the size of the labor force for next period. There are two changes to the planner’s
problem. First, the law of motion for employment becomes
ei = (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi ) − σi .

(A19)

Second, the planner has another vector of choice variables {σi }, with σi ∈ [0, (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi )] .
The decision of how many workers to separate from sector i employment into unemployment is:

⎧
 ⎨ < 0 → σi = 0
 

= 0 → σi ∈ (0, (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi ))
E Vu (·) − Vei (·)
⎩
> 0 → σi = (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi )

(A20)

depending on whether at the optimum a corner or interior solution arises. If the first-order
conditions (A16) hold with equality, then the optimality condition (A20) holds with the
“ < ” inequality and σi = 0. As a result, the planner’s allocation rule (2) remains unchanged.

A.5

Properties of the mismatch index

First, we prove that 0 ≤ Mφt ≤ 1. Since all the components of the sum in (8) are positive, Mφt ≤ 1. Under maximal mismatch (no markets where unemployment and vacancies

50

coexist), the index is exactly equal to one. To show that M φt ≥ 0, note that
1 − Mφt

α

1

φitα

i=1

vit
vt

 I


φit

i=1

(uit )1−α

vit
vt

α

1
α



φit vit

α

1
α

α

1

φitα vit

i=1

1

1
≤ α 1−α I

vt ut
= 1

I


1

1
= α 1−α I

vt ut

i=1

I


1−α
uit

i=1

where the ≤ sign follows from Hölder’s inequality. It is easy to show that the index becomes
exactly zero in absence of mismatch by substituting the allocation rule (6) into the index.
By inspecting (8) , it is also easy to see that the M φt index is invariant to “pure” aggregate
shocks that shift the total number of vacancies and unemployed up or down, but leave the
vacancy and unemployment shares across markets unchanged.
To show that the mismatch index is increasing in the level of disaggregation, consider
an economy where the aggregate labor market is described by two dimensions indexed by
(i, j), e.g., I regions × J occupations. Let MφIt be the mismatch index over the I sectors
and MφIJt be the one over the I × J sectors. From the disaggregated matching function, we
α 1−α
uijt . Summing this expression over j yields
have hijt = Φφijt vijt

hit =

J


α 1−α
Φφijt vijt
uijt

 J


=Φ

j=1


φijt

j=1

vijt
vit

α 

uijt
uit

1−α

vitα u1−α
it .

(A21)

At the aggregated level, we have hit = Φφit vitα u1−α
and so (A21) implies that
it
φit =

J

j=1


φijt

vijt
vit

α 

uijt
uit

1−α
.

(A22)

Now consider the disaggregated matching index. We have
1 − MφIJt


α 
1−α
J
I 

φijt vijt
uijt
=
vt
ut
φ̄
i=1 j=1 IJt

for
φ̄IJt =

 I J


1
α

φijt

i=1 j=1

51



vijt
vt



(A23)

α

.

(A24)

Manipulating the above expression yields
1 − MφIJt

J
I 

1
α 1−α
=
φijt vijt
uijt
φ̄IJt vtα u1−α
t
i=1 j=1


α 
1−α
J
I


vijt
uijt
1
α 1−α
=
vit uit
φijt
vit
uit
φ̄IJt vtα u1−α
t
i=1
j=1
 α  1−α
I
vit
uit
1 
=
φit
vt
ut
φ̄IJt i=1
where the third step above follows from (A22). Next, manipulating (A24) delivers
⎧
1 ⎫α
 J
α α
I
⎨1 
⎬
 1  vijt 
α
φ̄IJt =
vit
φijt
⎩ vt
⎭
vit
i=1
j=1
⎧
⎛
⎞ α1 ⎫α
α  J
1−α
⎪
⎪


I
J
⎨1 
⎬
 1 vijt
 uijt
α
⎝
⎠
=
vit
φijt
·
⎪
⎪
vit
uit
⎩ vt i=1
⎭
j=1
j=1
where the second step above follows from the identity

J

j=1 uijt

= uit . Applying Holder’s

inequality now yields
φ̄IJt ≥

⎧
I
⎨1 


vit

J



φijt

vijt
vit

⎩ vt
i=1
j=1
"α
! I

 1 vit 
=
φitα
= φ̄It
v
t
i=1

α 

uijt
uit

⎫
1−α  α1 ⎬α
⎭

where φ̄It is the equivalent expression to φ̄IJt in (A23) for the aggregated case. Combining
results, we have shown that
1 − MφIJt

 α  1−α
I

φit vit
uit
≤
= 1 − MφIt
v
u
φ̄
t
t
It
i=1

and so we must have MφIJt ≥ MφIt .

A.6

Planner’s problem with endogenous vacancies

Optimal vacancy creation

Consider the planner’s problem of Section 2.2.1 solved in

Appendix A.2, the most general of our environments, and let the creation of vacancies {v i }
52

be under the control of the planner.
V (u, e; z, φ, δ, κ,Z, Δ, Φ) =

max

{ui ,vi , }

s.t. :
I

ui ≤ u

I


Zzi (ei + hi ) − Ki (vi ) − ξu + βE [V (u , e ; z , φ , δ  , κ ,Z  , Δ , Φ )]

i=1

(A25)

i=1

hi = Φφi m (ui , vi )

(A26)

ei = (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) (ei + hi )
I



ei
u =  −

(A27)
(A28)

i=1


ui ∈ [0, u] ,  ∈ [0, 1] , vi ≥ 0

(A29)

ΓZ,Δ,Φ (Z  , Δ , Φ ; Z, Δ, Φ) , Γφ (φ ; φ) , Γz (z ; z) , Γδ (δ  , δ) , Γκ (κ , κ)
The optimality condition for vacancy creation is
 

$
vi #
Zzi + β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi ) E Vei (·) .
Kvi (vi ) = Φφi mvi
ui
  
Using the expression for E Vei (·) obtained in (A17) and the functional forms for K i and
m specified in the main text, we obtain expression (18).
Calculation of planner’s vacancies We now lay out an algorithm to compute the planner’s optimal allocation of vacancies across sectors. Rearranging condition (A18) dictating
the optimal allocation of unemployed workers across sectors, given the distribution of vacancies {vi∗ }, yields
vi∗
u∗i


=

μ
·
1−α

1
α

1
Zzi Φφi
1−β(1−Δ)(1−δi )

where μ is the multiplier on the resource constraint

I


(A31)

ui ≤ u. Substituting (A31) into (18)

i=1

yields an equation for the optimal number of vacancies in sector i which reads
1/ε
1/ε   (1−α)/ε

α
α
1
Zz
Φφ
α
1
i
i
·
· (1 − α) ·
.
vi∗ =
κi 1 − α
μ
1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
Summing over all i s, we arrive at the optimal share of vacancies in sector i
%
& 1/ε
α
z i φi
1
κi 1−β(1−Δ)(1−δi )
vi∗
=
& 1/ε
vt∗
I 1 %
α
z i φi
i=1 κi

1−β(1−Δ)(1−δi )

53

(A32)

(A33)

(A30)

only as a function of parameters, which is quite intuitive: the higher is productive, matching
and job creation efficiency in sector i, relative to the other sectors, the larger its share of
vacancies. However, to solve the model, we need to determine the level of v i∗ which requires
eliminating μ from (A32). Combining again the two first order conditions, and summing
across all sectors, we arrive at

∗

u =

α
1−α

1/ε
·[ZΦ · (1 − α)]

1+1/ε
α

  1+(1−α)/ε
I

α
1
zi φi
1
·
·
μ
κ 1 − β (1 − Δ) (1 − δi )
i=1 i

1+1/ε
α

(A34)

which establishes a unique inverse relationship between μ and u ∗ : the higher the number of
idle workers, the lower the shadow value of the constraint.
Equation (A34) suggests an algorithm to solve for v i∗ . At any date, before choosing how
to allocate vacancies and unemployed workers, the total number of idle workers is a state
variable for the planner, i.e., u∗ is known. One can therefore back out μ from (A34) , and
then vi∗ from (A32) and u∗i from (A31) .
Counterfactual unemployment

To perform the counterfactual on unemployment with

endogenous vacancies, we use the same iterative procedure described in Section 3.2, with
the caveat that the relationship between the planner’s job-finding rate and the empirical jobfinding rate at date t is now given by
 ∗ α
 α  ∗   ∗ α
vt
vt
h∗t
1
ut
φ̄xt
∗
∗
·
,
= ft ·
·
·
ft = ∗ = Φt φ̄xt
∗
∗
ut
ut
1 − Mxt
ut
vt
φ̄xt

(A35)

where φ̄xt is given by equation (11), and φ̄∗xt is the same aggregator with shares (vit∗ /vt∗ )
instead of (vit /vt ) . When vit∗ = vit (i.e., ε → ∞), equation (A35) collapses to the relationship f ∗ = [f / (1 − Mxt )] (ut /u∗t )α that we have used in our baseline calculations with
exogenous vacancies.

54

,

B Data Appendix
B.1 Comparison between JOLTS and HWOL vacancies
As noted in Section 4, the vacancy counts in the HWOL database are derived from job listings
posted by employers on thousands of internet job boards and online newspapers. Vacancies
recorded in JOLTS are instead derived from a sample of about 16,000 business establishments. In particular, JOLTS vacancies represent “all unfilled, posted positions available at
an establishment on the last day of the month. The vacancy must be for a specific position
where work can start within thirty days, and an active recruiting process must be underway
for the position.” (Faberman, 2009, p. 86).
Further, sample establishments in the JOLTS only report their own direct employees
and exclude “employees of temporary help agencies, employee leasing companies, outside
contractors, and consultants,” which are counted by their employer of record, not by the
establishment where they are working.64 Thus, this approach captures temp-help and leasing
workers as long as their employers are sampled in the JOLTS, but does not capture the selfemployed contract workforce (these workers typically receive a 1099-MISC form instead
of a W-2 form to report payments received for services they provide). On the other hand,
the HWOL series includes postings for contract work but may miss positions that are not
commonly advertised online. As such, neither the JOLTS or the HWOL data are perfect,
since each may miss or overstate specific types of vacancies.
We perform several exercises to compare the vacancy counts we get from each data
source. First, we compare total vacancies by Census region in Figure B1. For the national
totals, the HWOL series tend to be lower than the JOLTS series before 2008 (especially in
the South), and higher from 2008 onwards (especially in the Northeast). The two series are
closest in the West: here the correlation between the HWOL and JOLTS series is 0.98. In
the other three regions the correlation ranges from 0.73 in the Midwest to 0.80 in the South.
For further comparison, we exploit one important feature of the HWOL data: for about
57% of the job listings, we observe the NAICS code of the employer. Therefore, we are
able to directly compare vacancy counts by industry from HWOL to those in the JOLTS.
64

see JOLTS Technical Note, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.tn.htm.

55

We report in Figure B2 scatterplots of vacancy shares by industry from JOLTS and from
HWOL—for the latter, we report both total vacancies, as well as vacancies without contract
work. The top panel of the figure reports average vacancy shares over the sample period
under consideration. Most data points are close to the 45-degree line, indicating that the
vacancy shares by industry in the two series line up fairly well, especially when we omit
contract work from HWOL to make it more comparable to the JOLTS. The only two sectors
where JOLTS and HWOL show significant differences in vacancy shares are “Public Administration” and “Accommodation and Food Services.” The bottom panel reports the change
in average vacancy shares between 2006 and the 12 month period around December 2009
for each series. Again, the JOLTS and HWOL series are quite close to each other, with the
exception of “Public Administration.” 65
We also investigated whether the missing industry information in HWOL exhibits any
systematic patterns that may have skewed our analysis. For robustness, we re-weighted the
industry observations in HWOL as follows: first, we dropped observations from individual
Job Boards with the highest rates of missing NAICS codes. Then, we re-weighted the remaining observations to correct for any correlation between NAICS missing values and Job
Board, occupation or Census region. In other words, if vacancies for specific (Job Board,
SOC, Census region) combinations are more likely to have missing NAICS codes, the vacancies that do have NAICS information in those cells are assigned a larger weight in computing
total vacancies by industry.66 The resulting vacancy shares are almost identical to those based
on the raw data.
65
We have also looked at average vacancy shares over the period pre- and post-recession separately, and the
patterns are very similar.
66
For example, suppose a (Job Board, SOC, Census region) cell has four observations. Observation one is in
NAICS code 11, observations two and three are in NAICS code 13, and observation four has a missing NAICS.
Thus, the missing NAICS rate is 0.25. Then, a weight of 1/(1 − .25) = 1.333 is applied to each observation
with non-missing NAICS. So we find 1.333 job vacancies in NAICS code 11, and 2.667 job vacancies in
NAICS code 13.

56

B.2 CES matching function estimation
In order to examine the plausibility of the Cobb-Douglas matching function specification,
we generalize (15) and estimate the following CES specification via minimum distance:
 σ
 
 post  1
vit
hit
pre

= γ QT Tt +χ{t≤07} ln (φi )+χ{t>07} ln φi
ln
+ ln α
+ (1 − α) +it .
uit
σ
uit
(B1)
Recall that σ ∈ (−∞, 1) with σ = 0 in the Cobb-Douglas case. A simulated annealing
algorithm is used to ensure that we obtain a global minimum. 95% confidence intervals
are computed via bootstrap methods. The estimation results are reported in Table B4. The
point estimates of σ range from −0.11 to 0.18 depending on the specification, implying an
elasticity between 0.9 and 1.2. In the specification with HWOL vacancies and CPS hires, we
cannot reject the null that σ = 0 at the 5% significance level. In the other specifications with
JOLTS data, σ = 0 lies outside the 95% confidence interval, but the point estimates are close
to zero, implying values close to unity for the elasticity of the matching function (i.e., close
to the Cobb-Douglas case).

B.3 Additional results on industrial and occupational mismatch
To examine the robustness of our results, we present various other specifications. In particular, we compute the indexes adjusted for one source of heterogeneity at a time in Figure B6,
and present the indexes for different values of α in Figure B7. We also compute the index
using φi estimated from the CPS flows data. This index and the corresponding mismatch
unemployment are shown in Figure B8. In addition, we compute the mismatch index using
φ’s separately estimated for the periods before and after the recession. We denote this index
. Table B8 summarizes these results and shows that our findings on industry level
as Mbreak
x
mismatch are remarkably robust. The contribution of mismatch to the increase in the unemployment rate varies between 0.52 and 0.77 percentage points, and accounts for 11-14% of
the rise in the unemployment rate. Finally, we repeat our analysis at the 2-digit industry level
using the HWOL data. Figure B9 paints a very similar picture to that obtained from JOLTS.
Both Mt and Mxt are somewhat higher for HWOL than for JOLTS, but peak and decline in
a very similar fashion. The contribution of mismatch to the increase in unemployment rate
57

is slightly larger with HWOL, as reported in Table B8—between 0.79 and 0.88 percentage
points.
We also show additional results for occupational-level mismatch. First of all, Figure B11
presents indexes adjusted for one source of heterogeneity at a time for 2-digit occupations.
We also compute the indexes for different values of α in B12. Table B9 summarizes these
results and shows that our findings on occupation level mismatch are quite robust.

B.4 Adjustment in sectoral unemployment count
Let uit be the number of unemployed workers at date t whose last job is in sector i, and U it
be the true number of unemployed actually searching in sector i at date t. Also let u jit be the
number of unemployed whose last job is in sector i and who are searching in sector j. By

definition, we have uit = Ij=1 ujit . The key unknown at each date t is the vector {Uit } .
From the panel dimension of CPS we observe hjit , the number of unemployed workers
hired in sector j in period t whose last job was in sector i. Let the total number of hires
in sector j in period t be hjt . Assume that the job-finding rate in sector j is the same for
all unemployed, independent of the sector of provenance, with the sole exception if their
previous job was in that same sector, in which case their job-finding rate is higher by a factor
γt ≥ 1, or:

hjjt
ujjt

hjit
= (1 + γt ) j , for i = j.
uit

(B2)

The average hiring rate of sector j is the total number of hires for j divided by the total
number of unemployed looking in sector j or:
    j  j 
 hj
hjt
ujt
ujit
hjt
it
+
.
=
Ujt
Ujt
Ujt
ujit
ujjt
i=j
Substituting (B2) into the above equation delivers:
  
 j 
j
j
 hj
ujt
hjt
u
h
it
it
+ (1 + γt ) itj
.
=
j
Ujt
U
U
u
u
jt
jt
it
it
i=j
Because the ratio hjit /ujit is the same across all i = j, we can pull it out of the sum above and

58

obtain, after rearranging:

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨



hjt
Ujt

hjit
=
ujit ⎪
⎪
⎩ (1 + γt )

1 + γt
hjt
Ujt

ujjt
Ujt





1 + γt

−1

ujjt
Ujt



if i = j
(B3)

−1

if i = j

Since we do not observe ujjt /Ujt , we want to substitute it out. Note that
hjjt

1

ujjt
1+γt
hjt
=
j
h
Ujt
γt
1 − hjtj 1+γ
t
t

and using this expression in (B3), we arrive at a relationship between the hiring rate from i
to j and the average hiring rate in j:
hjit
hjt
j
= ξit ·
Ujt
ujit
where
ξitj

=

⎧
⎪
⎨

1−

hjjt
hjt

if i = j

γt
1+γt

⎪
⎩ (1 + γt ) 1 −

hjjt
hjt

(B4)

γt
1+γt

if i = j

Rearranging equation (B4) and summing across all j yields, at every t, the I equations:
 
N

1 hjit
Utj
uit =
j
j
ξ
ht
j=1 it
in the (I + 1) unknowns {Ujt }, γt . The last equation needed is the “aggregate consistency”
condition

I


Ujt =

j=1

I


ujt

(B5)

j=1

stating that the true distribution of unemployed across sectors must sum to the observed total
number of unemployed. We therefore have a system of (I +1) equations in (I +1) unknowns.
In our calculation of unemployment counts, to guarantee a non-negative solution to the
linear system, we set to zero all entries in the transition matrices h jit which account for less
than 5% of hires hjt in any given sector at any date t. We find that the estimated values of ϕ t
are all close to one. Figures B15 and B16 plot the adjusted and unadjusted unemployment
counts for some selected industries and occupations. As expected, for example, this correction reduces the number of unemployed workers searching in construction and increases that
of those seeking jobs in healthcare.
59

B.5 Measurement error in vacancies
Suppose that true vacancies (Vit ) in market i are proportional to the observed vacancies (vit )
1

1

by a factor υiα , i.e., Vit = υiα ·vit . For simplicity, consider the economy without heterogeneity
in productive or matching efficiency of Section 2.1. The true mismatch index is

α  
1
α  1−α
I 
I
1−α
α


v
υ
V
u
uit
it
it
i it
=1−
Mυt = 1 −
1
I
Vt
ut
ut
α
i=1
i=1
i=1 υi vit
  α  1−α
I 

υi
vit
uit
= 1−
ῡt
vt
ut
i=1
for
v̄t =

 I


1
α

vi vit

(B6)

α

.

i=1

Note that the correction term υi /ῡt due to measurement error is exactly analogous to the
correction term φi /φ̄t for the index Mφt in (8) . Is it possible to identify measurement error
in vacancies υi in each sector? With a Cobb-Douglas specification, the true sectoral matching
function is hit = Φt Vitα u1−α
it . Substituting observed variables measured with error in place
of true ones, we arrive at
hit = Φt · υi · vitα u1−α
it .
Therefore, in a panel regression of log hires on log vacancies and log unemployment augmented with a time polynomial and fixed sector-specific effects, the estimated sector fixedeffect is precisely the measurement error in vacancies υi . One can therefore obtain an estimate of υi in the same way we propose to estimate φ i . To sum up, sectors where vacancies
are especially underreported (i.e., υi >> 1) will look like sectors with higher matching
efficiency.

60

Number of Vacancies (millions)

Northeast

Midwest

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5
0.4

0.5
JOLTS
HWOL
HWOL no contract

0.4

0.3
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0.3
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

South
Number of Vacancies (millions)

JOLTS
HWOL
HWOL no contract

West

2

1.4

1.8

1.2

1.6

1

1.4
0.8
1.2
0.6

1
0.8

JOLTS
HWOL
HWOL no contract

0.4

0.6
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

JOLTS
HWOL
HWOL no contract

0.2
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure B1: Comparison between the JOLTS and the HWOL (The Conference Board Help
Wanted OnLine Data Series). Top-left panel: Northeast, Top-right panel: Midwest, Bottomleft panel: South, Bottom-right panel: West.

61

HWOL vs. JOLTS Vacancy Shares, All Years
0.25

BUS

0.2

HWOL Vacancy Share

HEA

0.15

0.1

FIN

RET

MFG

INF WHO

0.05

EDU
REA

ACC
PUB

OTH

UTL
CON

MIN

ART

0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

JOLTS Vacancy Share
HWOL - No Contract

HWOL - Contract

Change in Average Vacancy Shares: 2006 vs. July 2009 - June 2010
0.06

0.05
HEA

Change in HWOL Vacancy Share

0.04

0.03

0.02
EDU

0.01

0

WHO

ACC

UTL
INF
FIN

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03
-0.03

RET
MIN
ART
REA

OTH

PUB

BUS

CON

MFG

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

Change in JOLTS Vacancy Share
HWOL - No Contract

HWOL - Contract

Figure B2: Top panel: comparison between vacancy shares in the JOLTS and HWOL (The
Conference Board Help Wanted OnLine Data Series) for the May 2005 to June 2011 period.
Bottom panel: change in average vacancy shares from 2006 to July 2009-June 2010 in the
JOLTS and the HWOL. See Table B1 for an explanation of industry labels.
62

Productivity

200

0.06

Construction
Manufacturing - Durables
Finance
Retail
Health

0.05

Destruction Rates

250

150

100

Construction
Manufacturing - Durables
Finance
Retail
Health

0.04

0.03

0.02

50

0.01

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Figure B3: Productivity levels (left panel) and job destruction rates (right panel) for selected
industries. Source: BEA and BLS for productivity levels and BED for job destruction rates.

45

0.07

40

0.06

35

35

0.05

0.05

30

30

0.04

0.04

25

25

0.03

0.03

20

20

0.02

0.02

15

15

0.01

0.01

Business and Financial Operations
Sales and Related
Healthcare Practitioner
Construction and Extraction
Production

Hourly Median Wage

40

10
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Separation Rate

45

10
2012

0
2005

0.07

Business and Financial Operations
Sales and Related
Healthcare Practitioner
Construction and Extraction
Production

2006

2007

2008

2009

0.06

2010

2011

Figure B4: Wages (left panel) and job separation rates (right panel) for selected occupations.
Source: OES for wages and CPS for job separation rates.

63

0
2012

0.2

0.25

Construction
Manufacturing - Durables
Finance
Retail
Health

0.2

Construction
Manufacturing - Durables
Finance
Retail
Health

Vacancy Share

Unemployment Share

0.15

0.1

0.15

0.1

0.05
0.05

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Figure B5: Unemployment and vacancy shares by selected industry.

0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11

M
Mx
Mφ
Mz
Mδ

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.15

Mismatch Index

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

2
1.8
1.6

u − u∗∗
u − uz
u − u∗x
u − u∗φ
u − u∗δ

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure B6: Mismatch indexes Mt , Mxt , Mφt , Mzt , and Mδt by industry (left panel) and
the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).

64

0.14
0.13

α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.15

0.12
0.11
Mismatch Index

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure B7: Mismatch index Mt by industry (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch
unemployment rates (right panel) for various values of α.
0.15
0.14

Mx JOLTS
Mx CPS

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.13
0.12
0.11
Mismatch Index

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01
0
2003

u − u∗x JOLTS
u − u∗x CPS

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2003

2012

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure B8: Mismatch index Mxt by industry (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch
unemployment rates (right panel) using CPS measure of hires from unemployment.

0.14
0.13

M JOLTS
M HWOL
Mx JOLTS
Mx HWOL

2.4
2.2
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.15

0.12
0.11
Mismatch Index

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

2

u − u∗
u − u∗
u − u∗x
u − u∗x

JOLTS
2-Digit HWOL
JOLTS
2-Digit HWOL

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

0
2005

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure B9: Mismatch indexes Mt (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel) using the JOLTS and HWOL (The Conference Board Help Wanted
OnLine Data Series).
65

0.04

0.16

Business and Financial Operations (Left Axis)
Sales and Related (Right Axis)
Healthcare Practitioner (Left Axis)
Construction and Extraction (Right Axis)
Production (Right Axis)

0.2

0.14

Vacancy Share

Unemployment Share

0.03

0.12
0.02
0.1

0.01

0.05

Business and Financial Operations (Left Axis)
Sales and Related (Left Axis)
Healthcare Practitioner (Left Axis)
Construction and Extraction (Right Axis)
Production (Right Axis)

0.16

0.04

0.12

0.03

0.08

0.02

0.08

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0.06
2012

0.04
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0.01
2012

Figure B10: Unemployment and vacancy shares by selected occupation.

0.14

0.12

2.5

M
Mx
Mφ
Mδ
Mz

2

Mismatch Index

Mismatch Index

0.1

0.08

0.06

u − u∗∗
u − ux
u − u∗φ
u − u∗δ
u − u∗z

1.5

1

0.04
0.5
0.02

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure B11: Mismatch indexes Mt , Mxt , Mφt , Mzt , and Mδt by occupation (left panel)
and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).

66

2012

2.5

α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.2

Mismatch Index

0.15

0.1

0.05
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
2005

2012

α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure B12: Mismatch index Mt by occupation (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch
unemployment rates (right panel) for various values of α.

5

M 2-digit SOC
M 2-digit SOC X 9 census divisons
Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

0.2

Mismatch Index

0.15

0.1

0.05
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

u − u∗ 2-digit SOC
u − u∗ 2-digit SOC X 9 census divisions

4

3

2

1

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure B13: Mismatch index Mt by occupation and location (left panel) and the corresponding mismatch unemployment rates (right panel).

67

2012

High School Graduate

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.12

Mismatch Index

Mismatch Index

Less than High School

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Some College

College

0.19

0.19

0.17

0.17

0.15
0.13
0.11
0.09

Mismatch Index

Miamatch Index

0.02

0.1

0.15
0.13
0.11
0.09

0.07

0.07

0.05
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0.05
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure B14: Mismatch indexes (Mt ) by occupation for different education groups.

68

Construction

Healthcare
1.5

Unadjusted
Adjusted
Number of Unemployed (million)

Number of Unemployed (million)

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Unadjusted
Adjusted

1

0.5

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Figure B15: Adjusted unemployment counts for selected industries.

Construction and Extraction Occupations
2.5

Personal Care and Service Occupations
1

Unadjusted
Adjusted

Unadjusted
Adjusted

Number of Unemployed (million)

Number of Unemployed (million)

0.8
2

1.5

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.5
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2005

2012

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure B16: Adjusted unemployment counts for selected occupations.

69

2011

2012

−3

1.6

−5

x 10

−4

x 10
2

Healthcare (Right axis)
Construction (Left axis)

8

−5

x 10

x 10
8

Sales (Right axis)
Construction(Left axis)

1.4
1.2

6

6

1

κ

0.8

κ

κ

κ

1
4

4

2

2

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2012

Figure B17: Time series of κ for two selected industries: construction and healthcare (left
panel) and two selected occupations: construction and extraction occupations, and sales and
related occupations (right panel). The cost is normalized by average annual labor productivity of the industry (annual wage for the occupation).

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

2.5

u − u∗ ( = 1)
u − u∗x ( = 1)

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

∗

Figure B18: Mismatch unemployment with M vt at the industry level using endogenous
vacancies specification with JOLTS.
4

Mismatch Unemployment Rate (ppts)

3.5

u − u∗ ( = 1)
u − u∗x ( = 1)

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

v∗

2010

2011

2012

Figure B19: Mismatch unemployment with M t at the occupation level using endogenous
vacancies specification with the HWOL (The Conference Board Help Wanted OnLine Data
Series).
70

Code
ACC
ART
CON
EDU
FIN
PUB
HEA
INF
MFG
MFG
MIN
OTH
BUS
REA
RET
UTL
WHO

Industry
Accomodation and Food Services
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
Construction
Education Services
Finance and Insurance
Government
Health Care and Social Assistance
Information
Manufacturing-Durable Goods
Manufacturing-Nondurable Goods
Mining
Other Services
Professional and Business Services
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Retail Trade
Transportation, Warehousing and Utilities
Wholesale Trade

Table B1: Industry classification in the JOLTS. The codes in the left column are those used
in Figure B2.

Code
110000
130000
150000
170000
190000
210000
230000
250000
270000
290000
310000
330000
350000
370000
390000
410000
430000
470000
490000
510000
530000

Occupation
Management Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Legal Occupations
Education, Training, and Library Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Production Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations

Classification
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Cognitive/Non-routine
Manual/Non-routine
Manual/Non-routine
Manual/Non-routine
Manual/Non-routine
Manual/Non-routine
Cognitive/Routine
Cognitive/Routine
Manual/Routine
Manual/Routine
Manual/Routine
Manual/Routine

Table B2: 2-digit SOC Codes used in our empirical analysis. The classification in the right
column is that used in Figure 7.

71

Code
111000
113000
119000
131000
132000
151000
211000
252000
272000
291000
311000
339000
352000
353000
359000
372000
373000
399000
411000
412000
413000
419000
433000
434000
435000
436000
439000
452000
472000
493000
499000
512000
514000
519000
533000
537000

Occupation
Top Executives
Operations Specialties Managers
Other Management Occupations
Business Operations Specialists
Financial Specialists
Computer Occupations
Counselors, Social Workers, and Other Community and Social Service Specialists
Preschool, Primary, Secondary, and Special Education School Teachers
Entertainers and Performers, Sports and Related Workers
Health Diagnosing and Treating Practitioners
Nursing, Psychiatric, and Home Health Aides
Other Protective Service Workers
Cooks and Food Preparation Workers
Food and Beverage Serving Workers
Other Food Preparation and Serving Related Workers
Building Cleaning and Pest Control Workers
Grounds Maintenance Workers
Other Personal Care and Service Workers
Supervisors of Sales Workers
Retail Sales Workers
Sales Representatives, Services
Other Sales and Related Workers
Financial Clerks
Information and Record Clerks
Material Recording, Scheduling, Dispatching, and Distributing Workers
Secretaries and Administrative Assistants
Other Office and Administrative Support Workers
Agricultural Workers
Construction Trades Workers
Vehicle and Mobile Equipment Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers
Other Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Assemblers and Fabricators
Metal Workers and Plastic Workers
Other Production Occupations
Motor Vehicle Operators
Material Moving Workers

Table B3: 3-digit SOC Codes used in our empirical analysis.

JOLTS
JOLTS Hires
CPS Hires

α
0.576
[0.542,0.603]
0.301
[0.267,0.350]

HWOL

σ
0.152
[0.051,0.242]
0.18
[0.08,0.303]

α

σ

-

-

0.239
[0.194,0.291]

-0.108
[-0.226,0.004]

Table B4: Estimates of the vacancy share α and CES substitutability parameter σ, using industry and occupation level data. 95-5 confidence intervals computed via bootstrap. Sample
sizes are the same as in Table 1.

72

Industry
Mining
Arts
Construction
Accommodations
Retail
Professional and Business Services
Real Estate
Wholesale
Other
Transportation and Utilities
Manufacturing - Nondurables
Education
Health
Government
Finance
Manufacturing - Durables
Information

φpre
1.71
1.69
1.66
1.53
1.47
1.43
1.41
1.21
1.14
1.14
0.96
0.94
0.93
0.87
0.85
0.84
0.76

φpost
1.36
1.87
1.73
1.60
1.46
1.45
1.22
1.35
1.16
1.16
1.00
1.02
1.05
0.89
0.73
0.78
0.70

Table B5: Estimates of industry-specific match efficiencies using hires from the JOLTS.

Industry Groups Industry
Construction
Group 1
Mining
Manufacturing
Group 2
Other
Transportation and Utilities
Accommodations
Arts
Group 3
Professional and Business Services
Retail
Wholesale
Education
Finance
Government
Group 4
Health
Information
Real Estate

φpre

φpost

0.50

0.55

0.42

0.44

0.38

0.39

0.33

0.33

Table B6: Estimates of industry-specific match efficiencies using hires from the CPS.

73

Occupation Groups
Service
Natural Resources,
Construction and Maintenance
Production, Transportation
and Material Moving
Sales and Office

Management,
Professional and Related

Occupation
Protective Service Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Production Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Management Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Legal Occupations
Education, Training, and Library Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations

φpre

φpost

0.58

0.63

0.56

0.63

0.48

0.52

0.37

0.35

0.32

0.33

Table B7: Estimates of occupation-specific match efficiencies using hires from the CPS.

74

JOLTS Hires

CPS Hires
HWOL

Index
M
Mx
Mφ
Mz
Mδ
M
M
M
MAK
x
Mbreak
x
Madj
∗
Mv (ε = 1.0)
∗
Mvx (ε = 0.5)
∗
Mvx (ε = 1.0)
∗
Mvx (ε = 2.0)
M
Mx
M
Mx

α u06 − u∗06
0.5
0.26
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.29
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.23
0.3
0.22
0.5
0.26
0.7
0.22
0.5
0.28
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.38
0.5
0.70
0.5
0.36
0.5
0.27
0.5
0.27
0.5
0.10
0.5
0.63
0.5
0.56

u10.09 − u∗10.09
1.01
0.84
0.92
0.96
0.98
0.89
1.01
0.82
0.89
0.92
0.89
1.52
1.91
1.25
0.95
1.03
0.62
1.51
1.35

Δ(u − u∗ )
0.75
0.59
0.63
0.72
0.74
0.67
0.75
0.60
0.61
0.67
0.65
1.14
1.21
0.89
0.68
0.77
0.52
0.88
0.79

Δ(u − u∗ )/Δu
13.9%
10.9%
11.7%
13.3%
13.7%
12.4%
13.9%
11.1%
11.2%
12.4%
11.9%
21.1%
22.3%
16.5%
12.7%
12.4%
9.6%
16.3%
14.7%

Table B8: Changes in mismatch unemployment at the industry level. All the changes are
calculated as the difference between October 2009 and the average of 2006. Note that Δu =
5.4 percentage points.

75

2-digit

3-digit

Routine/Cognitive
2-digit × region (quarterly)
2-digit (quarterly)

Index
α u06 − u∗06
M
0.5
0.85
Mx
0.5
0.42
Mφ
0.5
0.46
Mz
0.5
0.85
Mδ
0.5
0.80
M
0.3
0.72
M
0.5
0.85
M
0.7
0.79
Mbreak
0.5
0.42
x
Madj
0.5
0.84
v∗
M (ε = 1.0) 0.5
1.41
∗
Mvx (ε = 0.5) 0.5
1.08
v∗
Mx (ε = 1.0) 0.5
0.74
v∗
Mx (ε = 2.0) 0.5
0.58
M
0.5
1.33
Mx
0.5
0.79
Mφ
0.5
0.83
Mz
0.5
1.33
Mδ
0.5
1.29
MRC
0.5
0.41
M
0.5
0.81
M
0.5
0.68

u10.09 − u∗10.09
2.00
1.02
1.15
2.00
1.86
1.68
2.00
1.77
0.98
2.00
3.20
2.60
1.81
1.41
2.91
1.73
1.85
2.91
2.80
1.07
1.71
1.53

Δ(u − u∗ )
1.14
0.60
0.69
1.15
1.05
0.96
1.14
0.98
0.56
1.16
1.79
1.52
1.07
0.83
1.58
0.94
1.02
1.58
1.50
0.67
0.90
0.85

Δ(u − u∗ )/Δu
21.3%
11.1%
12.8%
21.2%
19.5%
17.8%
21.3%
18.1%
10.4%
21.4%
33.1%
28.1%
19.7%
15.3%
29.3%
17.4%
18.8%
22.2%
27.8%
12.3%
16.9%
16.0%

Table B9: Changes in mismatch unemployment at the occupation level. All the changes
are calculated as the difference between October 2009 and the average of 2006. Note that
Δu = 5.4 percentage points.

76

INDUSTRY
Agriculture and Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Trade
Transportation and Utilities
Information
Financial
Professional Business Services
Education and Health
Leisure
Other
Public Administration
All

July 2005-June 2007

July 2007-June 2009

July 2009-June 2011

UN
0.17
0.16
0.21
0.24
0.23
0.21
0.21
0.23
0.25
0.29
0.28
0.25
0.23

UN
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.23
0.19
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.20

UN
0.15
0.13
0.16
0.21
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.20
0.20
0.18

UD
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.10

UD
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.09

UD
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08

Table B10: UN and UD flow rates by industry.

OCCUPATION
Management
Business and Financial Operations
Computer and Mathematical
Architecture and Engineering
Life, Physical and Social Science
Community and Social Service
Legal
Education, Training, and Library
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical
Healthcare Support
Protective Service
Food Preparation and Serving Related
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance
Personal Care and Service
Sales and Related
Office and Administrative Support
Construction and Extraction
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair
Production
Transportation and Material Moving
All

July 2005-June 2007

July 2007-June 2009

July 2009-June 2011

UN
0.15
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.20
0.29
0.20
0.25
0.20
0.21
0.29
0.25
0.29
0.28
0.30
0.26
0.24
0.17
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.23

UN
0.16
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.19
0.18
0.21
0.19
0.23
0.27
0.23
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.25
0.22
0.16
0.16
0.18
0.19
0.21

UN
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.20
0.18
0.18
0.22
0.21
0.24
0.23
0.26
0.22
0.20
0.13
0.14
0.16
0.19
0.18

UD
0.07
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.12
0.13
0.06
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10

UD
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.07
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09

Table B11: UN and UD flow rates by occupation.

77

UD
0.07
0.06
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.08

