NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS SKILL ACQUISITION AND EXPORT MANUFACTURING IN
MEXICO
David Atkin
Working Paper 18266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18266
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

Special thanks to David Kaplan and ITAM for computing and making available the IMSS Municipality
level employment data. Thanks to Angus Deaton, Penny Goldberg and Gene Grossman for guidance
and encouragement throughout. Further thanks to Joe Altonji, Treb Allen, Chris Blattman, Richard
Chiburis, Dave Donaldson, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, Leonardo Iacovone, Amit Khandelwal, Fabian
Lange, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Marc Melitz, Mushfiq Mobarak, Marc-Andreas Muendler, Hannah
Pitt, Guido Porto, Nancy Qian, Jesse Rothstein, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Eric Verhoogen, Glen Weyl
and numerous seminar participants for their useful comments. Financial aid from the Fellowship of
Woodrow Wilson Scholars at Princeton University is gratefully acknowledged. Any errors contained
in the paper are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Atkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico
David Atkin
NBER Working Paper No. 18266
August 2012, Revised July 2015
JEL No. F16,J24,O12,O14,O19
ABSTRACT
This paper presents empirical evidence that the growth of export manufacturing in Mexico during
a period of major trade reforms, the years 1986-2000, altered the distribution of education. I use variation
in the timing of factory openings across commuting zones to show that school dropout increased with
local expansions in export manufacturing. The magnitudes I find suggest that for every twenty-five
jobs created, one student dropped out of school at grade 9 rather than continuing through to grade
12. These effects are driven by less-skilled export-manufacturing jobs which raised the opportunity
cost of schooling for students at the margin.
David Atkin
Department of Economics
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue E19-750
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
atkin@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Many developing countries have experienced rapid periods of industrialization driven by
expansions in low-skill manufacturing exports. The existing trade literature has found that
exporting firms pay higher wages (Bernard and Jensen 1995; see Bernard 1995 for Mexico)
and that export expansions are often associated with rises in the returns to skill (surveyed
in Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007; see Cragg and Epelbaum 1996, Hanson and Harrison 1999
and Verhoogen 2008 for Mexico). From these two stylized facts, it is tempting to conclude
that schooling will rise with the arrival of new exporting opportunities. However, such an
inference ignores the fact that new exports jobs have the potential to significantly raise the
opportunity cost of schooling. If the rise in the opportunity cost of schooling outweighs any
rise in the return to schooling, some youths will drop out of school at younger ages. This
paper exploits variation in the timing of factory openings across commuting zones to show
that this is indeed what occurred in Mexico between 1986 and 2000.
The finding that export expansions can reduce school attainment has important ramifications. From a macro perspective, many countries pursuing export-led growth strategies also
want to upgrade the skill level of their workforce, believing that the positive externalities from
education drive long-run growth rates (Lucas 1988). Therefore, understanding the particular
job characteristics that raise or lower educational acquisition is vital for designing industrial
and trade policies that can increase short run growth rates without reducing education levels. In the last part of the paper, I address this question by exploring how heterogeneity in
educational responses relates to industry and location characteristics of the new job arrivals.
New export employment opportunities have two offsetting effects. On the one hand, when
a new firm opens, a student may drop out of school in order to take one of the abundant
job openings at the time of the factory opening—the opportunity cost of schooling channel. On the other hand, if the student expects that vacancies will continue to be available
and these jobs will sufficiently reward school acquisition, he or she may choose to stay in
school longer—the return to schooling channel. Which effect dominates during periods of
export-oriented industrialization is an empirical question.
Mexico provides a perfect setting to study the impacts of globalization on the labor force.
Over the period spanned by the data (1986-2000), Mexico turned its back on an import substitution strategy and liberalized trade, joining GATT in 1986 and NAFTA in 1994. During
these years, many new plants opened, often in the form of Maquiladoras, to manufacture
products for export. Total employment in export manufacturing sectors rose from under
900,000 formal sector jobs at the beginning of 1986 to over 2.7 million jobs in 2000. The
majority of these jobs were low skill, with more than 80 percent of employees in the year

1

2000 possessing less than a high school degree.1
A unique dataset makes this analysis possible. I match cohort average education (my
skill measure, calculated using 10 million schooling records from the 2000 census) to exportindustry job growth in the cohort’s commuting zone in the year the cohort turned age 16
(calculated using annual firm-level employment data from social security rolls covering the
universe of formal sector firms).2 At this “key exposure age”, compulsory education concludes and formal employment is first possible. I can then compare the school attainment
of cohorts within a commuting zone who reached their key exposure age at the time of
substantial factory openings to slightly younger or older cohorts who did not.
The primary empirical difficulty is reverse causation; that local skill levels may themselves
determine firm employment decisions. In the context of my panel of 1,808 commuting zones
and 14 cohorts, the exogeneity requirement is that—conditional on commuting-zone fixed
effects and linear trends, and state-cohort fixed effects—firm employment decisions do not respond to deviations in the schooling of individual cohorts. I instrument employment changes
with changes attributable solely to large single-firm openings, closings, expansions and contractions. I argue that sizable expansions and contractions are associated with large fixed
costs and not driven by changes in the labor supply of one or even several cohorts of youths.3
I find that the cohorts who reached their key exposure age during years of substantial
expansions in export-industry employment in their commuting zone obtained relatively fewer
years of school compared to less exposed cohorts. In terms of interpretation, this finding is
not driven by new export manufacturing opportunities raising the education of all cohorts
in the commuting zone but raising education least among cohorts at the key exposure age.
(The change in school attendance of 16 year olds between 1990 and 2000 was smallest in the
commuting zones with the largest export-industry employment growth). The magnitudes I
find suggest that for every twenty-five new jobs that arrived, one student dropped out of
school at grade 9 rather than continuing on through grade 12.
I present multiple pieces of additional evidence to support my claim that export expansions reduced schooling by raising the opportunity cost of school: compared to other ages,
the reduction in schooling is largest for jobs arriving at age 16 and dissipates entirely at older
ages; I find similar patterns for grade-9 dropout rates but not primary school dropout where
earlier exposure matters more; school attendance at the time of the 1990 census responds
1
Trade liberalization in Mexico has been associated with an initial rise in the skill premium until the mid
1990’s (Cragg and Epelbaum 1996, Hanson and Harrison 1999), followed by a skill premium decline thereafter
(Robertson 2004, Airola and Juhn 2005). As I show in Section 5.1, education decisions respond to the skill
premium (the wage difference between employees of different skill levels) and the opportunity cost of school.
2
I restrict attention to the non-migrant population of Mexico since the location of migrants at age 16 is unknown. In Section 4.5.2, I show that composition bias due to selective migration cannot explain my findings.
3
This is especially true in Mexico, where a large quantity of migrant and informal labor ensures that
changes in the dropout decisions of individual cohorts have only a small impact on the set of potential hires.

2

most to job shocks occurring in the previous year rather than earlier or later years, and the
cohort aged 16 is most impacted; this drop in school attendance is matched by increases
in the propensity to work in the export sector but not in other sectors; sex-specific school
attainment responds more strongly to job shocks for that particular sex; the effects are
not driven by parental work decisions or selective migration; and the returns to on-the-job
training do not negate the reduction in formal schooling in wage terms.
The previous discussion focused on the schooling impacts of export manufacturing jobs.
There are several reasons for this focus. First, the impact of trade on schooling decisions is of
significant interest in its own right. Second, from a policy perspective, export manufacturing
plays a special role in developing countries. While policymakers must often decide whether
to encourage or restrict export manufacturing, especially FDI, such scenarios are rarer for
services or non-export manufacturing. This comes in part from the additional policy levers
available for export manufacturing (for example, Mexico’s Maquiladora system that exempts
exporting firms from tariffs on imported inputs). In contrast to their success in encouraging
export manufacturing, Mexico and many other developing countries have struggled to generate employment growth in large-scale non-export manufacturing. Meanwhile, services are
generally non tradeable and so location decisions are often tied to local demand.
In the last part of the analysis, I explore job creation across all sectors. While the arrival
of formal jobs in non-export sectors at age 16 is also associated with reduced schooling, the
effects size is significantly smaller than for export jobs. The effect disappears altogether
when I restrict attention to highly-agglomerated industries where local demand shocks are
less likely to bias estimates due to endogeneity. In order to understand the job characteristics
generating this difference, I write down a conceptual framework that incorporates stochastic
job opportunities and heterogeneous discount rates into an educational choice model. This
framework highlights the particular job characteristics that determine whether job arrivals
encourage or discourage educational acquisition. Drawing on schooling, wage and industry
of employment data from the 1990 census to characterize job arrivals, I find that dropout
is driven by job arrivals that require only a secondary school education, offer relatively high
wage premia and arrive in locations where there are many youths on the margin between
secondary and high school. Once these job characteristics are accounted for, new export jobs
no longer generate statistically larger reductions in schooling than non-export jobs.
This paper provides evidence in support of models of trade with endogenous skill acquisition. Findlay and Kierzkowski (1983) endogenize human capital in a Heckscher-Ohlin model
and show that trade exacerbates initial skill differences across countries by raising the return
to the abundant skill—the Stolper–Samuelson effect. Trade can induce divergent growth
paths if positive externalities to education are incorporated into such a model (Stokey 1991).

3

Wood and Ridao-Cano (1999) test the hypothesis that trade reduces educational acquisition
in unskilled labor abundant countries using a cross-country panel. However, it is difficult
to infer causality in cross-country regressions, particularly when changes in education levels
feed back into empirical measures of trade openness such as the ratio of exports to GDP.
The results are also consistent with the findings of studies in history and development.
Goldin and Katz (1997) show that industrialization slowed the growth of high school education in the early 20th century United States, while Federman and Levine (2005) find industrialization increased enrollments in Indonesia. Closest to this paper, Le Brun, Helper, and
Levine (2011) find industrialization had mixed effects in Mexico by looking at decadal changes
in school attendance and manufacturing employment in the census. This paper improves on
these studies by drawing on rich employment data at an annual frequency that both allows
me to design an instrumental variables strategy that controls for potential reverse causality
due to endogenous firm location choices and to explore heterogeneous effects by job type.4
Finally, a complementary literature looks at the educational impacts of the arrival of IT
service jobs in India. Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006), Shastry (2012), Jensen (2012) and
Oster and Steinberg (2013) all find positive enrollment impacts from the arrival of relatively
high-skilled service job opportunities in India.5 All these studies explore new opportunities
in a very specific sector in a small sample of locations. As these particular opportunities
demanded relatively high skills compared to the local skill distribution, they substantially
raised the return to schooling.6 By drawing on disaggregated employment data across many
industries and locations, this paper contributes to this literature by identifying the job characteristics that raise educational attainment and those that lower it.
Section 2 introduces the rich data set and the empirical methodology. Section 3 investigates the impact of export-manufacturing job arrivals on educational attainment. Section 4
validates the methodology through a variety of additional exercises. Section 5 explores why
export job creation leads to particularly pronounced reductions in schooling through the lens
of a simple model. Finally, Section 6 discusses policy implications and concludes.
2
2.1

Empirical Strategy
Data

I combine two sources of data to explore the relationship between educational attainment and job opportunities in export manufacturing. Cohort education data come from a
10.6 percent subsample of the 2000 Mexican census collected by INEGI and available from
4
This analysis focuses on youths at school-leaving ages at the time of the export job arrivals. For
evidence on positive schooling effects of trade liberalization for younger children via the household income
channel, see Edmonds and Pavcnik (2005) and Edmonds, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010).
5
Heath and Mobarak (2015) find similar outcomes for young Bangladeshi girls and the garment industry.
6
India’s experience may be regarded as the exception rather than the rule, as it is far more common for
a developing country to have a revealed comparative advantage in low-skill manufacturing.

4

IPUMSI (Minnesota Population Center 2007). The 10.1 million person records cover all
2,443 Mexican municipios (roughly equivalent to US counties). For reasons discussed in
Section 2.3, I exclude Mexico City in my primary analysis.
The employment data originate from the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS), and
cover the universe of formal private-sector establishments, including Maquiladoras. IMSS
provides health and pension coverage and all employees must enroll. I construct the main
employment variable, net new jobs, from annual changes in employment by industry within
each municipio.7 The data cover 2.2 million firms between 1985 and 2000, with employment
recorded on December 31st of each year. Table 1 reports sample means for both datasets.
For my primary analysis, I focus on the massive expansion of employment in exportoriented industries that dominated Mexico’s manufacturing growth over the period of study.
The IMSS data assign each firm to one of 276 industry categories, but do not indicate whether
a firm exports. Thus, I define a firm as an exporter if it belongs to a 3-digit ISIC industry
where more than 50 percent of output was exported for at least half the sample years.8 The
resulting export industries are: Apparel; Footwear; Leather and Leather Products; Wood
and Cork Products; Petrochemical Refinement; Metal Products; Electronic and Mechanical
Machinery; Electrical Machinery; Transport Equipment; Scientific and Optical Equipment.9
Between 1986 and 1999, employment growth in these export-intensive industries accounted for 65 percent of the growth in IMSS-insured manufacturing employment. Figure
1 displays the annual employment growth in both export and non-export manufacturing industries as well as in non-manufacturing industries. While not all of the jobs in the industries
that I classify as export manufacturing are in firms that export, the majority are. In 2000,
there were 2 million formal jobs in my export manufacturing grouping. 1 million of these
jobs were in Maquiladora firms according to INEGI Maquiladora statistics. (Maquiladora
job growth accounts for 60 percent of export-industry job growth as shown in Figure 1.) All
of these Maquiladoras are exporters since these export-assembly plants are legally required
to export almost all their production.10 A large number of the remaining 1 million export
industry jobs are also in exporting firms. For example, the 2000 Encuesta Industrial Annual
(EIA) surveys 5,801 large non-Maquiladora firms. Of the 370,340 EIA jobs in my export
industries, 51 percent are at firms that export more than 25 percent of their output.11 In
7
The aggregations from the firm to municipio level were carried out at ITAM, where the data were held
securely. Kaplan, Gonzalez, and Robertson (2007) contains further details on the IMSS data.
8
The 276 IMSS industry categories, the 119 used by the Mexican census and the 72 used by ISIC (Rev. 2)
were matched by hand. Export and output data come from the Trade, Production and Protection 1976-2004
database (Nicita and Olarreaga 2007). Results are robust to raising or lowering the 50 percent cutoff.
9
Appendix Figure C.1 provides further details regarding firm export orientation by industry grouping.
10
These firms were initially confined to border areas and employed mainly women, but by the year 2000
one quarter of firms were in non-border states and half the employees were male.
11
Only 20 percent of the 623,020 non-export industry jobs are at firms exporting more than 25 percent.

5

Section 3.1, I use these additional data sources to explore job creation at known exporters.
Figure 2 shows the education distribution of young workers—those aged 16-28, my sample
cohorts—in each industry at the time of the 2000 census. Formal sector employees in export
manufacturing industries are substantially less educated than formal sector workers in other
industries; 81 percent of export-industry employees have less than a high school education
compared to 75 percent of non-export manufacturing employees and 62 percent of employees
in other formal sectors. (Informal jobs are the least skilled with 85 percent of employees
having less than high school.) Export manufacturing employees are also younger with 18
percent of employees age 18 or under in the year 2000 as opposed to 13 percent for non-export
manufacturing and 12 percent for other formal sector jobs (see Appendix Figure C.2).
I combine the education and employment data using the 1985 municipio boundaries. In
order for each location to represent a single labor market, I create commuting zones by
combining municipios in the same Zona Metropolitan (as classified by INEGI) or where a
significant number of commuters moved between them in the 2000 census.12 The end result
is a panel of 14 cohorts across 1,808 geographic units which I refer to as commuting zones.13
2.2

Schooling Decisions and Export Employment Shocks at Age 16

Regressing school attainment on levels of export employment in the cross-section is likely
to provide biased estimates of the effect of export booms on schooling. If factories were
drawn to the educated north of Mexico due to its proximity to the US, there would be a
positive correlation between schooling and export employment. If factories were drawn to
poorer locations due to low wages or government incentives, there would be a negative one.
Rather than relying on this cross-sectional variation, my identification strategy exploits differences in exposure to export employment shocks at age 16 across cohorts within the same
commuting zone. In this section, I justify why shocks to job opportunities at age 16 are
likely to have particularly pronounced effects on educational choices.
My argument proceeds in two steps. First, I will argue that, conditioning on education,
the returns to entering the labor force will vary by year-of-entry and depend on the net
new job creation in that year. Second, I will argue that this heterogeneity in returns will
disproportionately affect the educational decisions of the cohort aged 16 in that year.
Forward-looking students trade off the foregone earnings from staying at school this
period (the opportunity cost of schooling) with the future wage benefits from more education
(the returns to schooling). There are a variety of models that generate the prediction that
12
I classify commuting municipios as those where more than 10 percent of the working population
reported commuting to a nearby municipio. In the few cases where a municipio sends workers to two
municipalities that do not send workers to each other, I create two synthetic municipios both containing
the sending municipio (but with the weights of individuals from the sending municipio halved).
13
Since the census was collected in February 2000, only firm data through 1999 is relevant. I lose one
additional year of data when calculating employment changes leaving 14 years of data.

6

this tradeoff depends, at least in part, on net new job creation that period (as opposed to
the total stock of jobs in the location). In Section 5.1, I present (and motivate) one such
model where youths are heterogeneous in their discount rates, and formal firms pay noncompensating wage differentials and ration jobs. A youth is more likely to drop out of school
in a year when many formal firms are hiring workers of their education level since they are
more likely to obtain a job in a firm that pays persistently higher wages. Conversely, they are
more likely to stay on at school if the new jobs are high skilled. In a pure matching model,
youths will search for job opportunities each period and stay in school if there is no match.
Hence, dropout is more likely in periods of employment growth. Another possibility is that
within-firm wage premia depend positively on labor demand conditions in the year of entry
due to optimal lifetime contracts for risk-averse credit-constrained workers (Beaudry and
DiNardo 1991). In each of these models, new job arrivals alter that year’s schooling decisions
by raising the opportunity cost of schooling as well as potentially changing the returns to
schooling. The empirical specification is designed to uncover the net effect of these two forces.
At what age would we expect these shocks to the opportunity costs of schooling to be
most pronounced? My main specification focuses on job arrivals in the year the youth turned
16. I dub this the “key exposure age” for two reasons. First, formal sector factory jobs first
become a direct alternative to school at this age as the legal minimum age for factory work
is 16.14 Younger cohorts cannot actually obtain these jobs and older cohorts would have
been exposed to positive shocks in previous years. Therefore, there is a discrete jump at age
16 in the value of a factory job opportunity. Second, the density of youths on the margin
between staying at school and dropping out is largest around this age. Compulsory schooling
in Mexico ends with Secundaria (grade 9). Most children complete this grade at age 15 or
16. Although the compulsory schooling law only dates from 1992 and enforcement is rare,
many youths drop out after this stage and a similar number enroll in high school but never
complete 10th grade. Accordingly, age 16 is the most common age to leave school in Mexico
and so shocks to the opportunity cost of schooling at this age will induce a particularly large
number of youths to alter their education decisions.
Figures 2 and 3 provide empirical support for the claim that 16 is the key exposure age.
Figure 2 shows that the modal level of completed schooling among young workers in the 2000
census is 9th grade (29 percent of workers compared to 21 and 13 percent for grades 6 and 12
respectively). Figure 3 draws on school attendance data from the 1990 census that lies in the
middle of my sample period. The solid line shows that the largest change in the proportion
of the cohort attending school occurs between ages 15 and 16 (and the dash-dot line shows
14
The minimum working age is 14. However, children under 16 require parental consent, medical
documentation, cannot work overtime or late hours and are forbidden from certain hazardous industries.
These rules are enforced in formal manufacturing and the minimum working age is typically taken as 16.

7

the converse for the proportion of the cohort that is working). The primacy of age 16 is more
pronounced looking at the dashed line that plots the change in the proportion of students in
each cohort maintaining their correct grade for age.15 There is a dramatic drop at age 16,
with substantially fewer 16 years olds having completed 10th grade than 15 year olds having
completed 9th grade. This drop dwarfs the changes at any other age. The dash-dot plot
shows that grade completion rates conditional on attendance also plummet at age 16.16
In conclusion, I expect new export opportunities to have a particularly pronounced effect
on the educational decisions of cohorts aged 16 at the time compared to younger or older cohorts. Section 4.1 confirms this conjecture by repeating my analysis for other exposure ages.
2.3

Empirical Specification

In order to determine the impact of new export job opportunities on cohort schooling, I
regress cohort schooling on local expansions in export manufacturing employment:
Szc = βlzc + δz + δz c + δrc + εzc .

(1)

Szc is the average years of schooling obtained by February 2000 for the cohort born in year
c in commuting-zone z,17 and lzc is a measure of export employment shocks at age 16 that I
describe below. I also include commuting-zone fixed effects, δz , commuting-zone-specific time
trends, δz c, and state-time dummies, δrc , where r indexes the state. (Time and cohort trends
are equivalent since the schooling of each cohort is observed only once in the year 2000.)
My export employment shock measure is the year-on-year employment growth in formal manufacturing firms in export-oriented industries located in commuting zone z in the
year the cohort turned age 16. Since a new factory hiring 100 workers will have a much
more muted effect on local labor market conditions in a large city compared to a small rural
municipio, I divide this employment change by the working age population:18
lzc =

export employmentz,c+16 − export employmentz,c+15
.
working-age populationz,1990

(2)

As the working-age population may be endogenous to new factory openings, I use the
commuting-zone population aged 15-49 from the 1990 census close to the beginning of the
sample period. In order to get a sense of magnitudes, lzc ranges between -0.17 and 0.19.
A large expansion (the 90th percentile among the 7800 expansions or contractions) created
15
Since schooling starts at age six, the correct grade is simply their age minus six years. Some youths
would have only obtained grade x-7 if they progressed sequentially since age is recorded in February.
However, this measurement error can not explain the discrete jump at age 16.
16
I estimate grade completion rates by dividing the proportion of youths age x who have completed
grade x-6 by the proportion of youths age x-1 who are both at school and have completed grade x-7.
17
I do not use data from 1990 census in calculating Szc as these data only cover 4 cohorts. Additionally,
the sampling methodology for selecting who received the long-form surveys changed between 1990 and 2000.
18
If the job shocks were not scaled by population in this manner, we would expect heterogeneous
treatment effects across locations that would not be captured by the additive commuting-zone fixed effects.

8

0.008 jobs per working age person or 0.16 jobs per member of the cohort aged 16 that year.
Table 1 reports a range of additional summary statistics for these shocks.
The state-time dummies control in a flexible manner for the fact that education was trending upwards, but at different rates across Mexico.19 The commuting-zone-specific fixed effects
and time trends control for the fact that educational outcomes vary across locations within
a state, and low-education commuting zones may be catching up with high-education ones.
I restrict the sample to non-migrants, defined as someone who reports being born in the
same state they are currently living in and who also lived in their current commuting zone
in 1995. Including in-migrants confounds the impact of local job opportunities on education
since the census does not ask where they lived when they were at school. Therefore, my
estimates are only representative of the non-migrants who comprise 80 percent of the full
census sample. In Section 4.5.2, I provide evidence that potential selection biases related to
migration cannot explain my finding that export job arrivals reduced schooling.
I exclude Valle de México (the commuting zone that includes Mexico City) since it constitutes two entire states so is swept out by the state-time dummies.20 I weight each cohortcommuting-zone observation by the number of individuals the cell represents. Hence, my
results are representative of the Mexican non-migrant population excluding Valle de México.
My empirical strategy compares the average schooling of a cohort who was heavily exposed to local factory openings in export-oriented industries at their key exposure age to
older and younger cohorts in the same commuting zone who did not receive such a shock to
their employment opportunities at this age. I flexibly control for time trends using cohorts
of the same age living in nearby commuting zones where factories did not open at the key
exposure age. I now turn to discussing the potential threats to identification and present a
novel instrumentation strategy.
2.4

Threats to Identification and Instrumentation Strategy

I address three econometric concerns: omitted variables, reverse causality and measurement error. Omitted variables will bias coefficients if a third factor affects both a commuting
zone’s education level and its attractiveness as a location for a firm. The commuting-zone
fixed effects sweep out time-invariant features of the commuting zone. The state-time dummies control for omitted variables that change over time within the 32 states of Mexico.
Finally, commuting-zone-level time trends control for omitted variables that change over
time within a commuting zone in an approximately linear fashion.
There are two obvious omitted variables that may affect schooling and correlate with
detrended local employment changes. First, a factory may agree to make complementary
19
The state-time dummies also remove trends that arise because younger cohorts have had less time to
complete their education, and the degree of measurement error for younger cohorts may vary by state.
20
As a robustness check, I replace state-time dummies with region-time dummies and include Mexico City.

9

investments when it opens, for example building a school. Unfortunately, there are no annual
data at the municipio level from which to construct controls. Therefore, I rely on the fact
that such investments affect all cohorts, with younger cohorts exposed for more years and
likely to see larger effects (the opposite to what I find). Additionally, Helper, Levine, and
Woodruff (2006) report that school building decisions in Mexico were made nationally prior
to 1992 and at the state level afterward, with little municipio say in either period. Second,
there may be local demand shocks that both affect schooling decisions and alter the demand
for local manufacturing output. My focus on export industries mitigates this concern as
demand comes from foreign rather than local consumers.21
The second econometric concern is reverse causality. The local education distribution
determines the relative wages of different skill groups, and relative wages affect firm employment and location decisions.22 If new factories lower education, and low schooling levels
also attract factories, β̂ will be biased in an ambiguous direction. In my panel setting, bias
occurs if deviations in de-trended cohort schooling (i.e. after accounting for commuting-zone
fixed effects and linear trends, and state-time fixed effects) affect past, present or future firm
employment decisions. Therefore, while a firm may wish to locate in a low-skill location, or
in a location where skills are declining over time, one or several cohorts with an unusually
strong aversion to schooling must not influence a firm’s decision to open in a location.
To deal with reverse causality, I require an instrument for lzc , the net new export jobs per
worker defined in equation 2 above. My instrument is the net new export jobs per worker
generated by large single-firm expansions/openings and contractions/closings—positive or
negative changes of 50 or more employees in a single year at a single firm. As these large single
firm changes comprise 79 percent of the total change in employment over the period, the
instrument correlates strongly with lzc . For the instrument to be exogenous to the error term
in equation 1, firms can only respond to deviations in cohort schooling—those not accounted
for by the commuting-zone fixed effects and linear trends, and the state-time fixed effects—
through the small expansions and contractions that are excluded from my instrument.
I argue that this exclusion restriction is plausibly satisfied. The large (and hence costly)
expansions and contractions in the export industries I focus on are typically driven by external demand shocks interacted with stable commuting-zone characteristics (distance to
US border, existing input suppliers etc.),23 not by changes in local labor supply. Even in
21
In Appendix D, I further focus only on industries where production is geographically agglomerated
and hence job creation is driven by national rather than local demand factors.
22
Bernard, Robertson, and Schott (2004) show that factor prices are not equalized across Mexico,
resulting in an inverse relationship between relative wages and relative skill levels. In the extreme, if there is
no informal sector, unemployment or migration, one additional dropout results in one new formal employee.
23
Very large firms may expand or contract by more than 50 people even absent an external demand shock.
For robustness, I restrict attention to expansions and contractions that are unusually large for a given firm.

10

cases where changes in labor supply do drive firm location decisions, deviations in the school
attainment of 16 year olds will play a negligable role for two reasons. First, a cohort of 16
year olds is a very small component of the local skill distribution in Mexico—where a large
number of both informal and migrant workers compete for formal sector jobs24 —and so total
labor supply will be little affected by small deviations in local dropout rates. Second, in order to base location decisions on these deviations, entrepreneurs must obtain cohort-varying
information about education levels in a commuting zone, which is not readily available.
For the reasons above, large single-firm expansions and contractions are unlikely to be influenced by deviations in the schooling of the cohort aged 16 at the time. However, multiple
years of serially-correlated schooling shocks, for example due to a school closure, could both
have non-negligible effects on total labor supply and be observable to entrepreneurs. Three
factors limit the size of the bias in this case. First, any correlation between past schooling
deviations (the deviations that are plausibly observable to the entrepreneur) and current
location decisions will be divided by the number of cohorts in my panel (fourteen). Second,
older cohorts have progressively smaller impacts on the pool of local labor a firm can hire as
many will no longer be seeking employment. Third, any persistent trends in schooling will
be absorbed by the commuting-zone linear time trend.
In Section 4.3, I provide explicit evidence in support of the instrumental variable strategy. I show that large expansions and contractions in the late 1980’s correlate with education
decisions recorded in 1990, but large expansions and contractions in the early 1990’s do not.
An additional specification addresses reverse causation head on. I explicitly control for the
schooling levels of previous cohorts by including four lags of Szc . These lags soak up the component of the error term correlated with lzc through the serial correlation in schooling.25,26
The third econometric concern is measurement error in lzc . IMSS registration defines
firm formality. However, some firms existed informally prior to registering with IMSS, thus
formalization appears as new job creation. Such measurement error attenuates β̂ and could
also bias my results if an omitted variable both encouraged firms to register and affected
education choices. The IV strategy above mitigates this concern since large firm expansions
and contractions occur in larger firms that would find it difficult to evade IMSS registration.
Finally, I cluster all standard errors at the commuting-zone level to prevent misleading
inference due to serial correlation in the error term across years within a commuting zone
24

Only one third of Mexican working-age adults are in formal private sector employment.
To be more precise, imagine the true data generating process is Szc = βlzc +uzc , where shocks to average
cohort schooling may be positively serially correlated: uzc = %uzc−1 +vzc with 0 < % < 1. Firms locate where
there is a high proportion of dropouts in the previous cohort of 16 year olds: lzc = πSzc−1 + zc , π < 0. If I
run the regression Szc = βlzc + εzc , β̂ will be negatively biased. Running Szc = βlzc + γSzc−1 + εzc results in
unbiased estimates of β. If factory openings are also serially correlated, β̂ will be attenuated towards zero.
26
As lagged dependent variables are necessarily correlated with the error term in a panel regression, I
exclude the commuting-zone fixed effects and trend.
25

11

(Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004). The large number of groups (1808 commuting
zones) mitigates concerns regarding spurious correlation.
3

Basic Results

Table 2 presents the results from running the regression specification in equation 1. Column 1 contains the ordinary least squares (OLS) results. Column 2 contains the instrumental
variable (IV) results, in which I instrument net new export jobs per worker with net new
export jobs per worker attributable to changes of 50 or more employees in a single firm in a
single year. As expected, the first stage of the IV is highly significant. Column 3 contains the
reduced form (RF) results from regressing cohort schooling directly on the instrument. Column 4 repeats the RF specification but also includes a control for general employment trends
at the commuting-zone level (the net new jobs per worker at age 16 created through large
expansions and contractions in non-export industries). Column 5 repeats the RF specification but includes four lags of cohort schooling instead of the fixed effects. (Appendix Figure
C.3 presents a visual plot of the RF strategy for the 30 commuting zones that experienced
the largest change in export employment over the sample period.)
In all five specifications, the arrival of new export-manufacturing jobs at age 16 significantly reduces cohort schooling (β̂ < 0) with coefficients between -3.155 and -3.380. The
effect size for formal non-export job arrivals is significantly different and one third as large
(a finding I return to in Section 5). The differences between the OLS and IV results are
small, suggesting that any bias due to reverse causation or measurement error is not severe.
The interpretation of the coefficients from the IV and RF specifications are subtly different. The RF coefficient estimates the effect of the subset of new export jobs that were
created through large openings/expansions and closings/contractions. The IV coefficient
scales the RF coefficient by the first stage in order to provide an estimate of the impact of
all export job arrivals. However, a single large factory opening or expansion will be highly
salient, and hence may have different educational impacts compared to an equivalent number
of small expansions. In this scenario, where treatment effects are heterogeneous, there are
well known difficulties in interpreting the IV coefficient. In contrast, the RF coefficient is
straightforward to interpret, unbiased if the instrument is exogenous, and potentially the coefficient of interest for policymakers hoping to encourage new factory openings or substantial
expansions. Accordingly, for the remainder of the paper I report only the RF coefficients.
The magnitude of the coefficient in Table 2 implies substantial educational impacts. As a
concrete example, the 90th percentile of the distribution of large firm expansions corresponds
to 0.017 net new export jobs per worker. Using the reduced form coefficient, such a shock
results in the exposed cohort obtaining 0.06 years less school on average. Alternatively, I
would find the effect size I do if for every twenty-five new export jobs that arrived, one
12

student in the cohort dropped out at grade 9 rather than continuing on to grade 12.27
As with any difference-in-difference regression, my results only imply that the education
of cohorts heavily exposed to new factory openings at age 16 fell relative to other cohorts
in the commuting zone who were less exposed at these ages. It is possible that, due to a
new factory opening, education actually rose across every cohort in the commuting zone but
relatively less for the cohorts aged 16. This interpretation would imply that the commuting zones which experienced the largest growth in export employment also saw the largest
increases in the school attendance of 16 years olds between the 1990 and 2000 censuses. To
tease apart these two interpretations, I run the following regression:
Attend16z,2000 − Attend16z,1990 = γ

1999
X

lzt + εz ,

(3)

t=1990

where Attend16z,t is the proportion of the commuting zone z cohort aged 16 at the time of
P
the year t census who are currently attending school. The independent variable, 1999
t=1990 lzt ,
is the total change in the number of export jobs per worker between January 1st 1990 and
December 31st 1999. Once more, I present OLS results as well as IV and RF regressions
using the large expansions/contractions instrument. I also report results that include the
initial level of school attendance as an independent variable to control for low education
commuting zones catching up (either the initial value for the cohort aged 16 or the initial
value for the cohort one year older for which there are less obvious endogeneity concerns).
Table 3 presents the results of the regression in equation 3. The estimate of the coefficient
on the change in export employment, γ̂, is significantly negative in all specifications. School
attendance rose least in the commuting zones that saw the most export job growth over the
decade. Therefore, I conclude that export expansions in a locality led not just to relative
but also absolute declines in schooling for the cohorts aged 16 at the time.28
3.1

Alternative Methodologies for Classifying Exporting Firms

The nature of the IMSS data means that I am not able to identify the actual export status
of each employer. In this section, I explore a range of alternative codings for export status.
I first explore two alternate classifications of the IMSS industry codes. My main spec27

If one out of twenty-five new jobs induced a member of the cohort of non-migrants aged 16 to forgo 3
years of education, cohort schooling would fall by 3/25=0.12 years with the arrival of as many new jobs as
members of the cohort. If one job arrived for every person of working-age, cohort schooling would fall by
approximately 25 times as much, 0.12×25=3, since 16 year old non-migrants comprise 3.87 percent of the
Mexican population aged 15-49 in the 2000 census. This is the approximate effect size I find—i.e. a 3 year
reduction in cohort schooling from 1 new export job per worker, lzc = 1. Of course, the cohort can obtain
a higher or lower proportion of the new jobs if some students would have dropped out anyway or dropout
and don’t find a job. These proportions seem reasonable: in the 2000 census, 11.5 percent of formal export
manufacturing workers are aged 18 or younger, 74 percent of whom were non-migrants.
28
It seems implausible that the new export jobs led to educational attainment of 16 year olds rising
across Mexico but less in the particular locations where the jobs were actually arriving.

13

ification classifies the 58 3-digit manufacturing industries as “export” if more than half of
output was exported for at least half the sample years. Column 1 of Table 4 reruns the basic
specification, equation 1, but codes an industry as export if real exports per worker during
the sample period were in the top quartile of all manufacturing industries. Column 2 allows
industries to change status over time by coding export industries as those exporting more
than half their output that year. Results are similar under both alternative classifications.
It is possible to approximately identify the IMSS firms that are Maquiladoras by matching the firm level employment data to INEGI statistics on annual Maquiladora employment
by industry, state-industry and municipio.29 Since Maquiladoras are legally required to export almost all their output, these firms are exporters and accounted for 985,232 net new
jobs between 1986 and 1999 (and 816,708 of 1,370,950 net new jobs in industries I classify as
export). Column 3 of Table 4 reruns the basic specification but focuses only on job growth
at these “known” exporters. Column 4 uses an alternative concordance provided by IMSS
where Maquiladoras are identified by matching firm-level IMSS data with records from the
Maquiladora census.30 In both cases I find significant, if slightly smaller, declines in schooling.
Finally, I draw on the Encuesta Industrial Anual (EIA) and Encuesta Industrial Mensual (EIM). These surveys cover 3,200 to 6,800 large non-Maquiladora firms depending on
the year (out of 87,000 to 142,000 non-Maquiladora manufacturing firms in IMSS). I code
a firm as an exporter if more than 25 percent of output is exported. Unfortunately, the
INEGI sampling methodology is not designed to capture new firm openings since the firm
list was refreshed only once over the sample period and there are no clear criteria for inclusion. Additionally, data prior to 1993 do not contain municipio identifiers. Therefore, I
follow the methodology of Verhoogen (2008) exactly and create a consistent EIA panel of
1,114 firms that are present in every period and calculate the annual change in employment
among exporters in each commuting zone (creating 59,753 net new jobs between 1986 and
1999). The resulting variable contains intensive margin changes for the set of (not necessarily
representative) firms that were both large and in business throughout the sample.31
In contrast to Maquiladoras, column 5 of Table 4 shows an insignificant positive schooling
impact of job growth in the EIA panel. Columns 6 and 7 combine both Maquiladora and EIA
firms and show that the coefficients differ significantly (with p-values of 5.2 and 6.2 percent
respectively). These results are not particularly surprising. The skill level of the jobs is likely
29
These data come from the INEGI website. I classify firms as Maquiladoras when the number of
employees in a given cell of the INEGI statistics (e.g. year-state-industry) is equal or greater than the
employees in that cell in the IMSS data. As firms appear in several overlapping aggregates, I can iterate
this process until convergence. I am able to classify all the potential Maquiladoras in 4 iterations.
30
About 80 percent of total Maquiladora employment can be matched using this concordance.
31
These data are confidential and only year-municipio-industry level aggregates were available precluding
the use of my RF specification here. As a firm may become an exporter during the sample period, some
export job creation comes from non-export jobs becoming export jobs.

14

to be a major determinant of schooling impacts. Maquiladoras are export assembly operations known for demanding low levels of skill. In contrast, Verhoogen (2008) shows that, for
this panel of large non-Maquiladoras, demand for skill is higher among exporters than non exporters. Column 8 provides support for this explanation by breaking job growth in EIA firms
into blue and white collar jobs. As expected, the positive effect is driven by more-skilled white
collar job growth, with a negative coefficient on less-skilled blue collar job growth. Section 5
explores heterogeneity by skill level in more detail using skill measures from the 1990 census.
3.2

Alternative Samples and Specifications

In Appendix A, I demonstrate the robustness of my main finding to many additional
specifications: removing the various time fixed effects and trends, considering alternative
samples (excluding 781 small commuting zones with no formal sector, excluding metropolitan areas or big cities, including Mexico City, not weighting by cohort size, breaking results
up by region, controlling for the roll out of Progresa) and exploring alternate specifications
(using different schooling measures, extending the 50 employee threshold of my instrument,
restricting attention to unusually large expansions/contractions at the firm level, separately
exploring expansions and contractions, and allowing for state-level spillovers). Summarizing,
there is a negative impact of new export job arrivals on the educational attainment of cohorts
aged 16 at the time that is robust to alternative samples and specifications.
4

Validating the Methodology

In the previous sections, I argued that new export opportunities alter the returns to and
opportunity cost of schooling; and that I identified the net effect on school attainment by
comparing heavily exposed cohorts to less exposed cohorts within and across commuting
zones. In this section, I present a range of additional evidence in support of this claim.
4.1

The Age 16 Exposure Window and Effects at Other Ages

My identification strategy is built on the assumption that youths are disproportionately
affected by new employment opportunities at age 16. In Section 2.2, I justified this assumption by appealing to the fact that this age is both the legal factory employment age and the
time when students are deciding whether to attend high school or not.
This assumption can be tested. To do so, I repeat my basic specification, equation 1,
but replace net new export jobs per worker at age 16 with job shocks at other ages. I run
17 regressions, one for each age of exposure between 7 and 23. As previously, my job shocks
include only large expansions and contractions. Figure 4 plots these 17 coefficients and the
associated 95 percent confidence intervals. Reassuringly, the largest negative impacts on
cohort schooling occur from export employment shocks at age 16. There are also significant
negative effects from export employment shocks at three other ages around which students
transition between school stages (ages 13, 15 and 18) but these are substantially smaller in
15

magnitude. Shocks at the youngest ages of 7-11 and the older ages of 20-21 raise cohort
schooling, although only the first of these is significant at the 5 percent level.
As export employment shocks are likely to be serially correlated, running separate regressions for each age of exposure may be misleading. Instead, I can include multiple ages
of exposure in same regression at the cost of further shrinking the sample size (for each
additional age of exposure, I lose one year of my short 14 year panel). Simultaneously including five ages of exposure centered around age 16, I still find that exposure at age 16
leads to the largest reduction in school attainment (the full results are reported in Appendix
Table C.1).32 In summary, the more pronounced effects at age 16 are consistent with the
maintained assumption that age 16 is the key exposure age.
4.2

Are Students Really Dropping Out of School at Age 16?

Up to this point, my dependent variable has been school attainment—as measured by
the highest completed grade at the time of the 2000 census. In the absence of true panel
data that tracks school attendance in every year, completed schooling is a sensible metric
since not all students are at the same grade at age 16, the age factory employment is first
legal. In this section, I explore an alternative metric, the grade-9 dropout rate.
As emphasized in Section 2.2, if new job arrivals at age 16 raised the opportunity cost
of schooling, we would expect the bulk of the reduction in school attainment to come from
students dropping out during the transition between secondary and high school (grades 9
and 10). Hence, I now turn to analyzing grade-9 drop out rates directly. I can also perform
a placebo-like test. If the opportunity cost of school channel is at play, dropout rates for
youths transitioning between secondary and high school should respond most to shocks at
age 16 compared to other ages. In contrast, whether students ever reach this stage (i.e. complete secondary school) should respond most to shocks at younger ages when this preceding
schooling decision is typically made.
I calculate grade-9 dropout rates for each cohort and commuting zone by dividing the
number of students obtaining exactly 9 years of school by the number of students obtaining 9
or more years of school.33 With this measure in hand, I reproduce the multiple-exposure-age
regressions presented in Section 4.1 but replace cohort average schooling with the grade-9
dropout rate. Figure 5 plots the coefficients for each age of exposure between 7 and 23. As
hypothesized, the largest grade-9 dropout rates occur for export employment shocks at age
16. The magnitude of the coefficient on exposure at age 16 is a sizable 0.374 (significant at
32
The magnitude of the coefficient on shocks at age 16, -4.09, is even larger than in the baseline specification. The second largest coefficient is on shocks at 18, -1.60, and borderline significant at the 10 percent level.
33
I restrict attention to cohorts aged 16 and above at the time of the 2000 census and include in the
denominator 16 year olds who are both currently attending school and have completed grade 9. Of course,
these are not true dropout rates since a youth who repeats a grade may appear to have dropped out while
a student who did dropout but later returned to school would not appear as a dropout.

16

the 5 percent level). This coefficient implies that a shock at the 90th percentile of large firm
expansions would increase grade-9 dropout rates by 0.64 percentage points.
I perform a similar exercise but replacing the proportion of students dropping out between
secondary and high school with the proportion of each cohort that have not graduated secondary school by the time of the 2000 census (i.e. they dropped out pre grade 9). In contrast
to the results with the grade-9 dropout rate, Figure 5 shows that the largest increases in this
pre-grade-9 dropout rate occurs with export employment shocks at ages 11 to 13, consistent
with the fact that these are the ages at which the decision to enter secondary school is made.
As before, I can combine multiple ages of exposure in the same regression. Appendix
Table C.1 reports these regressions of both grade-9 and pre-grade-9 dropout rates on the five
ages of exposure centered around age 16 and age 13. Complementing Figure 5, the largest
coefficients across the four regressions are those for shocks at age 16 on grade-9 dropout
rates and shocks at age 13 on pre-grade-9 dropout rates.
4.3

Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census

I now turn to another data source that has been used sparingly up to this point: the census conducted in March 1990. As this census falls in the middle of my sample period, I can
use contemporaneous school attendance and employment measures to: (1) provide further
evidence that age 16 is the key exposure age, (2) show that youths did drop out to work in
export manufacturing, and (3) provide support for my identification assumption that large
employment shocks are not driven by educational decisions made in prior years.
To provide further support for my key exposure age, I run a linear probability model and
regress a dummy for individual i’s school attendance at the time of the March 1990 census,
Aizc , on export employment shocks in three preceding and three subsequent years. In order
to trace the impact on different age groups, I include all cohorts c aged between 12 and 19
at the time of the census alongside cohort fixed effects δc , and allow the coefficients βct on
the net new export jobs per worker in year t to differ for each cohort:
Aizc =

1992
X

βct lzt + δc + εizc .

(4)

t=1987

This specification compares the school attendance of youths in commuting zone z shocked
in 1989, the year preceding the March census, to youths of the same age in similar commuting zones that did not receive shocks that year. (And provides estimates based on similar
comparisons for shocks in other years and at other ages.)
As in my panel specification, I restrict attention to large expansions and contractions that
are plausibly exogenous. However, here I do not include commuting-zone fixed effects. Such
fixed effects sweep out the shocks for one age group and cannot capture the highly non-linear

17

differences in school attendance at different ages between high and low schooling locations.34
However, since locations do differ in their schooling dynamics, I restrict attention to a comparable set of locations; the 178 commuting zones that experienced an expansion in export manufacturing employment in at least one year between 1987 and 1992. Appendix C reports qualitatively similar results using all commuting zones and commuting-zone fixed effects (with
each set of coefficients relative to the omitted category, shocks at age 16), as well as results for
a similar exercise that also incorporates the 2000 census and shocks between 1997 and 2000.
The leftmost panel of Figure 6 plots the 48 coefficients (6 annual shocks plotted separately for each of the 8 age cohorts) from estimating equation 4. Export employment shocks
in 1989 (the year immediately preceding the survey) significantly reduce school attendance
at age 16 with a β̂16,1989 of -1.90 and a standard error of 0.88. (The raw coefficients, both
here and in the remainder of this section, are relegated to Appendix C.) Consistent with 16
being my key exposure age, the negative effect on school attendance is most pronounced for
1989 employment shocks on the cohort aged 16 in comparison both to shocks in other years
for this same cohort or to shocks in any year for older and younger cohorts.
The second purpose of this section is to show is that these 16 year olds really are dropping out of school to take up export jobs. I repeat the specification above but now replace
the school attendance dummy with a dummy for whether the youth is working full time; or
alternatively, working full time in an export manufacturing industry. The coefficients from
these regressions are plotted in the second and third panels of Figure 6. For the cohort aged
16, both the proportion of the cohort working and the proportion working in exports respond most to export employment shocks in 1989. Thus, the previously-documented decline
in school attendance is mirrored by a rise in export manufacturing employment. Reassuringly, both the attendance and employment coefficients are of similar magnitudes (-2 and
+2 respectively). The coefficient on export employment is slightly lower at 1.4, suggesting
that some of those dropping out due to export shocks either end up in other sectors or are
misclassified by census enumerators.
I can further explore these sectoral employment choices by replacing school attendance in
equation 4 with dummies for employment in the other industries reported in the 1990 census
(services, primary industries, non-export manufacturing, insufficiently specified manufacturing, and unclassified). In contrast to the large response of export manufacturing employment
noted above, employment propensities in these other industries do not appear to respond to
export employment shocks (see Appendix Figure C.6). For example, for 1989 shocks on the
cohort aged 16, the magnitude of the change in employment in export manufacturing is more
than 4 times greater than the change in the sector with the second largest effects (insuffi34
To see this non-linearity note that attendance gaps between better and worse locations only appear
between ages 14 and 21 (before which almost everyone is in school and after which almost no one is).

18

ciently specified manufacturing—the sector where misclassified export jobs would show up).
Although employment impacts seem concentrated in export manufacturing, I cannot rule
out that some of these new jobs may be at informal export manufacturing firms.35 For example, if a new factory generates demand for informal subcontracting, my estimated schooling
impacts combine the effects of both these types of job creation.
The final purpose of this section is to provide support for the IV strategy outlined in Section 2.4. I argued that large firm expansions and contractions (which I use to calculate my
employment shocks) are plausibly exogenous to education decisions made in prior periods—
conditional on commuting-zone-specific fixed effects and trends, and state-time fixed effects.
To test this claim, I explore whether employment expansions and contractions in the years
immediately following 1989 are related to educational choices made by youths in the March
1990 census. As can be seen from any of the panels in Figure 6 (or C.6), there is no evidence
that the shocks after the census of March 1990 are related to either school attendance or employment outcomes. For all age groups and all three dependent variables, the coefficients are
bunched around zero for shocks in the years following 1989. More formally, focusing on the
school attendance regression in equation 4 above and the coefficients for cohorts aged 16, I
cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients on export shocks in the three years following the census are equal to zero (an F-statistic of 0.0083 distributed F(3,163)). In contrast,
shocks in prior years do alter school attendance propensities: I can reject the null that the
coefficients on shocks in preceding years are zero at the 1 percent level (the F-statistic is 4.05).
4.4

Gender Differences

The main analysis groups males and females together. In this section, I explore heterogeneity across genders. As a first pass, columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 rerun my main specification
by gender. I replace cohort average schooling in equation 1 with either Szcm , the average
schooling of males in the cohort, or Szcf , the average schooling of females in the cohort.
As I run the two regressions separately, I allow for gender-specific trends. Although both
male and female schooling significantly decline with new export job arrivals, male schooling
declines more than female with coefficient estimates of -4.4 and -2.5 respectively.
The independent variable, net new export jobs per worker at age 16, is the same in both
specifications. Thus, these gender differences can come about either because boys and girls
respond differently to the same job opportunities, or because some job opportunities are
gender-specific. In the latter case, new export jobs that are particularity suited to women
will have a more pronounced effect on female schooling than male and vice versa. Verifying
this prediction serves as a simple test of my assumed mechanism, that schooling responds
to new export opportunities through changes in the opportunity cost and returns to school.
35

Unfortunately, the 1990 census doesn’t distinguish between formal and informal jobs.

19

In order to carry out this test, I utilize the fact that the IMSS employment data provide
firm-level employment by gender. These data cannot be used directly, since the sex ratio in
a factory may be endogenous to boys’ and girls’ schooling choices. Accordingly, I use the sex
ratio among new jobs created during the first 5 years of my sample (1985 to 1989) to create a
commuting-zone and 3-digit-industry specific sex ratio and assume subsequent employment
changes in that location-industry pair maintained this ratio.36 I then multiply these sex ratios
by the total employment shocks for that location-industry pair to provide annual measures
of gendered local labor demand that are plausibly exogenous to contemporaneous education
decisions. I also present a second variant that multiplies the total employment shocks by the
sex ratio at plants in that location-industry pair in 1985, the first year of my IMSS data.37
ˆ and lzcf
ˆ in hand, I run:
With these two sets of sex-specific export employment shocks lzcm
ˆ + βf lzcf
ˆ + δz + δz c + δrc + εzc
Szcf = βm lzcm

(5)

for female schooling, or similarly for male schooling by replacing Szcf with Szcm . I hypothesize
that βf < βm if female schooling is the dependent variable and βm < βf if male schooling is.
Prior to presenting the results of this test, I confirm that these predicted sex-specific
shocks are correlated with the realized sex-specific employment shocks lzcm and lzcf . I replace the schooling dependent variable with either lzcm or lzcf in the specification above.
These results are presented in Columns 3-6 of Table 5. Reassuringly, for both variants of
shock—using either ∆1985-1989 sex ratios or 1985 sex ratios—I find that male jobs are
stronger predictors of male job creation than female ones and vice versa for female job
creation. Columns 7-10 of Table 5 present the test itself. As hypothesized, and for both
variants, male schooling declines significantly with male export employment shocks but there
is a substantially smaller and insignificant decline in response to female shocks.38 Similarly,
female school attainment declines more with female export employment shocks than with
male shocks (although the coefficient on female shocks in female columns is smaller than for
male shocks in male columns, and it is not significantly different from zero). Youths respond
more to employment shocks specific to their gender, and the response is larger for males.
4.5

Alternative Mechanisms

The previous sections provide a range of evidence that new export opportunities lower
school attainment by raising the opportunity costs of schooling and hence inducing youths
on the margin to drop out of school. Here I directly dismiss three alternative mechanisms.
36
For commuting zones where there is no job creation in that industry between 1985 and 1989, I use the
sex ratio for local job creation at the 2-digit industry level, then at the 1-digit level, then at the 3-digit state
level, and finally the 3-digit national level. I obtain similar results using different orderings of this algorithm.
37
The first measure is preferred since few locations had factories in 1985 and the sex ratio of jobs created
in the export booms of the 1980s and 1990s differed substantially from the prior sex ratio.
38
I find marginally insignificant p-values of 0.15 and 0.16 (columns 7 and 9) for the test of the βm = βf null.

20

4.5.1

Parental Work Channels

New export jobs may also attract adult family members, not just youths. As education is
a normal good, new jobs should increase household income and hence raise schooling. To explain the reduction in schooling I find, adults who previously looked after the young children
in the household would have to enter the workforce and make a youth stay home instead.
The cross-sectional methodology introduced in Section 4.3 allows me to dismiss this
parental employment explanation. I rerun the specification in equation 4 on the cohort aged
16, but allow the coefficients on export employment shocks to differ depending on whether
one of the youth’s parents is employed in export manufacturing at the time of the census.39
If my results were driven by parental work channels, I would expect the reduction in school
attendance due to shocks in 1989 to be most pronounced in households where a parent is
working in export manufacturing. In fact, the opposite is true, with reductions in attendance
driven by youths in households where parents are not employed in export manufacturing.
I reach a similar conclusion looking at households where any household member (e.g. a
sibling) works in exporting. These results are shown in Appendix Figure C.7 where I also
show that export employment shocks do not change the probability that parents work but
do increase the probability they work in export manufacturing.
4.5.2

Selective Migration

As discussed in Section 2.3, the census does not record where migrants were living at
age 16. As I cannot match migrants to local job opportunities at their key exposure age, I
excluded them from my sample and my results only pertain to the non-migrant population.40
One fifth of export manufacturing workers are internal migrants. My results understate
the true educational decline if potential future migrants reduce their schooling in response to
new opportunities at exporters in other commuting zones. I cannot evaluate this claim using
my identification strategy. However, suggestive of this hypothesis, McKenzie and Rapoport
(2006) find that the option to migrate to the US lowers educational attainment in Mexico.
Migration could bias my results if local labor market conditions alter the composition
of out-migrants. For example, a new factory opening may deter a low-skill worker from
migrating, but have no impact on the migration decision of a high-skill worker. The average
education of non-migrants would then fall due to reduced out-migration of low-skill workers. I
address this concern in Appendix B. First, I show that new export-manufacturing jobs do not
increase the size of the sample cohort or the sample cohort’s share of the working population.
39
Note that I am not able to append family backgrounds in the main analysis since older cohorts in my
sample have left their parental homes by the time of the 2000 census.
40
Rural youths will be underrepresented in this sample if they are more likely than urban youths to migrate in search of jobs. As urban areas contain three quarters of Mexico’s population and most of its formal
sector jobs, this underrepresentation will only have a small impact on my population-weighted estimates.

21

Second, I use data from the 2000 census on the municipio of residence in 1995 to show that
new export jobs arrivals deter relatively more educated youths, rather than less educated
youths, from migrating internally. This parallels Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) who find
that emigrants to the United States are more skilled than non-emigrants.41 Therefore, the
negative schooling impacts I find are potentially even larger in magnitude since compositional
effects due to selective out-migration will likely bias the coefficient towards positive values.
Another concern is that exogenous inflows of migrants may alter both education and
factory location decisions. An inflow of low-skill migrant labor would lower local unskilled
wages, attracting factories and encouraging local students to acquire more education. As with
selective out-migration, such migrant inflows bias my negative point estimates towards zero.
Of course, in-migration may reduce the responsiveness of non-migrant education to new
factory openings (since locals are less likely to obtain these factory jobs and in-migrants
would put downward pressure on the wages the jobs paid). In Appendix B, I show that
this hypothesis is correct. A large number of migrants working in the export sector of a
particular commuting zone attenuates the educational impacts of new export job arrivals.
In fact, consistent with the opportunity cost of schooling channel, the regression estimates
imply that if all local export workers are migrants there would be no negative effects at all.
4.5.3

Income Effects and High Returns to On-the-Job-Training

One explanation for my findings is that the return to on-the-job training exceeds the return to schooling for students who choose to drop out as a result of new export job arrivals.
In this section, I show that there is no support for such a conjecture. By the year 2000,
the youths induced to drop out by the arrival of export jobs are earning, if anything, lower
wages than they would have earned had these jobs never arrived in their localities.
The 2000 census records the total income, the earned income and the hours worked in
the previous month. I replace the dependent variable in equation 1 with several cohort-level
income measures. The identification arguments are the same as those discussed in Section
2.4. However, reverse causality is less worrisome here as cohort income deviations in the
year 2000 are unlikely to influence factory location decisions in previous years.
Table 6 presents these results. To capture both extensive and intensive margins, columns
1 and 2 present results with the average total or earned income of the cohort as the dependent variable (including the zeroes in the averages). Columns 3 and 4 focus on the intensive
margin and replace the dependent variable with the average log wage or log income among
full time workers in the cohort. Finally, column 5 replaces the dependent variable by a simple
proxy for the Mincerian rate of return; the schooling coefficient from a commuting-zone and
41
Of course, these emigration patterns to the US may not have been driven by local labor demand shocks
so the international migration evidence is only suggestive.

22

cohort specific regression of log earned income on both years of schooling and a sex dummy.42
If the return to on-the-job training in the export sector exceeds the return to school we
would expect positive effects of export jobs on incomes. Instead, all five coefficients are negative although not significantly so (the coefficients are of reasonable magnitudes but the standard errors are too large to detect such effect sizes given the noise in the census income data).
Of course, income losses do not imply welfare losses. Impatient or credit-constrained students
will rationally forgo schooling for immediate income gains, knowing that in a few years their
salaries will be lower than if they had stayed at school (particularly if year-of-entry wage premia fade). Policymakers could still have paternalistic concerns for their citizens if they believe
adolescents discount the future particularly heavily when faced with delayed gains. Similarly,
peer effects at this stage of life are particularly strong, and may cause excessive dropout rates.
The magnitudes of the coefficients imply low returns to schooling for these cohorts. I
find a coefficient of -0.05 for log income and -0.07 for log wages. Combining these with the
schooling coefficients in Table 2 implies Mincerian “rates of return to schooling” of around
2 percent.43 This return to an additional year of school is lower than returns of around 7.5
percent found by Psacharopoulos, Velez, Panagides, and Yang (1996) for Mexico. A low
estimate of the return to schooling is not surprising. These estimates are identical to local
average treatment effects (LATEs) from regressing log income on schooling where schooling
is instrumented by net new export jobs. The LATE is likely to be lower than the average
returns to school since new export jobs directly raise wages and the LATE group (youths
whose decisions are altered by factory openings) are likely to have lower returns to education.
5

What is Different about Export Manufacturing?

The previous sections have focused on the schooling impacts of export manufacturing
jobs. The introduction outlined several motivations for this focus. However, in order to
better understand the mechanisms at play, I now explore whether the schooling impacts of
export jobs differ from job creation in other sectors? And if so, why?
Recall that in column 5 of Table 2, I modified equation 1 to include net new jobs in
non-export industries as a control (again focusing on large expansions and contractions).
Figure 7 plots the coefficients on both export and non-export jobs from running this specification for every age of exposure between 7 and 23. Across the age distribution, the schooling
impacts of new export job opportunities closely track the impacts of new job opportunities
in other sectors. The striking exception is at age 16 where new export jobs lead to substantially greater reductions in school attainment (recall the coefficient on export jobs was -3.25
compared to -1.17 for all other jobs, with the difference significant at the 1.2 percent level).
42
Given that the effects found in this paper operate on schooling margins between primary and high
school, I restrict attention to the rate of return within this schooling range.
43
The return to schooling is simply the wage or income coefficient divided by the coefficient on schooling.

23

Endogeneity issues are a greater concern for new non-export jobs, even using large expansions and contractions. Unlike exports, demand in these industries may be driven by local
consumption patterns that are correlated with local unobservables. In order to mitigate
these concerns, Appendix D reports similar patterns using only job growth in industries that
are highly geographically concentrated and so shocks are likely to be driven by national or
international, rather than local, demand.44 In fact, using only shocks in these highly agglomerated industries, new export job arrivals at age 16 continue to significantly reduce schooling
while non-export job arrivals lead to small (and insignificant) increases in schooling.
Why are the effects of new export jobs so pronounced at age 16 yet this is not the case for
jobs in other sectors? This is the age I dubbed the key exposure age, where the opportunity
cost of schooling channel is strongest. Hence, it is reasonable to think that the opportunity
cost channel is particularly strong for new export jobs, either because of the skills these jobs
demand, the wages they pay, or the characteristics of youths in the locations they open. In
order to explore these explanations, I lay out a conceptual framework that clarifies how these
characteristics affect schooling choices.
5.1

A Conceptual Framework for Understanding Educational Choices

Forward-looking youths in a particular commuting zone choose among three discrete education levels, s = (1, 2, 3), corresponding to primary school, secondary school and high
school respectively (the three most common educational levels in Mexico). Youths make an
irreversible decision in each period t to either stay on at school and obtain an additional
level of education or enter the labor force with their current level of schooling.
A student at school receives u(ȳ) utility that includes any family support and the direct
utility from schooling. A worker with schooling s who entered the labor force in period i
earns a wage of ys,i,t in period t. I assume log utility and a Mincer-like wage function:
u(ys,i,t ) = ln ys,i,t = a0 + γs + b[t − i] + εs,i ,

(6)

where a0 is the base salary, γ is the return to an additional level of school, b is the return to experience, and εs,i is a stochastic and persistent year-of-entry wage premium specific to skill s.
These year-of-entry wage premia exist as only certain firms will offer a worker a job in any
given year. In a year when more formal firms are hiring, a student is more likely to obtain a
job at a firm paying persistently higher wages.45 Accordingly, these wage premia are a weakly
44
I restrict attention to 95 of the 276 4-digit IMSS industries that had spatial Hefindahl indexes of more
than 0.1 in 2000. This strategy also mitigates concerns that export shocks are partially driven by local
demand shocks for non-export production in industries I categorize as export.
45
Firm-specific premia may derive from efficiency wage, fair wage, insider bargaining or search models.
Frias, Kaplan, and Verhoogen (2009) document firm-specific wage differentials in Mexico. Duval Hernandez
(2006) presents evidence of formal sector job rationing in Mexico. Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz
(2012) and Beaudry and DiNardo (1991) present evidence for year-of-entry wage premia across and within
firms, respectively.

24

increasing function of new job opportunities, li , in the year of entry into the labor force;
εs,i = ωs,i φs,i li ,

(7)

where φs,i is the proportion of the new jobs available to workers with school s and ωs,i ≥ 0
captures the premia the new jobs pay compared to job opportunities in a normal year.
A student lives forever, cannot borrow or save and discounts at the rate ρ. The dropout
decision of an enrolled student in period t depends on whether her discount rate is above the
discount-rate cutoff, ρ̄s,t , obtained by equating the net present value of dropping out with
school s with the net present value of obtaining exactly one more school stage, s + 1:
ρ̄s,t =

RSs+1,t
γ + Et εs+1,t+1 − b − εs,t
≡
.
a0 + γs + εs,t − ln ȳ
OCs,t

(8)

This expression is intuitive. The numerator corresponds to the perceived per-period utility
gain from possessing an additional level of schooling (which I define as the “return to schooling” RSs+1,t ). The denominator corresponds to the utility difference between working this
period and being at school (which I define as the “opportunity cost of schooling” OCs,t ). An
impatient student with a high discount rate, ρ ≥ ρ̄1,t , will choose s = 1 in period t; in period
t + 1 a student with an intermediate discount rate, ρ̄1,t > ρ ≥ ρ̄2,t+1 , will choose s = 2 and
a patient student with a low discount rate, ρ < ρ̄2,t+1 , will choose s = 3.46
5.1.1

Aggregate Schooling of the Cohort Aged 16 and New Plant Openings

I first derive an expression for the average schooling of the cohort at my key exposure age,
age 16. In order to generate within-cohort variation in schooling, I assume that youths are
heterogeneous in their discount rates but otherwise identical.47 Since many Mexicans start
school late or repeat grades48 —and the effect of new job arrivals will depend on a youth’s
pre-existing level of education—I divide the cohort into two groups: a proportion θ of youths
who are not lagging behind (i.e. if they chose to stay at school they have s = 2 at age 16)
and a proportion 1 − θ who are lagging behind one period (i.e. they have only just completed
s = 1 at age 16). I allow the two groups to draw from different distributions of discount
rates: ρ is distributed with a p.d.f. f (x) and c.d.f. F (x) across the continuum of non-lagging
youths, and with a p.d.f. g(x) and c.d.f. G(x) across lagging youths. These c.d.f.s and the
discount-rate cutoffs pin down aggregate schooling, S, of the age-16 cohort in period T :
S = 1 + θ[F (ρ̄1,T −1 ) + F (ρ̄2,T )] + (1 − θ)[G(ρ̄1,T ) + G(ρ̄2,T +1 )].

(9)

I now examine an unanticipated and one-off plant opening in period T . The opening gen46
I restrict attention to the simple case where both the return to and opportunity cost of schooling are
positive and the ε shocks are small enough that the ranking ρ̄1,t > ρ̄2,t+1 is always preserved.
47
Youths may also differ in their ability which would affect wages and ȳ. This additional heterogeneity will
not alter the sign predictions as long as ability is observable and εs,i is weakly increasing in li for all abilities.
48
For example, 33.6 percent of 16 year olds attending school in the 1990 census had not completed grade 9.

25

erates a large number of vacancies, lT > 0, as the whole plant must be staffed at the time of
opening. In subsequent periods there are smaller (known) vacancy shocks, lT +t = δ t lT with
δ ∈ [0, 1), demanding the same skills and paying the same premium. Taking a first-order
Taylor expansion of equation 9 around lT = 0—the counterfactual of no plant opening—I
obtain the resulting change in cohort schooling:
S|lT >0 − S|lT =0 =

d(ρ̄1,T )
d1,T ω1,T φ1,T lT
|l
dε1,T T =0
|

{z

<0

+

}

d(ρ̄1,T )
|l =0 δd1,T δφ2,T lT
dε2,T +1 T
|

{z

}

>0
d(ρ̄2,T )
d(ρ̄2,T )
+
|lT =0 d2,T ω2,T φ2,T lT +
|l =0 δd2,T ω3,T φ3,T lT . (10)
dε2,T
dε3,T +1 T

|

{z

<0

}

|

{z

>0

}

where d1,T ≡ g(ρ̄1,T )(1 − θ) is the density of youth on the primary/secondary school margin
and d2,T ≡ g(ρ̄2,T )(1−θ)δ+f (ρ̄2,T )θ is the density of youth on the secondary/high school margin (with the lagging-youth density adjusted by δ as they receive the shock one period later).
The first term captures the impact of any job arrivals that require only primary school.
These jobs induce students on the margin between primary and secondary school to drop out
by raising the opportunity cost of school (OC1,T ), lowering the return to school (RS2,T ) and
hence lowering the discount-rate cutoff ρ̄1,T . Since non-lagging youths already have s = 2
(or chose to dropout), only the lagging proportion 1 − θ respond to these lowest-skill jobs.
The next two terms capture the impacts of job arrivals requiring secondary school. For
lagging students on the margin between primary and secondary, these jobs induce school acquisition by raising the return to school (RS1,T ) and hence the discount-rate cutoff ρ̄1,T (term
two). These same jobs induce school drop out for students on the margin between secondary
and high school in both groups by raising the opportunity cost of school (OC2,t ), lowering
the return to school (RS3,t ), and hence lowering the ρ̄2,T and ρ̄2,T +1 cutoffs (term three).
Finally, any new jobs requiring high school raise the returns to school for both groups
and encourage youths on the margin between secondary and high school to acquire more
education (term four). Appendix Figure C.8 illustrates these shifts in discount-rate cutoffs.
The return to schooling in Mexico rose pre-NAFTA before falling in the late 1990s (see
footnote 1). Against this backdrop, I note that a plant opening can lead to lower cohort
schooling despite the return to schooling rising if the opportunity cost of schooling also rises
(for example, if new export jobs pay high wages but relatively more so for high-skill positions).
5.2

Exploring Heterogeneity in the Impact of New Job Arrivals

The framework above suggests that the relationship between employment expansions at
age 16 and schooling is ambiguous and mediated by three factors: the skill level demanded
by the new jobs (the φs,T ’s), the wage premia these jobs pay over existing job opportunities (the ωs,T ’s), and the density of youths on the dropout margin at age 16 (the ds,T ’s).
The importance of the skill demanded was apparent from Table 4 which showed that new
26

Maquiladora and blue collar EIA jobs reduced schooling, but white collar EIA jobs did the
opposite. In this section, I expand on the analysis using census data on schooling and wages
matched to an individual’s industry of employment (recall IMSS does not record schooling). To minimize endogeneity concerns, I use data on younger workers (those aged 16-28)
in the 1990 census to characterize the post-1990 job arrivals, and then explore how these
characteristics relate to heterogeneity in the schooling impacts of these job shocks.
In terms of the first factor, the skill level, I categorize jobs in each state-industry cell (for
the 86 industries I can match across the census and IMSS) by the proportion of workers in
each of three schooling bins: workers without completed secondary schooling (grade 8 or less),
with secondary school but without completed high school (between 9 and 11), and high school
and above (12+). I can then impute the skill distribution of new jobs by multiplying the
IMSS job arrivals by the census skill proportions for the corresponding state-industry pair.
The top left panel of Figure 8 plots, by sector, the imputed skill distribution of net new
job arrivals per worker in the years 1991-1999 attributable to large firm expansions and contractions (the variation used in my preferred regression specifications).49 Export industries
have a much larger share of employees falling into the first two bins, workers without high
school, compared to non-export sectors (89 percent compared to 72 percent). As all my
IMSS shocks are formal, this skill discrepancy may be due to the fact that export sectors
have more informal jobs and formality is not recorded in the 1990 census. The top right
panel of Figure 8 shows this is not the case, with an even larger discrepancy when I repeat
the exercise using data from the 2000 census where formality is recorded.
I use wage income from the census to calculate proxies for wage premia (the ratio of wage
income for full time employees in an industry relative to the average wage in that locality
for that skill level), again at the state-industry level. The middle panels of Figure 8 plot the
average value of these premia by sector and skill, imputed as above from the composition of
the 1991-1999 IMSS job shocks. New formal jobs arrived in industries that paid above average
wages for their localities, although slightly more so for jobs in non-export than export sectors.
Finally, I require proxies for the density of youths on the secondary and high school
dropout margins. It is straightforward to show that the densities are simple functions of three
objects: (1) the proportion of the entire cohort dropping out at that educational stage; (2)
the proportion of the cohort that is both non-lagging and drops out at that stage; and (3) the
persistence of job shocks across years, δ.50 The first two objects I can estimate separately for
each commuting zone from the school attainment and attendance data from recent cohorts of
16 year olds in the 1990 census.51 The third, the perceived persistence rate, is unobservable,
49

Appendix Figure C.9 repeats this exercise using job shocks across all years (1986-1999) and all firms.
The density in the first term of equation 10, g(ρ̄1,T )(1 − θ), can be rewritten as h(ρ̄1,T ) − f (ρ̄1,T )θ where
h(·) is the p.d.f. of the entire cohort. Similarly, g(ρ̄2,T )(1 − θ)δ + f (ρ̄2,T )θ equals δh(ρ̄2,T ) + (1 − δ)f (ρ̄2,T )θ.
51
In terms 1 and 3 of equation 10, job arrivals induce dropout for youths with ρs just below the (pre50

27

and so I assume δ = 0.5. I explore alternate proxies for these objects later in this section.
The bottom left panel of Figure 8 summarizes these density measures by sector. I subdivide the skill proportions from the top left panel into terciles of the relevant density term for
that skill level from equation 10 (where there are two relevant densities for jobs that demand
secondary school, and so two blocks of three bars). The higher the third bar in each block
relative to the first two, the larger the share of jobs arriving in locations with many youths on
the relevant schooling margin. Compared to non-export jobs; export jobs demanding primary
school arrive disproportionately in locations with many youths on the primary/secondary
margin (the first block), and export jobs demanding secondary school arrive disproportionately in locations with many youths on the secondary/high school margin (the third block).
In the right panel of Figure 8, I use data from the 2000 census that exclude informal
jobs. Patterns are similar except that there is a substantial increase in the share of nonexport jobs demanding primary school that arrive in locations with many youths on the
primary/secondary margin. This suggests that inference using measures from the 1990 census, where I cannot exclude informal jobs, may be misleading for the least-skilled IMSS jobs.
I now turn to supplementing my baseline regression specification, equation 1, with the
four job-characteristic controls derived in equation 10:
Szc = β0 lzc +β1 d1z ω1z φ1z lzc +β2 δd1z ω2z φ2z lzc +β3 d2z ω2z φ2z lzc +β4 δd2z ω3z φ3z lzc +δz +δz c+δrc +εzc .
I calculate ωsz φsz lzc —for cohort c and for each of the three skill bins s—by multiplying net
new jobs lzcj in industry j in the year the cohort turned 16 by the state r-industry j specific
wage premia and skill proportions described above, and then summing across all 86 3-digit
P
industries: j ωsrj φsrj lzcj . The dsz density terms, also described above, pre-multiply this
summation. As explained above, I focus on job shocks post 1990, the year my proxies are
measured, and again restrict attention to large single-firm expansions and contractions.
Columns 1-4 of Table 7 present results for all IMSS job arrivals (columns 5-8 show results just for the export industries that were my focus up to now). I build the analysis in
steps. Column 1 presents the specification without characteristic controls. Using post-1990
shocks only, there is no negative effect of all-industry job shocks (column 5 shows that export
shocks post 1990 had significant negative impacts on schooling, as they did in the full samshock) secondary and high school dropout cutoffs, respectively. Thus, for object (1), I use the proportion of
the cohort with exactly 9 (the schooling of youths with ρs just below ρ̄1,t ) or 12 (the analog for ρ̄2,t ) years
of school. I take a weighted average of the 5 cohorts aged 20-24 that have had time to complete high school.
For object (2), I use the change in the proportion of the cohort at the correct age-for-grade and at school
in the final year of secondary school, grade 9, and the proportion for the cohort one year older in grade 10
(and similarly for the high school to college transition). In terms 2 and 4 of equation 10, job arrivals induce
school acquisition for youths with ρs just above the cutoffs. Thus, I calculate similar measures for object (1)
but use the proportions with exactly 7-8 years of school (the school attainment of youths who start but do
not complete secondary school) or 10-11 years of school (the analog for high school). For object (2), I use the
change in attendance of students at the correct age-for-grade between 7 and 8, or 10 and 11, years of school.

28

ple). Columns 2-3 add the skill and skill-wage interactions, respectively.52 The coefficients
on the key secondary school job shocks—recall that secondary school was the modal level
of education for export sector employees in my 2000 census sample—are negative but only
significantly so when the wage interactions are also included. However, as is clear from equation 10, a weak negative coefficient on these intermediate-skill job shocks is not surprising
since it conflates two effects: lagging youths who acquire more education due to these jobs,
and non-lagging youths whose dropout rates increase.
Column 4 includes the full set of controls that allows me to disentangle these two effects.
The coefficient on the third interaction is negative, large, and highly significant. School
dropout is driven by jobs demanding secondary school arriving in locations with many youths
on the secondary/high school dropout margin. I find support for the sign predictions on two
of the three other interactions. As predicted, both secondary and high school jobs induce
skill acquisition if a sufficient number of youths are on the relevant margin (although only
the former is significant). Less intuitively, jobs demanding primary school induce school
acquisition for youths on the relevant margin (although, as noted earlier, proxies drawn from
the 1990 census may be particularly misleading for this category as formality is not recorded).
Once the job characteristics captured by the interaction terms are accounted for, export
jobs no longer have a differentially negative effect on school dropout. Column 9 adds export
job shocks to the all jobs specification in column 1, and column 10 further includes the
four interaction terms. The coefficient on new export jobs—i.e. the differential impact of
exports—shrinks from a significant -1.920 to an insignificant -0.862. The interaction terms
have substantial explanatory power. Running the non-export shocks over the sample period
through the coefficients on the interaction terms in column 10 and rescaling by the average
shock size, I find that non-export job arrivals reduced average schooling by 0.046 years for
a shock size of 1 (i.e. one job arrival per worker). Running export job shocks through the
same coefficients, I find export jobs reduced average schooling by 0.547 years, or a differential
impact of 0.501. This explained component is 2/3rds of the unexplained component.53
Columns 11-16 find qualitatively similar results using a range of alternative proxies. Column 11 calculates wage premia using hourly rather than total wages. Column 12 calculates
density measures using cohorts aged 17-21 rather than 20-24 at the time of the 1990 census.
Column 13 uses estimates of δ, the vacancy persistence rate, from an AR(1) regression of net
new job arrivals at the industry-commuting zone level. Column 14 replaces the density proxies in terms two and four of equation 10 with those used in terms one and three, respectively.
Finally, columns 15-16 redo the analysis using only job shocks in the highly-agglomerated
industries described in Appendix D. The bulk of high-skill job creation occurs in non-export
52
53

One skill interaction drops out since the sum of job shocks in all skill bins equals the total job shock.
The unexplained component is the effect of new export jobs in row 2 of column 10.

29

sectors where local demand shocks may drive labor demand. In column 16, where these
endogeneity concerns are mitigated, the high-skill interaction term is positive, significant,
and large in magnitude—implying that more skilled jobs encourage school acquisition.
In summary, the negative schooling impacts induced by the large influx of export manufacturing jobs in Mexico seem to be driven by the fact that many of these jobs demanded
workers with secondary educations, paid reasonably high wages and arrived in locations
where many youths were on the margin between secondary and high school. These export
jobs were not intrinsically different to other jobs, they just possessed a set of characteristics
that disproportionately induced school dropout.
6

Conclusions

This paper finds that for Mexico during the period 1986 to 2000, the new manufacturing
opportunities generated by trade liberalization altered the distribution of education. In particular, the influx of new export-manufacturing jobs reduced the schooling of cohorts at their
key exposure ages at the time. The magnitudes I find suggest that for every twenty-five new
jobs created, one student dropped out at grade 9 rather than continuing on through grade 12.
The specific characteristics of export manufacturing in Mexico can explain these negative
schooling impacts. Export manufacturing generated an abundance of new low-skill jobs
which substantially raised the opportunity cost of schooling for youths on the dropout margin
at age 16. My findings suggest that there would not have been the same negative schooling
impacts had these jobs demanded more educated workers and had they arrived in parts of the
country where fewer youths were on the dropout margin at the legal factory employment age.
These findings are relevant for designing industrial and trade policies. Many developing
countries, including Mexico, have prioritized raising the education level of the workforce at
the same time as pursuing an export-oriented industrialization strategy. Given the trade-off
between these goals in the Mexican context, it is vital for policymakers to know which types
of new manufacturing opportunities pull students out of school and in what context.
There are also policy remedies that do not require altering the type or location of job
arrivals. Payments that condition on school attendance would neutralize the negative educational impact of export jobs.54 Alternatively, raising the age of earliest employment in export
manufacturing ensures that most young workers would have already chosen their final education level before being allowed to work in these plants. Finally, reducing the psychic cost
of returning to school in later life would allow adults to obtain the foregone education should
the export-manufacturing jobs dry up or should the adult come to regret their decision.

54
The much-studied Progresa program in Mexico does just that, providing cash transfers to parents who
keep their children in school up to grade 9. The roll out was too late to have an impact on my sample.

30

References
Airola, C., and J. Juhn (2005): “Wage Inequality in Post-Reform Mexico,” Working
Papers 2005-01, Department of Economics, University of Houston.
Beaudry, P., and J. DiNardo (1991): “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the
Movement of Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,” The Journal
of Political Economy, 99(4), 665–688.
Bernard, A. (1995): “Exporters and Trade Liberalization in Mexico:
Structure and Performance,” Discussion paper, MIT.

Production

Bernard, A., and J. Jensen (1995): “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US Manufacturing:
1976-1987,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1995, 67–112.
Bernard, A. B., R. Robertson, and P. K. Schott (2004): “Is Mexico A Lumpy
Country?,” NBER Working Papers 10898.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249–275.
Chiquiar, D., and G. Hanson (2005): “International Migration, Self-Selection, and
the Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” Journal of
Political Economy, 113(2), 239–281.
Cragg, M., and M. Epelbaum (1996): “Why has Wage Dispersion Grown in Mexico? Is
it the Incidence of Reforms or the Growing Demand for Skills?,” Journal of Development
Economics, 51, 99–116.
Duval Hernandez, R. (2006): “Informality, Segmentation and Earnings in Urban
Mexico,” Discussion paper, Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies.
Edmonds, E., and N. Pavcnik (2005): “The Effect of Trade Liberalization on Child
Labor,” Journal of International Economics, 65(2), 401–419.
Edmonds, E. V., N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010): “Trade Adjustment and
Human Capital Investments: Evidence from Indian Tariff Reform,” AEJ: Applied
Economics, 2(4), 42–75.
Federman, M., and D. Levine (2005): “The Effects of Industrialization on Education
and Youth Labor in Indonesia,” The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 5(1), 1.
Findlay, R., and H. Kierzkowski (1983): “International Trade and Human Capital: A
Simple General Equilibrium Model,” The Journal of Political Economy, 91(6), 957–978.
Frias, J. A., D. Kaplan, and E. Verhoogen (2009): “Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence from Mexican Employer-Employee Data,” Discussion paper, Columbia University.
Goldberg, P., and N. Pavcnik (2007): “Distributional Effects of Globalization in
Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 65, 39–82.
Goldin, C., and L. Katz (1997): “Why the United States Led in Education: Lessons
from Secondary School Expansion, 1910 to 1940,” NBER Working Papers 6144.
Hanson, G., and A. Harrison (1999): “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in
Mexico,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, pp. 271–288.
Heath, R., and A. M. Mobarak (2015): “Manufacturing Growth and the Lives of
Bangladeshi Women,” Journal of Development Economics, 115(0), 1 – 15.
31

Helper, S., D. Levine, and C. Woodruff (2006): “How Does Economic Liberalization
affect Investment in Education?: Evidence from Mexico,” Discussion paper, UCSD.
Ibarraran, P. (2004): “Essays on Labor Markets and Economic Integration in Mexico,”
Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Jensen, R. (2012): “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work
and Family Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127(2), 753–792.
Kaplan, D. S., G. M. Gonzalez, and R. Robertson (2007): “Mexican Employment
Dynamics: Evidence from Matched Firm-Worker Data,” Discussion paper, ITAM.
Le Brun, A., S. R. Helper, and D. I. Levine (2011): “The Effect of Industrialization on Children’s Education. The Experience of Mexico,” Review of Economics and
Institutions, 2(2).
Lucas, R. (1988): “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22(1), 3–42.
McKenzie, D., and H. Rapoport (2006): “Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment? Evidence from Mexico,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 3952.
Minnesota Population Center (2007): “Integrated Public Use Microdata SeriesInternational: Version 3.0,” http://international. ipums. org/international.
Munshi, K., and M. Rosenzweig (2006): “Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern
World: Caste, Gender, and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy,” American
Economic Review, 96(4), 1225–1252.
Nicita, A., and M. Olarreaga (2007): “Trade, Production, and Protection Database,
1976-2004,” The World Bank Economic Review, 21(1), 165.
Oreopoulos, P., T. von Wachter, and A. Heisz (2012): “The Short- and Long-Term
Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” AEJ: Applied Economics, 4(1), 1–29.
Oster, E., and B. M. Steinberg (2013): “Do IT Service Centers Promote School
Enrollment? Evidence from India,” Journal of Development Economics, 104, 123–135.
Psacharopoulos, G., E. Velez, A. Panagides, and H. Yang (1996): “Returns
to Education During Economic Boom and Recession: Mexico 1984, 1989 and 1992,”
Education Economics, 4(3), 219–230.
Robertson, R. (2004): “Relative Prices and Wage Inequality: Evidence from Mexico,”
Journal of International Economics, 64(2), 387–409.
Shastry, G. K. (2012): “Human Capital Response to Globalization Education and
Information Technology in India,” Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), 287–330.
Stokey, N. L. (1991): “Human Capital, Product Quality, and Growth,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106(2), 587–616.
Verhoogen, E. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2).
Wood, A., and C. Ridao-Cano (1999): “Skill, Trade, and International Inequality,”
Oxford Economics Papers, 51(1), 89–119.

32

Figure 1: Manufacturing Employment Changes

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

600
400
-200

0

200

400
-200

0

200

400
200
0
-200

Employment Change (1000's)

Other Industries

600

Non-Export Manufacturing

600

Export Manufacturing

1998

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

Year
Change in Formal Employment

Change in Maquiladora Employment

Note: Formal employment changes calculated using IMSS employment data, Maquiladora employment changes using INEGI Maquiladora statistics.

Figure 2: Histogram of Education by Sector (Age 16-28 in 2000, IMSS Insured)
Non-Export Manufacturing

Other Formal Sector Jobs

Informal Jobs (Not Insured)

.2
0

Proportion of Workers (2000)

.4

Export Manufacturing

6

9

12

16/17

6

9

12

16/17

6

9

12

16/17

6

9

12

16/17

Employees Years of Schooling
Note: Education distribution calculated using the 2000 census for formal sector workers age 16 to 28 (my sample cohort). A formal worker is
defined as a worker insured by IMSS or equivalent insurance scheme.

.6

.7
.8
.9
1
Estimated Completion Rate

Change in Proportion of Age Cohort
Compared to Previous Age Cohort
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Figure 3: Changes in School Attendance, Grade Completion and Employment by Age (1990 Census)

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

Age
Attending School

At Correct Grade-for-Age

Employed

Estimated Completion Rate

Note: Figure uses 1990 census to plot changes in the proportion of the cohort attending school (solid line), at the correct grade-for-age (dashed line),
and in full-time employment (dash-dotted line), all compared to the age cohort one year younger. Correct grade-for-age measured as proportion of
cohort at grade age − 6. Long-dashed line shows the estimated completion rate (the proportion of cohort at the correct grade-for-age divided by
proportion of cohort one year younger both at the correct grade-for-age and attending school).

33

-4

Cohort Schooling
-2
0

2

Figure 4: Export Job Shocks at Different Ages of Exposure

8

10

12

14
16
Age of Exposure

18

20

22

Notes: Figure plots the coefficients from 17 regressions that regress cohort average schooling on net new export manufacturing
shocks using the specification in equation 1 but replacing export job shocks at age 16 with export job shocks at one of 17
different ages between 7 and 23. Dashed line shows 95 percent confidence intervals.

Proportion of Cohort Dropping Out
-.5
0
.5

Figure 5: Grade 9 and Pre-Grade-9 Dropout at Different Ages of Exposure

8

10

12

14
16
Age of Exposure

Grade-9 Dropout

18

20

22

Pre-Grade-9 Dropout

Notes: Each solid line in the figure plots the coefficients from 17 regressions that regress cohort average dropout rates on net
new export job shocks. The darker line shows grade-9 dropout rates (i.e. the proportion of the set of students with 9 or more
years of schooling who obtain no additional years of schooling beyond 9). The lighter line shows pre-grade-9 dropout rates
(i.e. the proportion of students that obtain fewer than 9 years of schooling). Both lines use the specification in equation 1 but
replace schooling with the relevant dropout rates and replacing the export job shocks at age 16 with export job shocks at one
of 17 different ages between 7 and 23. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals.

34

Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

4
2
-2

0

2
-2

0

2
0
-2

Deviations

Working in exports

4

Working

4

Attending school

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

Year of export employment shock
age 12

age 13

age 14

age 15

age 16

age 17

age 18

age 19

Notes: Each panel plots 48 coefficients from regressions of a binary variable from the 1990 census (denoted by panel title) on
export employment shocks in each year between 1987-1992. I include cohorts aged 12-19 and age fixed effects, and allow the
coefficients on the shocks to differ by age. Full specification shown in equation 4 of main text. Sample restricted to commuting
zones with at least one year of employment growth in export manufacturing between 1987-1992. Lines connect coefficients of
same age cohort and x-axis denotes the year of the shock. Vertical lines drawn at the time of the March 1990 census.

-4

Cohort Schooling
-2
0
2

4

Figure 7: Differential Effects of Export and Non-Export Job Shocks

8

10

12

14
16
Age of Exposure

Export Manufacturing Job Shocks

18

20

22

Other Formal Job Shocks

Notes: Figure plots the coefficients from 17 regressions that regress cohort average schooling on both net new export jobs and
net new job arrivals in all other sectors using the specification in equation 1 but replacing shocks at age 16 with shocks at one
of 17 different ages between 7 and 23. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Coefficients on export job shocks are
significantly different from non-export job shocks at age 16 (an F-stat of 6.29 with a p-value of 0.012).

35

Figure 8: Skill Differences by Sector
Skill Requirements (1990)

Exports

.4
.3
.2
0

.1

Proportion of Job Shocks

.4
.3
.2

Proportion of Job Shocks

.1
0

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

Wage Premia (1990)

9-11

Exports

>11

Non Exports

1
0

.5

Wage Premia Over Average Wage

1
.5

Wage Premia Over Average Wage

<9

1.5

Non Exports

0

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

<9

Skill X Density at Dropout Margin (1990)

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

Skill X Density at Dropout Margin (2000)

Non Exports

Exports

Non Exports

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

<9

9-11

9-11

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

.15
.1
.05
0

.05

.1

.15

Proportion of Job Shocks

.2

.2

Exports

Proportion of Job Shocks

>11

Wage Premia (2000)

1.5

Exports

0

Non Exports

.5

Non Exports

.5

Exports

Skill Requirements (2000)

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

Note: Top row plots skill distribution of net new jobs per worker attributable to large expansions and contractions occurring
between 1991 and 1999. Job arrivals categorized into three skill bins based on highest completed educational stage of workers in
each state-industry at time of census; primary school (grades < 9), secondary school (grades 9 − 11), and high school or above
(grades > 11). Second row plots wage premia (over the average commuting zone wage for that skill bin) paid by these same net
new job arrivals. Bottom row subdivides the skill bins in top row into terciles (denoted by superscripts) of the relevant density
of marginal youths for each skill level detailed in equation 10. Left panels use 1990 census information, right panels use 2000
census (where I focus on formal sector employees only).

36

Table 1: Sample Means
Census Sample (2000, Age 16-28, Non Migrants, Excl. Mexico City)

mean

standard deviation

observations

21.54
8.51
0.52
0.42
7.47
0.48
8540.26
0.81

0.0038
0.0038

1,706,582
1,636,520
1,706,582
1,706,582
667,103
1,706,582
1808
2,060,457

IMSS Annual Firm Sample (1985-2000)

mean

standard deviation

observations

Firm Size (Employees)
Firm Size (Firms Changing Employment)
Firm Size (Firms Hiring/Firing≥ 50 in single year)
Worker Sex (1=male, 0=female)

12.08
16.03
416.41
0.68

0.044
0.065
4.140

11,365,321
7,675,094
109,263
11,365,321

Total in 1985
4,472,491
372,520

Total in 2000
12,509,298
912,284

Unique 1985-2000

Combined Sample (1986-1999, Weighted by Cell Population)

mean

standard deviation

observations

Jobs/Working Age Population (All Sectors)
Export Jobs/Working Age Population
Net New Jobs/Working Age Population (All Sectors)
Net New Export Jobs/Working Age Population
Net New Jobs/Worker (All Sectors) (Large ∆s)
Net New Export Jobs/Worker (Large ∆s)
Positive Net New Export Jobs/Worker (Large ∆s)
Negative Net New Export Jobs/Worker (Large ∆s)
Non-Zero Net New Export Jobs/Worker (Large ∆s)
Net New Export Jobs/Worker (Large ∆s) (Demeaned by CZ)

0.188761
0.034833
0.012288
0.003069
0.006189
0.002405
0.006676
-0.002354
0.004448
0.000000

0.155967
0.057492
0.020343
0.007928
0.014048
0.007072
0.008846
0.006166
0.009136
0.005495

25,289
25,289
25,289
25,289
25,289
25,289
1,446
509
1,955
25,289

Age
Years of School
Employed (1=yes, 0=no)
Insured by IMSS (1=yes, 0=no)
Monthly Log Earned Income (Pesos)
Sex (1=male, 0=female)
Commuting-Zone (CZ) Size
Non-Migrants as Proportion of Full Sample

Employees
Firms

0.0011
816.7

2,194,681

Table 2: The Effect of New Export-Manufacturing Jobs on Educational Attainment
(1)
OLS
Net New Export Manufacturing
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

-3.155***
(0.638)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Cohort Average Completed Years of Schooling
IV (Large ∆s) RF (Large ∆s) RF (Large ∆s) RF and LDV
-3.192***
(0.614)

-3.306***
(0.690)

Net New Jobs/Worker
at Age 16 (All Other Sectors)

-3.246***
(0.684)
-1.169**
(0.514)

L.Cohort Schooling

0.309***
(0.0164)
0.274***
(0.0132)
0.171***
(0.00946)
0.132***
(0.0105)

L2.Cohort Schooling
L3.Cohort Schooling
L4.Cohort Schooling
Observations
R2
Commuting Zones
Kleibergen-Paap F-stat (1st Stage)

-3.380***
(0.551)

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808
11121

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

25,192
0.915
1808

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Independent variable is net new exportmanufacturing jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16. The IV column instruments net new jobs per
worker by the net new jobs per worker attributable to firms that expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees
in a single year. The RF columns replaces net new jobs per worker with the instrument. State-time dummies, commuting-zone
dummies and commuting-zone linear trends not shown. The “RF and LDV” column replaces fixed effects and municipality trends
with four lags of cohort schooling. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone
clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

37

Table 3: Changes in School Attendance 1990-2000 and New Export-Manufacturing Jobs
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Change in Proportion of 16 Year Olds Attending School at Census, 1990-2000
OLS
IV (Large ∆s)
RF (Large ∆s)

∆Net New Export Manuf. -0.222*** -0.208*** -0.227*** -0.198*** -0.186*** -0.202*** -0.213*** -0.195*** -0.218***
Jobs/Worker (1990-1999)
(0.0420) (0.0400) (0.0415) (0.0424) (0.0409) (0.0419) (0.0458) (0.0437) (0.0453)
Proportion of 16 Year Olds
Attending School, 1990

-0.156***
(0.0115)

-0.101***
(0.0124)

-0.156***
(0.0115)

Proportion of 17 Year Olds

-0.102***

-0.101***

-0.101***

Attending School, 1990

(0.0128)

(0.0128)

(0.0128)

Constant
Observations
R2

0.0772*** 0.154*** 0.119*** 0.0766*** 0.126*** 0.118*** 0.0760*** 0.153*** 0.117***
(0.00225) (0.00602) (0.00567) (0.00226) (0.00649) (0.00567) (0.00220) (0.00602) (0.00565)
1,777
0.015

1,777
0.109

1,743
0.050

1,777
0.015

1,743
0.096

1,743
0.050

1,777
0.012

1,777
0.105

1,743
0.046

Notes: Dependent variable is the change in proportion of 16 year olds attending school at time of census, 1990-2000. Independent variable is
change in net new manufacturing jobs per worker arriving in commuting zone between January 1st 1990 and December 31st 1999. Columns 2,
5 and 8 include initial proportion of 16 year olds attending school as a control (17 year olds in columns 3, 6 and 9). IV and RF columns use
the net new jobs per worker attributable to firms that expand or contract employment by 50 or more employees in a single year either as an IV
or as main regressor. Regression weighted by commuting-zone population of 16 year olds in 1990 census, excludes Mexico City and migrants. *
significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

Table 4: Alternative Exporter Measures
(1)

Exports/
Worker
Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

(2)

(3)
(4)
Cohort Average Completed
RF (Large ∆s)
Anually Maquiladora Maquiladora
Coded
Agg. Imp.
Micro Imp.

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Years of Schooling
(OLS)
(RF/OLS)
(OLS)
EIA Maq. Agg. Maq. Micro EIA
Panel
+ EIA
+ EIA
Panel

-4.241*** -2.943***
(0.885)
(0.759)

Net New Maquiladora
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

-2.106**
(0.881)

-1.856**
(0.898)

Net New EIA Export
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

4.435
(3.232)

-2.117**
(0.878)

-1.869**
(0.897)

4.487
(3.250)

4.477
(3.251)

Net New EIA Blue Collar
Export Jobs/Worker Age 16

-17.66
(13.35)

Net New EIA White Collar
Export Jobs/Worker Age 16

90.41*
(52.51)

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

25,275
0.942
1807

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

25,275
0.942
1807

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Independent variables are alternate measures of net new jobs per
worker created by exporters in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16. Columns 1 and 2 use alternate classifications described in main text. Columns 3
and 4 restrict attention to Maquiladoras identified either from matching the IMSS sample to industry-by-municipality Maquiladora aggregates or to
the census of Maquiladoras. Columns 5 and 8 focus on employment growth in a panel of large non-Maquiladoras that export more than 25 percent
of output. Columns 6 and 7 combine the panel of large non-Maquiladoras with the Maquiladoras. State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies
and commuting-zone linear trends not shown. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone
clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

38

Table 5: Sex-Specific Net New Export Jobs and Educational Attainment
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Cohort Schooling NNEM Jobs/Worker at 16
Cohort Schooling
Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female

All RF (Large ∆s)
Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16 (NNEM)

-4.364*** -2.511**
(1.105)

(1.099)

(Male Prop. NNEM Jobs 1985-89)
×( NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16)

1.589*** 0.459***

(Female Prop. of NNEM Jobs 1985-89)
×(NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16)

0.724*** 1.230***

(0.148)

(0.126)

-5.541**

(0.127)

-0.407

(0.116)
1.516*** 0.506***

(Female Prop. Export Manuf. Jobs 1985)
×( NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16)

0.560*** 1.413***
(0.101) (0.106)

(0.121)

25,113
0.885
1808

25,160
0.913
1808

16,258
0.960
1808

-2.238

(1.712) (3.352)

(Male Prop. Export Manuf. Jobs 1985)
×( NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16)

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

0.517

(2.400) (2.271)

16,258
0.936
1808

25,113
0.953
1808

-6.223*** -2.477

(0.104)

25,113
0.931
1808

16,144
0.903
1806

16,204
0.926
1808

(1.693)

(1.623)

-1.869
(2.047)

-2.559
(2.478)

25,113
0.885
1808

25,160
0.913
1808

Notes: Dependent variable in columns 1-2, and 7-10 is the (gender-specific) cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Dependent variable
in columns 3-6 is the (gender-specific) net new export jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to firms that
expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year. Independent variables in columns 1-2 are same export jobs per worker
measure but not gender specific. Independent variables in other columns are predicted gender-specific export job shocks obtained by multiplying
actual non-gender-specific export job shocks by sex ratios of prior job shocks between 1985-1989 (columns 3-4 and 7-8, where sample excludes cohorts
who turned 16 prior to 1990) or sex ratios of factories open in 1985, the first year of the dataset. State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and
commuting-zone linear trends not shown. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered
standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

Table 6: Net New Export Jobs and Later Life Income
(1)
Total income
(including 0s)

(2)
Earned income
(including 0s)

(3)
Log hourly wage

Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

-613.4
(2,647)

-236.4
(2,650)

-0.0712
(0.190)

-0.0494
(0.202)

-0.101
(0.138)

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

25,287
0.675
1808

25,288
0.696
1808

23,934
0.886
1808

23,724
0.903
1807

20,611
0.292
1759

RF (Large ∆s)

(4)
(5)
Log earned income Mincerian returns
(full time workers) (full time workers)

Notes: Dependent variable is the cohort average income, earned income, log hourly wage, log earned income or Mincerian returns in the year
2000. Independent variables are net new export jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age and 16 attributable to firms that
expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year. Log earned income and Mincerian returns restricts attention to
workers working at least 20 hours a week. Mincerian returns calculated by regressing log earned income on schooling and a sex dummy separately
for workers in every single cohort and commuting zone and taking the coefficient on schooling. State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies
and commuting-zone linear trends not shown. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone
clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

39

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

49.50
(41.24)
16,199
0.952
1801

>2nd Schl.×Wage×δDensity2
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

16,258
0.952
1808

-65.79***
(22.03)

2nd Schl.×Wage×Density2
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

16,258 16,258
0.952
0.952
1808
1808

37.97*
(20.31)

2nd Schl.×Wage×δDensity1
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

-2.484
(2.485)

>2nd Schl.×Wage
×Jobs/Worker Age 16
12.02**
(5.177)

-3.724*
(2.256)

2nd Schl.×Wage
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

<2nd Schl.×Wage×Density1
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

-1.462
(2.146)

<2nd Schl.×Wage
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

16,258
0.952
1808

16,217 16,217
0.952
0.952
1803
1803

9.575
(10.68)

-6.215
(8.461)

8.805
(10.84)

-2.568
(2.171)

>2nd Schl
×Jobs/Worker Age 16
-2.114
(6.204)

-10.06
(10.19)

-2.556
(3.527)

2nd Schl
×Jobs/Worker Age 16

-0.607
(0.828)

(5)

(8)

16,163
0.952
1797

173.7
(124.9)

-127.1***
(48.58)

-22.68
(33.20)

7.773
(16.35)

0.324
(1.842)

Interactions of Export Job Shocks
Baseline Specification

-1.783** 2.767 -4.607
(0.755) (4.247) (9.321)

2.747
-0.226 1.130
(0.422) (1.196) (2.267)

Interactions of All Job Shocks
Baseline Specification

(1)

Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Net New
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

LHS: Cohort Average Years
of Schooling, RF (Large ∆s)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

16,258
0.952
1808

-1.920**
(0.946)

0.133
(0.499)

35.28*
(19.80)

11.62**
(5.019)

-0.864
(0.945)

-0.553
(0.852)

31.64
(25.82)

10.58**
(5.349)

-0.835
(0.959)

-0.538
(0.954)

27.30***
(8.716)

10.09**
(4.865)

-1.275
(0.926)

-0.693
(0.655)

29.18
(19.51)

8.443
(5.688)

-1.228
(1.003)

-0.402
(0.815)

16,199
0.952
1801

42.60
(41.37)

16,199
0.952
1801

44.09
(41.38)

16,226
0.952
1804

28.96
(32.10)

16,199
0.953
1801

0.215
(0.489)

16,199
0.952
1801

30.52
(61.56)

-60.25*** -55.71** -66.06** -17.19** -74.23**
(23.34)
(22.44) (25.66) (7.043) (34.66)

35.25*
(20.45)

11.25**
(5.212)

-0.862
(0.939)

-0.410
(0.857)

16,258
0.952
1808

-3.151**
(1.531)

1.355*
(0.786)

16,199
0.953
1801

216.6***
(76.41)

-82.51**
(38.23)

35.59
(32.31)

12.77*
(7.436)

-2.217
(1.696)

-0.00974
(1.350)

Export Main Effect and Interactions of All Job Shocks
Baseline Spec.
Alt wage Alt avg Alt delta Alt dens High Herfindahl

(9)

Table 7: Exploring Heterogeniety Due to Job and Location Characteristics

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average schooling in the year 2000. Independent variables are net new jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to
firms that expand or contract employment by 50 or more employees in a single year, as well as interactions for the skill level of the job, the wage premia on offer, and the density of youth on
the relevant schooling margin. The job arrivals are categorized into primary school (<2nd Schl.), secondary school (2nd Schl.) and high school and above (>2nd Schl.) based on the education
level of sample-age employees in the relevant state-industry pair in the 1990 census. Wage premia (relative to average wage in that location for workers in that skill bin) are also from the 1990
census at the state-industry level. Density measures for the primary/secondary margin (Density1 ) and secondary/high school margin (Density2 ) are calculated using school attendance and
highest completed education in the 1990 census. See Section 5.2 for additional details. Columns 5-8 focus on export-sector job arrivals between 1991 and 1999, while the remaining columns
focus on all job arrivals between 1991 and 1999 (with columns 9-16 also including the main effect of export job arrivals). State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone
linear trends not shown. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent
level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

40

Appendix For Online Publication
Appendix A

Robustness Results

I present a variety of robustness checks on my key finding, that cohort schooling declines
with net new export-manufacturing jobs at age 16. Tables A.1 to A.4 rerun the preferred
reduced form specification, repeated in column 1 of each table, with several modifications.
Table A.1 explores how sensitive results are to the removal of the various fixed effects
and trends. Columns 2 to 4 sequentially remove the commuting-zone linear trends, the
state-specific time dummies and finally the basic time-dummies. Column 5 removes both
the commuting-zone fixed effects and linear trends. The coefficient remains negative and
becomes about twice as large in magnitude with the removal of the commuting-zone linear
trends. One potential explanation is that, with only 14 years of data, the inclusion of a linear
trend terms risks over-fitting and causing attenuation due to the inclusion of an excessive
number of controls in the regression. Removing the other time fixed effects in columns 3 and
4 results in even larger coefficients. Meanwhile, the removal of the commuting-zone fixed
effects and linear trends flips the sign of the relationship. Therefore, the effects I find are
primarily coming from variation within commuting zones across time as opposed to variation
across commuting zones within time.
Tables A.2 and A.3 investigate how results vary across different geographic samples. In
column 2 of Table A.2, I exclude the 781 commuting zones that had no formal sector employment during the period. As these commuting zones are generally very small, they have little
impact on my weighted regression results. Column 3 controls for the fact that the Progresa
conditional cash transfer program was rolled out at the end of the sample period. Progresa
could potentially be a cause of omitted variable bias as the program encouraged children to
stay in school at the tail end of my sample period by offering cash incentives. Therefore, I
include a Progresa dummy takes the value 1 in the 1998 and 1999 if more than 10 percent of
the commuting-zone population reported receiving Progresa or Procampo payments in the
2000 census (no specific Progresa indicator is available in the census). Column 4 excludes the
two large cities in the sample, Monterrey and Guadalajara, which may have been driving my
population weighted results. In both columns 3 and 4, results are unchanged. Finally, column 5 reproduces the main specification but without the cohort population weights that are
used in all other specifications. The coefficient is slightly smaller, but still highly significant.
In Table A.3, I explore additional geographic subsamples. Columns 1-3 focus on the
Northern region, the Central region and the Southern region of Mexico respectively. Results
are similar in the North and Center of the country. In the South of the country I find a larger
negative coefficient. Since there was very little export job creation in the South, it is perhaps
not unsurprising that when these jobs arrived, the impacts were particaulry large. In the
1

remaining columns, I replace the state-time fixed effects with region-time fixed effects using
three regions of Mexico (North, Center and South). The region-time fixed effects allow me to
include Mexico City (which is its own State). Additionally, region-time fixed effects allow me
to separately run regressions on various sub-samples for which there is limited variation in the
presence of 31×14 state-time dummies. Column 5 reproduces the standard specification but
with region-time fixed effects. The coefficient is similar but slightly smaller than the statetime fixed effects specification. The coefficient changes little in column 6 where I includes the
Valle de México metropolitan zone that contains Mexico City. Column 7 restricts the sample
to the 54 metropolitan zones in Mexico. Column 8 restricts the sample to the 1754 nonmetropolitan commuting zones in my data set. Results are similar except for the case when
I focus only on metropolitan zones where I find no negative schooling effect. These results
suggest that the dropout effects I find are coming primarily from smaller towns and cities.
Finally, Table A.4 examines various alternative specifications. One concern is that schooling is mismeasured as I only observe completed schooling in the year 2000 and youths may
go on to obtain additional schooling at a later date. In column 2, I cap education at 12 years
and recalculate cohort schooling. By capping education at 12 years, most of the sample will
have reached their final level of schooling by the year 2000, mitigating concerns that the
amount of misreporting varies with the skill level of the commuting zone. I also note that
adult education was uncommmon in Mexico over this period.1 In column 3, I further restrict
attention only to individuals not at school at the time of the census. Results are very similar
in both cases. Therefore, I can be confident that my results are driven by students making
school dropout decisions before the end of high school.
Column 4 shows that my results are robust to extending the cutoff threshold of my instrument from changes of 50 employees to changes of 100 employees in a single firm in a
single year. One potential worry with my identification strategy is that my variation may be
driven by large expansions and contractions at firms that almost always expand (or contract)
by more than 50 employees each year. For these firms, the firm-level year-to-year variation
may be small and potentially driven by changes in the educational decisions of the cohort
aged 16. Columns 5 and 6 show that this is not the case by restricting attention to large
1

The 2003 World Bank report “Status of Education for Out of School Adults in Mexico” (downloaded from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1126210664195/16369711126210694253/Status_Out_School_Mexico.pdf) contains figures on adult education in Mexico. In 1983,
just prior to the start of my sample, 13,279 grade school certificates and 13,021 lower secondary school
certificates were awarded to adults out of a population of approximately 25 million adults without completed
lower secondary schooling. By the end of the sample, the year 2000, 188,800 grade school certificates and
305,500 lower secondary school certificates were awarded to adults out of a population of 32.5 million adults
without completed lower secondary schooling. In terms of returning to high school during my sample period,
the World Bank report states: “There has been minimal effort in Mexico to reduce the out-of-school adult
population that has not completed their upper secondary education. In fact it is only recently in 2001-02,
that educational authorities have become aware of the magnitude of the problem.”

2

expansions and contractions that are unusually large for the firm in question. Column 5
restricts attention to shocks where the absolute change in firm-level employment is both
above 50 and more than 1 standard deviation above the mean employment change at that
firm. Column 6 restricts attention to large shocks at firms that do not experience absolute
changes in employment of more than 50 in more than half of the periods in which the firm
appears in the data. In both cases, I find similar or larger effect sizes.
Columns 7-8 of Table A.4 separate new export job arrivals into the jobs created (firm
expansions or openings) and the jobs destroyed (firm contractions or closures) in each
commuting-zone year cell. Column 7 includes only new job creation, labeled hires, and
I find similar magnitudes. Column 8 includes both job creation (hires) and job destruction
(fires) with the latter coded as negative numbers. The coefficient is of a similar magnitude
for both; job expansions lower education, and job contractions raise education. Column 9 interacts new export job arrivals with a positive and a negative indicator dummy. Therefore, I
allow for years of net new job losses (negative values of lzc ) to have potentially different effects
from years of net new job gains (positive values of lzc ). I find similar coefficients on both.
Finally, column 10 investigates the possibility that there are geographic spillovers. For
example, a student may decide to drop out of school due to new export job opportunities
in the State capital. I calculate the net new export job arrivals at age 16 in all other commuting zones in the state and divide this number by the working age population of those
other commuting zones. I include this state-level job measure as an additional independent
variable (and replace state-time dummies with region-time dummies to avoid collinearity).
The coefficient on state-level net new export jobs per worker is positive but insignificant,
providing limited evidence for this hypothesis.
In summary, there is a robust negative impact of new export-manufacturing jobs at age
16 on cohort schooling.

3

Table A.1: Robustness: Fewer Fixed Effects
(1)

(2)

Baseline

(3)

(4)

(5)

Fewer Fixed Effects

Cohort Average Completed Years of Schooling (All RF, Large ∆s)
Net New Export Manufacturing
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

-3.306***
(0.690)

-7.016***
(1.073)

-8.490***
(1.665)

-12.31***
(3.062)

8.095**
(4.118)

Commuting-Zone Fixed Effects
Commuting-Zone Linear Trends
State-Time Dummies
Time Dummies

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

No
No
Yes
Yes

25,289
0.942
1808

25,289
0.904
1808

25,289
0.892
1808

25,289
0.876
1808

25,289
0.327
1808

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Independent variable is
net new export-manufacturing jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable
to firms that expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year. Column 1
repeats the baseline specification with state-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone
linear trends. Columns 2-4 sequentially remove commuting-zone linear trends, state-time dummies and timedummies. Column 5 removes commuting-zone fixed effects and linear trends. Regressions weighted by cell
population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses. *
significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

Table A.2: Robustness: Different Geographical Samples
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Baseline

No Informal

Progresa

No Monterrey

Regression

commuting zones

Dummy

or Guadalajara

Unweighted

Cohort Average Completed Years of Schooling (All RF, Large ∆s)
Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16
Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

-3.306***
(0.690)

-3.234***
(0.691)

-3.268***
(0.693)

-3.154***
(0.690)

-2.741***
(0.880)

25,289
0.942
1808

14,376
0.939
1027

25,289
0.943
1808

25,261
0.935
1806

25,289
0.806
1808

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Independent variable is net new
export-manufacturing jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to firms that
expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year. State-time dummies, commutingzone dummies and commuting-zone linear trends included. Geographic coverage documented in column headings.
Progresa dummy included in column 3 takes the value 1 in the 1998 and 1999 if more than 10 percent of the
commuting-zone population reported receiving Progresa or Procampo payments in the 2000 census. Regressions weighted by cell population (except column 5 which is unweighted), exclude Mexico City and migrants.
Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and
*** at 1 percent.

4

5

Region

Region

Mexico City

Includes

(6)

10,542
0.928
753

Yes
No

-2.184**
(0.937)

10,114
0.931
724

Yes
No

-16.19***
(4.625)

25,289
0.939
1808

No
Yes

-2.373***
(0.777)

25,303
0.955
1809

No
Yes

-2.437***
(0.806)

756
0.964
54

No
Yes

0.892
(1.737)

Zones

Metropolitan

(7)

24,533
0.905
1754

No
Yes

-2.474***
(0.664)

Commuting Zones

Non-Metropolitan

(8)

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000. Independent variable is net new export-manufacturing jobs per worker
arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to firms that expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year.
State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone linear trends included in columns 1-4. Columns 5-8 replace state-time dummies with
region-time dummies. Geographic coverage documented in column headings. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City (except column
6) and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

4,633
0.935
331

Yes
No

Yes
No

State-Time Dummies
Region-Time Dummies
25,289
0.942
1808

-3.287***
(1.001)

-3.306***
(0.690)

Net New Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

Region-Time FE

Baseline With

(5)

Cohort Average Completed Years of Schooling (All RF, Large ∆s)

Region

Southern

Central

Northern

Baseline

(4)

(3)

(2)

(1)

Table A.3: Robustness: Different Geographical Samples

6

(2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

25,289
0.939
1808

25,289
0.942
1808

(0.737)

(0.673)

25,282
0.932
1808

-3.389***

-3.149***

25,289
0.942
1808

(0.884)

-3.628***

25,289
0.942
1808

(2.129)

-5.226**

25,289
0.942
1808

(0.912)

(0.884)

25,289
0.942
1808

(1.310)

-3.111**

-3.414***

-3.479***

25,289
0.942
1808

(1.759)

-2.992*

(0.846)

-3.413***

25,289
0.938
1808

(2.370)

3.556

(0.891)

-2.933***

Notes: Dependent variable is cohort average years of schooling in the year 2000, other than columns 2 and 3. Dependent variable in column 2 is cohort average schooling with
schooling capped at 12 years. Dependent variable in column 3 is cohort average schooling for subset of students not currently attending school. Independent variable is net new
export-manufacturing jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to firms that expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees
in a single year. Column 4 raises the threshold to firms that expand or contract their employment by 100 or more employees in a single year. Columns 5 and 6 restrict attention
to expansions or contractions of 50 or more employees that are unusual for that firm (either 1 standard deviation above the firm mean in column 5 or at firms that do not
experience absolute changes in employment of more than 50 in more than half of the periods in which the firm appears in the data in column 6). Columns 7-8 break up export
job arrivals into net new job arrivals at firms expanding or contracting employment (column 7 includes hires alone, column 8 includes both hires and fires separately). Column 9
separates years of positive and negative net new job arrivals. Column 10 includes an additional independent variable, the net new export job arrivals in other commuting zones
in the State. State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone linear trends not shown. Column 10 replaces state-time dummies with region-time dummies.
Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5
percent and *** at 1 percent.

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

State-Level NNEM
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Negative NNEM
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Positive NNEM
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

New Fires in Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

25,289
0.942
1808

Net New Export Manufacturing -3.306*** -2.642***
Jobs/Worker at Age 16 (NNEM) (0.690) (0.561)

New Hires in Export Manuf.
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

(3)

Hires/Fires Pos/Neg State Spillover
Baseline Alternate School Measures |∆lmc | ≥ 100 Outlier |∆lmc | ≥ 50 Rare |∆lmc | ≥ 50 Hires
Cohort Schooling
Schooling
Cohort
Cohort
Cohort
Cohort
Cohort
Cohort
Cohort
Schooling Cap at 12 (Not at School) Schooling
Schooling
Schooling
Schooling Schooling Schooling
Schooling

(1)

Table A.4: Robustness: Alternate Specifications

Appendix B

Migration

As discussed in Section 4.5.2, migration could bias my results if local labor market conditions alter the composition of out-migrants. If new export jobs prevent low-education
individuals from migrating, the average education of the cohort declines with export job
arrivals despite no student altering their schooling decision. I perform two empirical tests in
order to dismiss this possible explanation for my findings.
The first test explores the size of different cohorts of non-migrants. If these composition
effects are important, and if the less educated are deciding not to migrate, the size of the
sample cohort should rise with new jobs in export manufacturing. To test this hypothesis, I
replace cohort years of schooling with log cohort size, ln Nzc , in specification 1:2
ln Nzc = βlzc + δz + δz c + δrc + εzc .

(11)

Column 1 of Table B.1 show the results from this regression. There is no evidence that
cohort size responds positively to net new export-manufacturing job arrivals at age 16. In
fact, the basic specification finds a small decline in cohort size. I draw similar conclusions
in column 2 where I use an alternate cohort population measure instead of log cohort size:
the cohort size divided by the working population at the time of the census.3
The second test directly examines the hypothesis that relatively uneducated youths were
disproportionately deterred from migrating due to a new factory opening. If this hypothesis
is correct, I should find that the education of out-migrants rises relative to the education of
non-migrants in a commuting zone when new export-manufacturing jobs arrive.
The 2000 census records where each individual was living in 1995. Therefore, for every
commuting-zone cohort pair, I calculate the average education of individuals who lived in
the commuting zone in 1995 but not in 2000, Sleave,zc , divided by the average education of
individuals who lived in the commuting zone in both 1995 and 2000, Sstay,zc . My dependent
variable is the mean value of this ratio for the five cohorts who turned 16 between 1995 and
1999
P Sleave,zc
. This variable is then regressed on the sum of the changes in export1999, 51
Sstay,zc
c=1995

manufacturing employment per worker between January 1995 and December 1999. I also
include a full set of state dummy variables:
1999
X Sleave,zc
X
1 1999
=β
lzt + δr + εm .
5 c=1995 Sstay,zc
t=1995

(12)

If my finding that new export jobs reduce schooling is driven by the less educated remaining
2
I use log cohort size as commuting-zone populations vary greatly. Therefore, I am considering
proportional changes in cohort size. Net new jobs are already scaled, as they are divided by the number of
workers in the commuting zone.
3
If cohorts aged 16 at the time of large export shocks have differential migration patterns compared
to less heavily exposed cohorts, these cohorts should have differential sizes compared to older and younger
cohorts within the same commuting zone.

7

in the commuting zone, the ratio of leavers to stayers education will increase with net new
export job arrivals between 1995 and 1999 (β > 0).
Results are reported in column 3 of Table B.1. β is significantly negative, not positive.
New export-manufacturing jobs keep the more educated youth in the commuting zone. This
is strong evidence, at least for the later years in the sample, that when new export jobs arrive,
out-migration effects tend to raise cohort education through composition effects. This result
only applies to internal migrants, but Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) find that emigrants to
the United States are also drawn from relatively educated portions of the population. Taken
together, the magnitude of my finding that new export-manufacturing jobs reduce schooling
is likely to be attenuated by out-migration.
In-migration may generate heterogeneity in the impact of new export-manufacturing jobs.
In the extreme, if only migrants are employed in export manufacturing in a particular commuting zone and labor markets are segmented, then new job arrivals should have no impact
on the education decisions of local youth. In this scenario, these export jobs do not enter
into a local youth’s choice set. In less extreme cases, large numbers of migrants are likely
to reduce the local manufacturing wage and hence make new export-manufacturing jobs less
attractive alternatives to schooling.
I test this hypothesis using the in-migrants I identify in the 2000 census. I interact
new export job arrivals at age 16 (potentially broken down by skill) by ϑz , the proportion of
formal export manufacturing jobs held by migrants in the year 2000 in each commuting zone:
Szc = βlzc + γϑz lzc + δz + δz c + δrc + εzc .

(13)

If the presence of a large number of migrants reduces the impact of new job arrivals on the
local population, I expect β to be negative, and γ to be positive.
I report results in columns 4 of Table B.1. Column 5 reports a similar specification but
using the proportion of migrants in employment more generally. I find the expected sign
patterns, and the negative coefficient on the migrant interaction is the same size as the positive coefficient on the main effect implying that if all the employees are migrants there is no
effect at all (although the standard error is equally large so the interaction is not significant).
Hence, in the absence of internal migration in Mexico, local education would decline even
more with the arrival of new export-manufacturing opportunities at age 16.

8

9
25,289
0.996
1808

-0.0599
(0.239)

25,289
0.783
1808

-0.00615
(0.00899)

1,663
0.049
1663

-0.847***
(0.255)

25,289
0.942
1808

(4.126)

5.085

-4.854***
(1.663)

25,289
0.942
1808

(4.745)

3.996

-4.454**
(1.765)

Notes: Dependent variable in column 1 is log cohort size for non-migrants in the year 2000 and column 2 is cohort size divided by commutingzone working population in the year 2000. Dependent variable in column 3 is the schooling of individuals who lived in the commuting zone in
1995 but not in 2000 divided by the schooling of individuals who lived in the commuting zone in both 1995 and 2000 (for cohorts who turned 16
between 1995 and 1999). Dependent variable in columns 4 and 5 is cohort average schooling. Independent variable in Columns 1-2 and 4-5 is
net new export jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s commuting zone at age 16 attributable to firms that expand or contract their employment
by 50 or more employees in a single year. Columns 4-5 also include an interaction with the proportion of migrants in formal export jobs in that
commuting zone from the 2000 census, or in employment more generally. Columns 3 uses the total net new export jobs per worker attributable
to firms that expand or contract their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year that arrived between January 1995 and December
1999. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 include State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone linear trends. Column 3 includes
State dummies. Regressions weighted by cell population and exclude Mexico City. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

×NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Migrant Prop. in All Jobs

×NNEM Jobs/Worker at Age 16

Migrant Prop. in Formal Export Manuf.

Net New Export Manufacturing (NNEM)
Jobs/Worker at Age 16

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Migration
Skill-Biased Migration
Migrant Interaction
All Reduced Form Specifications (Large ∆s)
Log Cohort Size
Cohort Size/
Ratio of Leavers School
Cohort Schooling
Working Population
to Stayers School

(1)
Migration

Table B.1: Net New Export Jobs and Migration

Appendix C

Additional Figures and Tables

0

50

Percentage
100

150

Figure C.1: Manufacturing Industry Features

Apparel, Footwear, Leather Metalic Products,
& Leather Products Machinery & Equipment

Wood
& Cork Products

Chemicals, Plastics, Mineral
Products, Metals & Paper

Export
Manufacturing

Food, Beverage
& Tobacco

Non-Export
Manufacturing

% Exports in Total Output
% Maquiladora Exports in Industry Exports
% Employees in Foreign Owned Firms
% Industry Exports in Total Exports

Notes: These data cover the whole of Mexico and originate from Nicita and Olarreaga (2007) (exports
in total output), Banco de Mexico (Maquiladora and industry shares of exports) and Ibarraran (2004)
(employees in foreign owned firms). The measure of output used by Nicita and Olarreaga (2007) does not
properly account for all the imported intermediate components that typify the Mexican export production,
hence the major export assembly industries show export ratios of over 100 percent. As these various sources
report at different levels of aggregation, textiles are included in the apparel et al. category despite being
classified as a non-export industry using the export threshold described in Section 2.1. Similarly, petroleum
refinement is included in the chemicals et al. category despite being classified as an export industry. The
metal products et al. category includes: metal products; electronic and mechanical machinery; electrical
machinery; transport equipment; and scientific and optical equipment.

10

Figure C.2: Histogram of Age by Industry Grouping (Age 16-28 in 2000, Insured by IMSS)
Non-Export Manufacturing

.05
0
16

18

20

22

24

26

28

16

18

22

24

26

28

26

28

Informal Jobs (Not Insured)

.05

.1

Other Formal Sector Jobs

20

0

Proportion of Workers (2000)

.1

Export Manufacturing

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

16

18

20

22

24

Employees Age

Note: The age distribution is calculated using the year 2000 census for formal sector workers age 16 to 28
(my sample cohort). A formal worker is defined as a worker insured by IMSS or equivalent insurance scheme.

11

Figure C.3: Visual Identification for 30 Commuting Zones with Largest Export Job Shocks
2
-2

Buenaventura

Gomez Farias

-2

-2

-2

0

0

0

2

2

2
0

Tehuacan

Teteles de Avila Castillo

2

0
2

0

Jalacingo

Valladolid

Concepcion del Oro

1994

1998

1986

1990

1994

1998

1986

1990

1994

1998

1986

1990

1994

1998

-2

-2

-2

0

0

0
1990

-2

-2

-2
1986

0

0

2

2

2

2

Valle Hermoso

-2

0
-2

-2

Camargo
2

Nogales
2

Moctezuma

0

0
-2

-2

0

0
-2
2

San Luis Rio Colorado

-2

0

Magdalena

2

2

-2

0

Baviacora
2

Aconchi
2

Teziutlan

-2

-2

-2

0

0

0
-2

2

2

2

2

Ajalpan

2

Buenavista de Cuellar

Net New Jobs Per Worker (Normalized Residuals)

0

2
-2

-2

Acuna

-2

-2

ZM Matamoros

2

Mexicali

Nuevo Casas Grandes

ZM Juárez

0

0

2
-2

-2
2
0

0
-2

ZM Chihuahua

0

0

2
0
-2
2

ZM Reynosa-Río Bravo

Ignacio Zaragoza

0

Cohort Average Education (Normalized Residuals)

ZM Nuevo Laredo

ZM Saltillo
2

ZM Piedras Negras
2

ZM Tijuana

1986

1990

1994

1998

1986

1990

1994

1998

Year Cohort Aged 16
Cohort Average Education

Net New Export Jobs

Note: Residuals from regressions of cohort schooling and net new export jobs at age 16 on state-time
dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone linear trends (i.e. the remaining terms in equation
1). Residuals are plotted against the year the cohort turned 16 for the 30 commuting zones with largest
cumulative export job arrivals per worker.

12

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

0
-2

0
-2

0

2

Working in exports

2

Working

2

Attending school

-2

Deviations (relative to effects at age 16)

Figure C.4: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census (Including Commuting-Zone FE)

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

Year of export employment shock
age 12
age 17

age 13
age 18

age 14
age 19

age 15

Notes: Each panel plots 48 coefficients obtained from regressing a binary variable from the 1990 census
(denoted by panel title) on export employment shocks in each year between 1987-1992. I include cohorts
aged 12-19 and age fixed effects, and allow the coefficients on the shocks to differ by age cohort. The full
specification is shown in equation 4 of the main text except here I also include commuting-zone fixed effects.
The omitted category is shocks at age 16. Sample restricted to commuting zones with at least one year of
employment growth in export manufacturing between 1987-1992. Lines connect coefficients of the same age
group and x-axis denotes the year of the shock. Vertical lines drawn in March 1990, the month of the 1990
census.

13

Figure C.5: Cross-Sectional Evidence from Both Censuses
Working in exports

1

1

0

-1

-1

0

0

-.5

Deviations

2

2

.5

3

3

Working

1

Attending school

-2

-1

0

1

-2

-1

0

1

-2

-1

0

1

Year of export employment shock
age 12
age 16

age 13
age 17

age 14
age 18

age 15
age 19

Notes: Each panel plots the 32 coefficients obtained from regressing the dependent variable (denoted by
the panel title) on export employment shocks in each year between 1987 and 1990 (for 1990 census data)
or between 1997 and 2000 (for 2000 census data). I include cohorts aged 12-19 and age-census fixed effects,
and allow the coefficients on the shocks to differ by age cohort. The full specification is shown in equation
4 of the main text. Lines connect coefficients of the same age group and the x-axis denotes the year of the
shock with 0 denoting the shock immediately preceding the census (1989 or 1999).

14

1
0
-1
-2

-2

-1

0

1

2

Age 17

2

Age 16

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1991

1992

1993

1
0
-1
-2

-1

0

1

2

Age 19

2

Age 18

-2

Deviations in industry of employment

Figure C.6: Job Propensities: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1987

1988

1989

1990

Year of export employment shock
Export manufacturing
Service sector
Manufacturing (insuf. specified)

Non-export manufacturing
Primary sector
Unclassified

Notes: Panels plots coefficients obtained from regressing the dependent variable from the 1990 census (dummies for employment
in the industry denoted by the legend for the relevant line) on export employment shocks in each year between 1987 and 1992.
I include cohorts aged 16-19 and age fixed effects, and allow the coefficients on the shocks to differ by age cohort. Sample
restricted to commuting zones with at least one year of employment growth in export manufacturing between 1987 and 1992.
Each panel plots results for four different industries for a single cohort. The full specification is shown in equation 4 of the
main text. Lines connect coefficients of the same industry and the x-axis denotes the year of the shock. Vertical lines drawn in
March 1990, the month of the 1990 census.

15

Figure C.7: Parental/Sibling Channels: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census
Parent works

Mother works

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

-5

-5
87 88 89 90 91 92 93

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

0
-2

-2

0

2

87 88 89 90 91 92 93
2

-5
0

2

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

-2

-2

0

2

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

Deviation in parent/family
employment probability

0

0

0

0
-5

Deviation in child
school attendance

5

5

5

Family works in exports
5

Parent works in exports

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

87 88 89 90 91 92 93

Year of export employment shock
Does work

Does not work

Notes: Each panel plots the coefficients obtained from regressing the dependent variable from the 1990 census (either school
attendance in the top panel, or family employment dummies denoted column headings in the lower panel) on export employment
shocks in each year between 1987 and 1992. Sample restricted to cohort aged 16 at the time of the 1990 census and to commuting
zones with at least one year of employment growth in export manufacturing between 1987 and 1992. For school attainment
in the upper panels, the coefficient on each of these shocks is allowed to differ depending on household employment status
denoted in the column header. Lines connect coefficients for the same household employment status. The lower panels plots
family employment propensities for the categories denoted in the header. The x-axis denotes the year of the shock in all panels.
Vertical lines drawn in March 1990, the month of the 1990 census.

16

Figure C.8: Responses of Discount-Rate Cutoffs and Schooling to Employment Shocks
Panel 1a: Shock to primary school job opportunities for non-lagging population
𝑓(𝜌)

𝜌2,T

Panel 1b: Shock to primary school job opportunities for lagging population
𝑔(𝜌)

𝜌1,T−1

𝜌2,T+1

𝜌1,T

No Effect

Decrease in Schooling

Density

Density

S=3

S=2

S=3

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌

𝜌2,T

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌

Panel 2a: Shock to secondary school job opportunities for non-lagging population

𝑓(𝜌)

S=2

Panel 2b: Shock to secondary school job opportunities for lagging population
𝑔(𝜌)

𝜌1,T−1

𝜌2,T+1

𝜌1,T

Decrease in Schooling
Density

Ambiguous
Density

S=3

S=2

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌
Panel 3a: Shock to high school job opportunities for non-lagging population
𝑓(𝜌)

𝜌2,T

S=2

S=3

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌
Panel 3b: Shock to high school job opportunities for lagging population
𝑔(𝜌)

𝜌1,T−1

𝜌2,T+1

𝜌1,T

Increase in Schooling
Density

Increase in Schooling
Density

S=3

S=2

S=3

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌

S=2

S=1

Discount Rate 𝜌

Notes: Figure shows the various movements of the discount-rate cutoffs for the cohort aged 16 at the time of
an unanticipated new factory opening described in Section 5.1.1 of the main text. The left column of panels
shows movements in cutoffs for non-lagging youths, those with S − 2 at the time of the shock. The right
column of panels shows movements in cutoffs for lagging youths, those with S = 1 at the time of the shock.
The first row shows the impact of shocks to jobs requiring S = 1, the second row shocks to jobs requiring
S = 2, and the third row shocks to jobs requiring S = 3.

17

Figure C.9: Skill Differences by Sector (All Job Shocks, All Years)
Skill Requirements (1990)

Exports

.4
.3
.2
0

.1

Proportion of Job Shocks

.4
.3
.2

Proportion of Job Shocks

.1
0

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

Wage Premia (1990)

9-11

Exports

>11

Non Exports

1
0

.5

Wage Premia Over Average Wage

1
.5

Wage Premia Over Average Wage

<9

1.5

Non Exports

0

<9

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

<9

Skill X Density at Dropout Margin (1990)

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

>11

Skill X Density at Dropout Margin (2000)

Non Exports

Exports

Non Exports

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

<9

9-11

9-11

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

.15
.1
.05
0

.05

.1

.15

Proportion of Job Shocks

.2

.2

Exports

Proportion of Job Shocks

>11

Wage Premia (2000)

1.5

Exports

0

Non Exports

.5

Non Exports

.5

Exports

Skill Requirements (2000)

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

d1 d1 d1

d1 d1 d1

d2 d2 d2

d2 d2 d2

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

<9

9-11

9-11

>11

Note: Top row plots skill distribution of net new jobs per worker occurring between 1986 and 1999. Job arrivals categorized
into three skill bins based on highest completed educational stage of workers in each state-industry at time of census; primary
school (grades < 9), secondary school (grades 9 − 11), and high school or above (grades > 11). Second row plots wage premia
(over the average commuting zone wage for that skill bin) paid by these same net new job arrivals. Bottom row subdivides
the skill bins in top row into terciles (denoted by superscripts) of the relevant density of marginal youths for each skill level
detailed in equation 10. Left panels use 1990 census information, right panels use 2000 census (where I focus on formal sector
employees only).

18

Table C.1: Net New Export Jobs at Different Ages of Exposure
(1)
All RF (Large ∆s)

Years of
School

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Education Metric (All Cohort Averages)
Grade-9 Pre-Grade-9 Years of Grade-9 Pre-Grade-9
Dropout

Dropout

School

Dropout

Dropout

Age 11 Net New Export
Manuf. Jobs/Worker

-0.372
(1.082)

0.196
(0.254)

0.168
(0.198)

Age 12 Net New Export

-1.763

-0.164

0.269

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(1.085)

(0.217)

(0.179)

Age 13 Net New Export

-2.133*

0.279

0.367**

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(1.118)

(0.215)

(0.169)

Age 14 Net New Export

-0.605

-0.131

-0.0143

-1.650*

-0.00726

0.134

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(1.287)

(0.239)

(0.153)

(0.897)

(0.232)

(0.137)

Age 15 Net New Export

-0.955

0.0935

-0.0159

-1.925**

0.0854

0.295**

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(1.340)

(0.210)

(0.159)

(0.828)

(0.216)

(0.136)

Age 16 Net New Export -4.090***

0.407*

0.303*

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(1.149)

(0.231)

(0.161)

0.753

0.0660

-0.301**

Manuf. Jobs/Worker

(0.932)

(0.189)

(0.138)

Age 18 Net New Export
Manuf. Jobs/Worker

-1.601*
(0.923)

0.329*
(0.173)

0.0233
(0.128)

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

18,063
0.952
1808

17,206
0.731
1806

18,063
0.941
1808

18,066
0.953
1808

15,739
0.778
1805

18,066
0.944
1808

Age 17 Net New Export

Notes: Dependent variable is a cohort education metric, either average completed schooling, grade-9 dropout
rates (i.e. the proportion of the set of students with 9 or more years of schooling who obtain no additional years
of schooling beyond 9) or pre-grade-9 dropout rates (i.e. the proportion of students that obtain fewer than 9
years of schooling). Independent variables are net new export manufacturing jobs per worker arriving in cohort’s
commuting zone at various ages between 11 and 18 attributable to firms that expand or contract their employment
by 50 or more employees in a single year. State-time dummies, commuting-zone dummies and commuting-zone
linear trends not shown. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commutingzone clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

19

Table C.2: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census
(1)

(2)

(Large ∆s)

in 1987

in 1988

in 1989

in 1990

in 1991

in 1992

12 year olds

1.106
(1.025)

0.374
(0.603)

0.147
(0.326)

0.582
(0.365)

-0.162
(0.520)

-0.717
(0.567)

13 year olds

3.380*

-0.291

-0.277

0.850

-0.625

-1.432

(1.736)

(1.248)

(0.598)

(0.688)

(0.974)

(1.076)

3.871**

-0.224

-0.788

0.273

-0.411

-1.039

(1.892)

(1.479)

(0.738)

(0.830)

(1.269)

(1.443)

3.613*

-0.617

-1.052

0.110

-0.446

-0.911

(1.955)

(1.677)

(0.779)

(0.757)

(1.385)

(1.464)

1.278

0.205

-1.904**

0.231

-0.656

-0.538

(1.913)

(1.792)

(0.880)

(0.910)

(1.449)

(1.436)

1.216

-0.721

-1.574**

-0.488

-0.799

-1.171

(1.274)

(1.457)

(0.766)

(0.721)

(1.160)

(1.254)

0.741

-1.137

-0.700

-0.419

-0.445

-0.870

(1.188)

(1.364)

(0.877)

(0.720)

(0.847)

(1.023)

-0.379
(1.228)

-0.389
(1.473)

-0.915
(0.874)

-0.352
(0.747)

-0.390
(0.897)

-0.395
(1.020)

All RF

14 year olds

15 year olds

16 year olds

17 year olds

18 year olds

19 year olds

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
School Attendance in March 1990
Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock

Observations
R2
Commuting Zones

675,299
0.669
178

Notes: Dependent variable is a dummy for school attendance at the time of the 1990 census. Independent
variables are net new export manufacturing jobs per worker attributable to firms that expand or contract
their employment by 50 or more employees in a single year arriving in youth’s commuting zone in each
year between 1987 and 1992. I include cohorts aged 12-19 and age fixed effects (not shown), and allow the
coefficients on the shocks to differ by age cohort. Sample restricted to commuting zones with at least one
year of employment growth in export manufacturing between 1987 and 1992. Regression weighted by cell
population, excludes Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

20

Table C.3: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1990 Census (Including Commuting-Zone FE)
(1)

(2)

(Large ∆s)

in 1987

in 1988

in 1989

in 1990

in 1991

in 1992

12 year olds

-1.445
(1.397)

-0.319
(1.544)

1.264
(0.928)

-1.178
(0.894)

-0.0292
(1.190)

0.0683
(1.177)

13 year olds

1.112

-0.589

1.174**

-0.225

-0.233

-0.821

(0.787)

(0.895)

(0.587)

(0.564)

(0.697)

(0.689)

1.664*

-0.150

0.924**

-0.168

0.00500

-0.572

(0.857)

(0.756)

(0.409)

(0.553)

(0.513)

(0.693)

2.179***

-0.670

0.951***

-0.0186

0.193

-0.368

(0.596)

(0.511)

(0.332)

(0.363)

(0.310)

(0.460)

0.246

-1.189**

0.304

-0.975***

-0.154

-0.233

(0.798)

(0.567)

(0.261)

(0.314)

(0.455)

(0.450)

-0.580

-1.498*

1.040**

-1.082*

-0.0326

-0.106

(0.934)

(0.790)

(0.524)

(0.604)

(0.800)

(0.758)

-1.805*

-0.856

0.848

-1.075

0.00812

0.325

(1.054)

(0.826)

(0.594)

(0.704)

(0.841)

(0.873)

All RF

14 year olds

15 year olds

17 year olds

18 year olds

19 year olds

(3)
(4)
(5)
School Attendance in March 1990
Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock Export Shock

Observations
R2
Municipalities

1,244,386
0.239
1808

Notes: Dependent variable is a dummy for school attendance at the time of the 1990 census. Independent
variables are net new export manufacturing jobs per worker attributable to firms that expand or contract their
employment by 50 or more employees in a single year arriving in cohort’s commuting zone in each year between
1987 and 1992. I include cohorts aged 12-19 and both age and commuting-zone fixed effects (not shown), and
allow the coefficients on the shocks to differ by age cohort. Cohort aged 16 is the omitted category. Regression
weighted by cell population, excludes Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered standard errors
in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

21

Table C.4: Counterfactual Job Types from the 1990 Census
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Cohort Employment Propensities in March 1990
Non-export
Service
Primary
Manuf.
Manuf.
Sector
Sector
(insuf. specified)

(6)

All RF (Large ∆s)

Export
Manuf.

1987 Export Shock: Age 16

-0.288
(0.718)
0.968
(0.795)
1.083
(0.776)
1.824***
(0.699)
1.507***
(0.497)
1.142**
(0.560)
1.302**
(0.567)
0.953*
(0.538)
1.599***
(0.338)
1.719***
(0.407)
1.815***
(0.404)
1.888***
(0.404)
0.699**
(0.327)
0.768**
(0.364)
1.184***
(0.375)
1.414***
(0.392)
-0.0673
(0.623)
0.274
(0.604)
0.233
(0.624)
0.0117
(0.680)
-0.609
(0.656)
-0.299
(0.710)
-0.598
(0.709)
-0.760
(0.796)

-0.00268
(0.216)
-0.112
(0.270)
0.355
(0.321)
0.556
(0.458)
-0.149
(0.172)
-0.353
(0.236)
-0.490**
(0.248)
-0.828**
(0.348)
0.113
(0.119)
0.104
(0.192)
-0.133
(0.168)
-0.0502
(0.213)
0.106
(0.145)
0.386**
(0.192)
0.172
(0.222)
0.305
(0.293)
0.100
(0.185)
0.0980
(0.268)
0.198
(0.276)
0.431
(0.347)
-0.0618
(0.198)
-0.180
(0.278)
-0.00965
(0.307)
0.00682
(0.455)

0.321
(0.355)
-0.647
(0.625)
0.219
(0.680)
-0.197
(0.964)
-0.210
(0.326)
0.944*
(0.501)
0.627
(0.640)
1.823**
(0.863)
0.0365
(0.196)
-0.386
(0.295)
-0.639*
(0.333)
-0.952**
(0.378)
-0.0424
(0.266)
-0.155
(0.285)
0.137
(0.399)
-0.0474
(0.432)
0.142
(0.291)
0.189
(0.378)
-0.0177
(0.427)
-0.203
(0.445)
0.0220
(0.293)
-0.386
(0.412)
-0.315
(0.458)
-0.695
(0.557)

-1.140
(0.727)
-1.386
(0.912)
-1.357
(0.911)
-1.583*
(0.824)
-0.475
(0.724)
-0.642
(0.805)
-0.281
(0.786)
-0.203
(0.835)
-0.338
(0.369)
-0.171
(0.438)
-0.581
(0.419)
-0.324
(0.435)
-0.751*
(0.422)
-0.825*
(0.471)
-0.574
(0.405)
-0.572
(0.477)
0.000953
(0.405)
0.135
(0.438)
0.0821
(0.413)
0.140
(0.394)
0.566
(0.532)
0.822
(0.601)
0.452
(0.579)
0.388
(0.651)

0.0157
(0.349)
0.573*
(0.345)
0.620
(0.405)
0.337
(0.372)
0.465**
(0.199)
0.494**
(0.235)
0.585**
(0.267)
0.907***
(0.324)
0.385**
(0.166)
0.520**
(0.221)
0.505**
(0.219)
0.300**
(0.131)
0.289*
(0.164)
0.579***
(0.193)
0.380
(0.244)
0.373*
(0.193)
0.0969
(0.137)
0.0919
(0.163)
0.118
(0.140)
-0.144
(0.153)
-0.0849
(0.137)
-0.0387
(0.184)
-0.115
(0.180)
-0.0261
(0.212)

-0.0766
(0.0886)
-0.142
(0.126)
0.0141
(0.118)
-0.0470
(0.179)
0.123
(0.0840)
0.162**
(0.0794)
0.103
(0.103)
0.288*
(0.165)
0.131**
(0.0539)
0.00766
(0.0565)
0.0416
(0.0878)
-0.0267
(0.0759)
-0.0128
(0.0534)
-0.0525
(0.0699)
0.0592
(0.0885)
-0.0836
(0.0845)
-0.0494
(0.0675)
-0.0437
(0.0778)
0.0324
(0.0740)
-0.0469
(0.0806)
-0.0858
(0.0818)
-0.0827
(0.0674)
0.0682
(0.147)
-0.109
(0.140)

650,454
0.066
178

650,454
0.042
178

650,454
0.144
178

650,454
0.078
178

650,454
0.023
178

650,454
0.012
178

1987 Export Shock: Age 17
1987 Export Shock: Age 18
1987 Export Shock: Age 19
1988 Export Shock: Age 16
1988 Export Shock: Age 17
1988 Export Shock: Age 18
1988 Export Shock: Age 19
1989 Export Shock: Age 16
1989 Export Shock: Age 17
1989 Export Shock: Age 18
1989 Export Shock: Age 19
1990 Export Shock: Age 16
1990 Export Shock: Age 17
1990 Export Shock: Age 18
1990 Export Shock: Age 19
1991 Export Shock: Age 16
1991 Export Shock: Age 17
1991 Export Shock: Age 18
1991 Export Shock: Age 19
1992 Export Shock: Age 16
1992 Export Shock: Age 17
1992 Export Shock: Age 18
1992 Export Shock: Age 19
Observations
R2
Municipalities

Unclassified

Notes: Dependent variables are dummy variables for employment in each of six industries at the time of the 1990 census.
Independent variables are net new export manufacturing jobs per worker attributable to firms that expand or contract their
employment by 50 or more employees in a single year arriving in cohort’s commuting zone in each year between 1987 and 1992. I
include cohorts aged 16-19 at the time of the census and age fixed effects (not shown), and allow the coefficients on the shocks to
differ by age cohort. Sample restricted to commuting zones with at least one year of employment growth in export manufacturing
between 1987 and 1992. Regressions weighted by cell population, exclude Mexico City and migrants. Commuting-zone clustered
standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent and *** at 1 percent.

22

Appendix D

Robustness Using Highly Agglomerated Industries

As noted in Section 2.4, the demand for exports is primarily driven by external demand
shifts.4 However, demand for domestic goods and services may be driven by local demand
shocks which correlate with other time-location-varying omitted variables. For example, a
positive shock to income may raise local demand and schooling, and upwards bias the job
arrivals coefficient. In order to mitigate this concern, I use the IMSS employment data to
calculate a Herfindahl index for state-level industrial concentration in the year 2000 at the
lowest level of industrial classification in the database (276 industries).
P
The Herfindahl index for industry j is equal to r (sjr −sr )2 , where sjr is state r’s share of
total employment in industry j, and sr is state r’s share of total manufacturing employment.
The values for the Herfindahl index range from 0.0017 for “services of repair, washing, lubrication, verification of emission of polluting agents and parking of vehicles” to a value of 0.75
for the “manufacture of pencils, rubbers, pens and ball-point pens” or for “Sulfur extraction”.
The value of the Herfindahl is above 0.1 for 95 industries (73 of which are in manufacturing)
and 181 industries have Herfindahls below that number (53 of which are in manufacturing).
If an industry is highly concentrated in a few states, demand is likely to be driven by
national rather than local demand shifters. Therefore, as a robustness check, I repeat the
analysis of Section 5 but replace the net new jobs per worker measures with job growth only
in the industries which have Herfindahl indexes below 0.1.
These results are reported in Figure D.1 which mimics Figure 7 by plotting the coefficients on both export manufacturing job shocks and other formal job shocks from separate
regressions at every age between 10 and 23 (except here only using job shocks in heavily agglomerated industries). As with Figure 7, the impacts of job shocks in export and non-export
sectors diverge at age 16 with a significantly more negative coefficient on export shocks at
age 16 compared to non-export shocks at that age (an F-stat of 4.96 with a p-value of 0.026).
In fact, there is no negative impact of non-export job shocks at age 16 at all (a coefficient
of 0.123 with a standard error of 0.619).
As discussed in Section 5.2, Column 15 of Table 7 reproduces the regression for exposure
at age 16 for highly-agglomerated industries, but just for job shocks post 1990. Column
16 of Table 7 further includes the four triple interactions to control for job characteristics
suggested by equation 10.

4
Foreign demand shocks, such as a US recession, are swept out in aggregate by the time fixed effects.
The variation remaining comes from the fact that export factories are located unevenly across Mexico,
coupled with the fact that there are industry-specific export demand shocks.

23

-4

Cohort Schooling
-2
0

2

4

Figure D.1: Differential Effects of Export and Non-Export Job Shocks (Highly-Agglomerated
Industries Only)

10

12

14

16
18
Age of Exposure

Export Manufacturing Job Shocks

20

22

Other Formal Job Shocks

Notes: Figure plots the coefficients from 14 regressions that regress cohort average schooling on both net
new export job shocks and net new job shocks in all other sectors using the specification in equation 1 but
replacing shocks at age 16 with shocks at one of 14 different ages between 10 and 23 and restricting attention
to highly agglomerated 4-digit industries in both sectors. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals.
Coefficients on export manufacturing job shocks are significantly different from non-export job shocks at age
16 (an F-stat of 4.96 with a p-value of 0.026).

24

