                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SAVINGS AND BEQUESTS




                         Michael D. Hurd




                      Working Paper No. 1826




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




Support from the Department of Health and Human Services grant 84
ASPE138A is gratefully acknowledged.   I am deeply indebted to
Thomas Prusa for his diligent and careful research assistance.  I
am very grateful to John Karl Scholz for his research help and his
careful reading of the manuscript. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research project in Aging. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      ER Drking Paper #1826
                                                      January 1986



                              Savings and Bequests



                                    ABSTRACT




     Empirical    stuaies have indicated that the elderly seem to
accumulate wealth after retirement, and that the desire to leave
Dequests is an important aeterminent of saving behavior, both Kinds of
results have cast doubt on the validity of the life cycle hypothesis of
consumption.  In the first part of this paper, a model of bequests is

specified, and the implications for consumption and wealth trajectories
are derived. The main result is that, even with a bequest motive,
consumption generally decreases with age after retirement, and that
wealth will also decrease for all but wealthy households. In the           -


empirical   part of the paper, wealth changes of retired households are
reported over 10 years of panel data. Contrary to many results from
cross—section data, the elderly do dissave: over 10 years the wealth ot
the elderly in tne sample decreases by about 27 real. A test for       a
beQuest motive is proposed. There is no evidence whatsoever for a
bequest motive.




                                                     Michael D. Hurd
                                                     tpart1rEnt of Economics
                                                     SUL'w
                                                     Stony Brook, NY 11794
                                                      (516) 246—6176
 1. Introduction



      itriough the life cycle hypothesis of consumption has played a
 centra.l role in theoretical ana empirical work aDout consumption since
 it was proposea by ModigHani and Brumberg (1954), many economists have
come to douot its empirical valiaity. Three Xmas of studies have
 contriDutea to the doubt: simulation ana estimation of earnings and
 consumption paths, Euler equation estimation, and micro data estimation
 of the age—wealth relationship. In this paper I am mainly interested in
 the savings behavior of the elderly and how it relates to the age—wealth
 relationship, but 1 shall briefly mention all three kinds of Studies.1
      Studies that simulate the consumption and earnings paths of
 households (White (1978,1984), Darby (1979)), or estimate the paths
directly (Kotlikoff and Summers (1981)) typically show that the
aggregate of the present value of savings cannot account for a
suDstantial amount of the capital stock that is held by households.
8ecause the holdings of capital stock not generated by household saving
must have been inherited, bequests must account for a large portion of
the capital stock. The authors conclude that the strict life cycle
hypothesis (no bequest motive) cannot be true for an important fraction
of the population.

     I find it difficult to draw the same conclusions. First, as far as
the simulations are concerned, we have little knowledge of the true
utility function parameters so that evaluation of the simulations is
highly subjective, Second. the representative consumer approach is
surely wrong given that wealth is highly concentrated in the population.
ihira, mortality uncertainty is not usually considered,  if there were
no uncertainty about the date of death, the strict life cycle hypothesis
says that wealth would be exhausted at the date of death. However, when
the cate of death is uncertain people will often die With positive
wealth as long as the consumption function is sufficiently concave and
as long as annuities of a certain kina are not available.
                                                           Therefore,




                             1
with uncertainty, the existence of bequests, large or small, does not
necessarily invalidate tne life cycle hypothesis. More to the point is
whether people would want to leave bequests even if the date of death
were known. Stated differently: do bequests enter the utility
function? Because we nave little quantitative knowledge of the process
generating savings, it seems to me that one can learn more about the
beauest motive from directly examining data on wealth holdings than
either from simulating data or from reconstructing the entire earnings
and consumption paths.
      Many studies have used the Euler equation approach (Hall (1978,
1985), Flavin (1981) and Haysahi (1982,1985)). The objective of these
studies is to estimate using time series methods the parameters of a
stochastic difference equation for consumption. In this framework the
life cycle hypothesis makes the strong prediction that the influence of
wealth and income on consumption will be zero. Often these studies
reject the life cycle hypothesis at least as a hypothesis governing tne
behavior of all consumers (Hall and Mishkin (1982)).
     Studies based on microeconomic data often investigate how wealth
varies with age. The relationship between wealth and age that is
generally found in cross section is implausi ie according to the life
cycle hypothesis; in particular the elderly seem to accumulate wealth
as tney age even though the life cycle hypothesis implies they should
decumulate (Mirer (1979), Menchik and David (1983), Danziger et al
(1982), and P(urz (1984)).   1 quote from Danziger et al: "the elderly
not only do not dissave to finance their consumption during retirement,
they spend less on consumption goods and services (save significantly
more) than the nonelderly at all levels of income. Moreover, the oldest
of the elderly save the most at given levels of income.    The empirical
finding that the elderly seem not to dissave has probably had the
greatest effect in convincing economists that the strict life cycle
hypothesis is not valid. The reasoning is that there is a maximum age
to which people can live, and, without a bequest motive, people will
want to consume all their wealth by that age. Yet, wealth seems to




                             2
  increase at any age. The Conclusion is that there must be a bequest
 not i ye.

      I believe there are fundamental difficulties in drawing such an
 inference from cross—section results. Wealthy people tend to live a
 long time; therefore, the older people in the sample will have haa above
 average earnings in their own cohorts,, and their wealth holdings will be
,cet. 2• higher than the wealth holdings of younger people. In
 addition, each cohort will have had different lifetime income
                                                                 levels,
 and rates of return on investments. Some
                                           adjustment, especial ly for
 lifetime income, must be made or else comparisons across age groups will
 be meaningless. In that the adjustment for each cohort cannot be
 estimated in the cross—section data, it has to be imposed; for example
 it is often assumea to follow long—term trends Such as growth rates of
wages. This means that lifetime income at each age is adjusted by the
long—term treno with the greatest ages having the greatest adjustment.
Whether one adjusts observed income to estimate lifetime income (King
and Dicks—Mireaux (1982)), or adjusts wealth itself (Mirer (1979)), the
age profile could slope up or down aepending on the adjustment that is
chosen. Thus, the adjustment itself, rather than the data, inevitably
determines the relationship between wealth ana age. My final reason for
not having much confidence in the Cross—section studies Is that it is
very difficult in cross—section data to be certain that people have
retired. Because some of the young elderly are still working, wealth
will initially increase with age even after normal retirement age.  It
is Certainly not inconsistent with the life cycle hypothesis that the
wealth of workers increases with the age.
     Papers by Diamond and Hausman (1984) ano Bernheim (1984) use panel
data. In contrast to many of the cross—section studies, both find that
the elderly dissave after retirement. The Diamond and Hausrnan paper is
based on the National Longitudinal Survey of older men. This data set
is not well—suited for a stuay of the wealth of the elderly after they
retire because even by the end of the 10—year panel the ages of the
sample range from 55 to 69. Even with a retirement age of 62, which is




                            3
earlier than average, only halt ot the sample woula be retirea in tne
last year; theretore, wealth changes ot retired people can only be
opserved tor a few years, and, even then, most of the retired will be
early retirees who may not be typical in their savings behavior. The
authors give no information about th numDer of observations that are
retired, but it is probably small. Furthermore, the wealth changes
reported in the paper are not directly and simply calculated; tney are
inferred from a complicated estimation methoa which seems to focus on
tne retirement and savings of workers, not of retired people.   Finally.

it is aifticult to judge the results because no definition of wealth is
given in the paper. As the theoretical results given in Section 2 of
this paper show, tne construction of the wealth variable reauires care;
some seemingly reasonable wealth variables such as the expectea present
value of Social Security benefits will not give good indications of
consumer penavior.
     bernheim'S work is a substantial advance over previous work.      He

studies wealth changes ot retired individuals and couples from panel
data, and suggests an appropriate way to account for annuities and
Social Security in consumption ano wealth calculations.2 In his sample
wealth generally declines between 1969 and 1975 and between 1975 and
1979. This is the first solid evic3ence that the elderly do dissave.
The evidence is not conclusive, however, because he only observed two
wealth changes, and because he used only a small fraction ot the sample.3
     In this paper I offer evidence on the empirical validity of the
strict lite cycle hypothesis against the life cycle hypothesis with
bequests. In the first part of the paper, some theoretical work
indicates which variables should be studied. The main result is that
measures of total wealth that include the present value ot Social
Security ana other annuities usually do not give information about
behavior.   1 then introduce and analyze a model in which lifetime
utility depends on the consumption path and on bequests.   As I model tne

beQuest motive, the consumption trajectory will decline with age;     the

wealth trajectory will also aecline unless initial wealth is large. One




                              4
woulo expect that even with a beauest motive the wealth of most people
would decrease with age. Theretore, a declining wealth trajectory is
not evidence in favor of either hypothesis.   in the empirical section 1
present oata that show the retired elderly in my sample do dissave.      I


concluoe from this that, in contradiction to many previous stucies, the
wealth—age relationship of the elderly is consistent with the strict
life cycle hypothesis. Then I test for a DeQuest motive. My test is
wnether the saving of the elderly wno have living children differs from
the saving of the elderly who co not have living children.   I find no
evidence for a bequest motive.
     The data are from the Retirement History Survey. From 19c59 to
1979, the RHS followed approximately 11,000 households whose heads were
born in 1906—1911. I Study the wealth changes of the retired people in
that survey.




                            5
2. consumption and Wealth irajectories


       I first review a simole model of intertemporal uti lity
maximization.    I then introauce a model which includes a oequest
motive ano annuities with the goal of finding some guidance for the
empirical results to be presented later. To simplify the problem 00th
theoretically and empirically. 1 study only retired people so that
utility is defined only over consumption and bequests. Without such a
restriction the empirical work becomes much more difficult because tne
workers attitude about future work is not known, so it is not easy to
say how his wealth ought to evolve. A gooc estimate of the wealth of
retired people can oe maae, however, ano in tne absence of unrecorded
transfers, this is rest—ot---lifetime wealth.
       I use six assumptions:   1. People maximize expected litetime
utility. 2. The budget constraint is known; its specification depends
on the model under consideration. 3. Irie probability of death is known
and exogenous, Out it will vary according to age, race and sex.      4.

People are not allowed unsecured borrowings, which implies both that no
one can die in debt, and that the budget constraint must hold at each
moment.    5. Annuities are exogenously given. This assumption can be
defended on the ground tnat most annuities are job—related pensions ana
Social Security, both of which are surely the result of job choices, not
savings choices. Furthermore, privately purchased annuities are, 'in
this   body of data, almost nonexistent probably due to their very low
yields, and their uncertainty. A paper by Friedman and Warshawsky
(1985) shows that in some years yields on annuities are dominated by
yields on long—term bonds, and in other years, they are only slightly
lower.    In that annuities are nominal and there is inflation
variability, they are risky just as bonds are risKy; but oonos are
liquid whereas annuities are not. in tact, the desire for liquidity may
mean that through Social Security and private pensions many people have
been forced to hold more in annuities than they would have chosen even




                                6
 it actuarially fair annuities were availaDle. .     The real   interest
 rate is known ana constant.


 2.1 No beQuests or annuities


      I Degin with a very simplified model which, nonetheless, Contains
many ot the important issues. Suppose that an individual chooses a
consumption trajectory to maximize


             S U(Ct )e_Ptatdt,


where Ct is consumption at time t, 1J(.) is an increasing, concave
utility function with unbounded marginal utility as c approaches zero, p
is the (constant) subjective discount rate, and a, the life rate, is
the probability that the individual will be alive at time t. The
utility model is the standard time—separable expectea utility
maximization model. The budget constraint is


               0
                   ce Ct w tor all T.

ihe budget constraint must hold at each instant; otherwise there is
some chance the person would die a debtor. Without annuities, however,
the form of the consumption function guarantees that wealth will never
become zero as long as the probability of begin alive is positive.
     The first order conditions imply that


               tt    =     (r—p)(T—t)


where u is marginal Utility at time t, ana similarly tor UT. this
equation simply says that expected marginal utility at time t must, at
the optimum, equal expected marginal utility at time I discounted back
to time t.   Taking I > t, we see that the ratio of marginal utilities
depenus on the conditional life rate, the probability of living at I




                                 1
given the person is alive at t.              If I is only slightly larger than t, we
can use an approximation to show how the marginal utilities depend on
the mortality rates. Let m e the instantaneous mortality rate at t;
that is,

                               ft
                   a1.   =       m ds,
                             1— Os


so tnat m=—da/dt.


                   aPt. =
                             a-m5Us.

men. at/at =   I    —
                         m1Vr—t)/a provided       m1 is approximately constant over
tne interval t to I. But I —             m1(T-t)/a    is approximately
em8t T—fl Therefore,

(I)                Ut utet                   )Vt—t)



If (p+m1/a)>r Ut < Ut.. Because of the concavity of u(.), this implies
that c. > c. At age 65 the conditional mortality rate of white males
is about .04, so that consumption will decline unless r is considerably
greater than p. Of course, even if r > p, consumption must eventually
decline because the conditional mortality rates increase With age,
eventually becoming unbounded at the last instant it is possible to be
alive. Most people would probably assume that p > r, however, so that
consumption will, a fortiori, decline when mortality is taKen into
account.4 When p + mt/at > r, wealth must decline with age:                if wealth
were ever to increase, it would always increase due to declining
consumption, yet utility maximization requires that all wealth be
consumea should someone live to the maximum possiDle age. That is,
utility maximization requires that WN = 0 whenever aN = 0.               This is the
reason why the apparent increase in wealth that hirer (1979) found has
cast doubt on the life cycle hypothesis.
      The conclusion that coi'sumption eventually declines is robust to




                                         8
 some changes in the model specification. For example, p may vary. The
 overall shape of the consumption trajectory would change;
                                                                    yet
 consumption would still decline at some age. Even marginal utility
 could change slowly ana the conclusion would De the same.
       It may be noted that if the form of U.) were known,
                                                                   equation   (1)
could be solved for C1 as a function ot Ct.          A. and a1, ana the
parameters of the utility function. For example, the constant relative
risk aversion utility function U(ct) =       c/r1—)        implies that


(2)              CI   = Ct(AIt
                            Ia

With panel data on the consumption of individuals who face different
life rates, one could estimate a, which is the index of relative
risk aversion, and r—p.


2.2   Bequests


     I now consider a model in which there is a specific bequest motive;
that is, bequests are not simply a residual due to uncertain date of
death but they give utility.
      Suppose that an individual chooses a consumption path to maximize


                 U(ct)e_Ptatdt +     V(bt)e_Ptmtdt

where V(.) gives the utility from a bequest, and bt is a bequest given
at time t.5 The idea behind the bequest part of the objective function
is that someone will receive utility today from the Knowledge that
should he die at time t his heirs would receive bt. For simplicity, the
subjective time rate of discount of bequests has been made the same as
the discount rate of consumption; the two discount rates can easily be
maoe to be different without seriously complicating the analysis.
      The constraint on the maximization is that bt =
                                                             w   >0. Again the
constraint will never be binding due to the form of the Consumption




                                 9
function. The solution to the maximization proolem is


(3)               ua = u+ha+he        r—p) +
                                               Sv5e(5_tr_P)msds

where V5 is the marginal utility of bequests at time s. The
interpretation of this equation is as follows: someone contemplating
reallocating a dollar from consumption at time t to consumption at time
t+h will lose uat in utility on average at time t.        if he lives to t+ri,
the oollar will have grown to ehr which will produce utility at the rate
of ut4.r. at+h ani           adjust for uncertainty and subjective
discounting. With probability m5 the individual will die at s before
reaching t-*h;    he will then have v5eI5tUP) in utility trom the
dollar. The integral sums up all of those possible utility gains. The
equation says that at the optimum the expected utilty loss must equal
the expected utility gain. Another interpretation comes from dividing
equation 3) by at ana putting h=1. Equation (3) is seen to be the
Euler equation for the utility maximization problem; that is, equation
(3) requires that consumption De chosen to make u. =       Et(ut+i),   which is
the Euler condition.
      Holding constant Ct+h, Ut is larger than what it would be without a
bequest motive (V5 >   0).     This implies that, in the normal case in which
consumption declines, a bequest motive causes the consumption trajectory
to flatten, and, because the budget constraint cannot be violated,
consumption will initially be smaller. Therefore, more wealth is held
than without a bequest motive, and the wealth trajectory is flatter.
This is why the empirical observation that the wealth trajectory of the
elderly is flat or rising has been interpreted to be evidence for a
bequest motive.
      The theoretical finding that a bequest motive causes more wealth to
be held is not surprising in that the oequest motive causes wealth to be
an argument ot the utility function, if, in fact, there were no bequest
motive but wealth holdings produced utility, the first—order condition
would be like that produced oy a bequest motive except that the marginal




                                 10
 ut1ty of wealtn would oe weighted by tne life rates rather than        D   the
 mortality rates. But in that the life rates are a function of the
 morta'ity rates this is just a difference in functional form of the
 utility function. In other words, there is a utility function detinea
 over consumDtion and wealth that would lead to a first—order condition
 n which wealth is weigntea by mortality rates.     Thus, with wealth data
only, the hypothesis of a bequest motive could not be separated from the
 hypothesis that wealth enters the utility function. What is required is
the specificatjon that the marginal utility of bequests will depena on
some observable variables. Without that specification anc without data
on the variables, no estimation methods could separate the the two
hypotheses.

        Equation (3) suggests an informal test of the bequest motive:
divide the sample into households with identifiable heirs and households
without identifiable heirs. One would expect that if there were a
bequest motive the wealth and consumption trajectories of those With
heirs would be flatter than the trajectories of those without heirs.
Although this test is not as powerful as ones based on specific utility
functions, it has the attractive feature of being free of functional
form.



2.3 Bequests and Annuities


        The models I have considered take wealth to be a stock from which
future consumption has to be financed. However, there is another
important class of resources for the elderly, annuities. By annuities I
mean those resources that offer an income flow, but which are not
bequeathable. The resources are not a stock in that typically they
cannot be borrowed against. Examples of annuities are Social Security,
private ana government pensions, Medicare and Medicaid, ana privately
purchased annuities.  (In the data, privately purchased annuities are a
insignificant fraction of total wealth, probably for reasons 1 mentioneo
in the introduction). I divide resources into two classes:




                              11
bequeathab]e wealtfl and annuities. When I refer to annuity wealth I
mean the actuarial present value of an annuity stream.
        The utility maximization problem with annuities is to maximize in
the path [Ct)


                S   U(ct)ePtatdt   + SV(bt)ePtmtat


 The constraints on the maximization are


(4)                  bt + 5(c5_A5)e(tds               w0e.

and



(5)                 w = w0e      + 5:   5_c5       (t5)f'05


where A5 is annuity income at time s, and Wt is bequeathable. As long
as the marginal utility of bequests or consumption is positive, (4) will
be binding. (5) is the borrowing or bequeathable wealth constraint,
which states that bequeathable wealth cannot be negative.
        The approach here may be contrasted with the usual kind of
intertemporal maximization problem in which only the present values of
income and consumption enter. The nonnegativity constraint (5) imposes
important restrictions on the problem.
        The solution to the optimization problem depends on whether the
borrowing constraint is binding or not.               If it is binding over an
interval, Ct 5 just equal to At over that interval: there is no
bequeathable wealth, and the individual simply consumes tfle annuity. It
over an interval (t,t+h), the borrowing constraint is not binding, then


                            =
  (b)                 uta       ut+ha+he       P
                                                     + Shvse(tr_P)msds

as before. When there is no bequest motive, the bequeathable wealth
constraint is eventually binaing (it may happen at the greatest age




                                   12
 possible), but with a bequest motive, the constraint may never be
 binding. If the marginal utility of bequests is large enough, the
 person wiM   desirealways to die with positive wealth. Let N be the
 greatest possible age 50 that aN = 0. When the wealth constraint is
 never binding, from (6)


 (7)           Ut =
                      Svse_Pi(s_tJ(ms,at)ds

The interpretation of this equation is that a dollar reduction in
consumption at t will eventually result in a dollar increase in
bequests; the integral accounts for the probability that it Will occur
at time s, and for the discounted utility that Will result. With the

specification of a declining marginal utility of bequests, greater
wealth will cause the integral to become
                                         smaller; hence, consumption
will increase,

       In this bequest model, the utility of bequests comes from
contemplating the utility the heirs will receive from the bequest.
Because bequests are typically a small fraction of the lifetime wealth of
the heir, the bequest should affect only slightly the marginal utility
of wealth of the heir. Therefore, the size of the bequest will have
only a small effect on the marginal utility of bequests. That is, a
reasonable specification for the utility of bequests is that V(b) =      ab.
An empirical specification should probably allow a to vary from
individual to individual in that there is substantial variation in the
wealth of heirs; but to find the consumption trajectory of a particular
individual, it seems reasonable to specify that V(b) = a, a constant.
I make that assumption for the rest of this paper.
       I assume that annuities are constant in real terms both for
simplicity and because in general it is empirically correct,    in the
RHS in 1975, at least 75Z of annuities were constant in real terms;
about 25X were constant in nominal terms, which implies that they had a
negative growth rate (Hurd and Shoveri (1985)). In fact, whether the
annuities are constant or have a growth rate does not affect the




                             13
analysis very much.


2.3.1 Positive terminal wealth


       For a given level of annuities there are three kinds of solutions
to the maximization problem depending on the level of w0.          i)   If

'initial wealth is low, the borrowing constraint is binding At some time I
< N.   BequeathaDle wealth reaches zero at 1.     ii)   If initial wealth is
high, the borrowing constraint is never binding and the individual has
positive wealth at N. Consumption is always greater than annuities.
 iii) If initial wealth is medium, the borrowing constraint is never
binding but WN   = 0.   Consumption is always greater than annuities except
possibly at age N when it may decline to A.
       I first analyze the case in which w0 is high (WN >    0).

 (8)            ut=aetr_P5_tms,atds

 In tnat Ut IS independent of w0, the consumption trajectory is
 independent of w0 for all w0 that lead to wN > 0. This happens because
 after taking into account mortality and discounting, the marginal
 utility of consumption along the entire consumption path equals the
 marginal utility of bequests.      If consumption were to increase in
 response to an increase in wealth, the marginal utility of consumption
would fall below the marginal utility of bequests, which would not be
 optimal. Of course, one would have a similar result if the marginal
 utility of bequests has only small variation.
       Although the consumption trajectory is the same for all w0 that
 lead to WN >   0, the wealth trajectories vary greatly. Some examples are
 shown in Figure 1. This illustrates that even if individuals have
 identical tastes, their wealth trajectories will be quite different
 provided they have different initial wealth.
       The consumption trajectory when WN > 0 will depend on r—p and the
 time pattern of mortality rates. When r = p,




                               14
    (9)               Se_Ps_t)msos = at

so that Ut       =a   for all t, independent of the mortality rates.
Consumption is constant. This happens because effectively there is no
discounting: the individual is indifferent between leaving a bequest
'over all future dates. in that the conditional probability of aeath is
one, the expected marginal utility of bequests is a, Which is put equal
to the marginal utility of consumption.
          When p >   r,    the integral in (9) is less than one. At each t,
consumption is higher than when p =r. As before, if consumption is
reduced by a dollar, bequests increase by a dollar with prooability one;
but the bequest occurs in the future ana must be discounted.
          Whether the consumption trajectory is rising or falling depends on
the interaction between er—p and m5. From (8) aut/dt =
                                                                     u   =



(10)                  —am/a +          (
where $     =p   -   r.     In general one cannot sign (10).
          if we consider u to be a function of $,        f($),   then for small $


                      f($)   =   f(Q)   +



where 0<$<$, and                   means that the derivative is eqvaluated at $
=    0.   In that f(0) = U (marginal utility is constant when p =            r),   the
sign of du/dt depends on the sign of                     =



                           = aLl   —



Therefore,     f($) > 0 if


(11)                      (mt/at)S(m5/a)(s_t)d5 <1.




                                            15
it may be noted that the condition for dut/dt > 0 depends only on the
mortality function, not on a or on the details of U(c).
           1 first Show that (11) is not trivial by giving an example in which
it is not satisfied. Without loss of generaltiy let t = 0.                               Suppose m5
=   5/N for 0 < s        <   N/lU and m5 = (5/9)N              for P4/10 <   S < N.   Condition (11)

is satisfied if

                  'N
    (12)       m- m sds < 1.
                  Os

but With       this    mortality rate function, the LI-IS of (12) is 25/18, and

dut/cit is negative.
       I now give some examples in which condition (11) is satisfied;
these examples seem to cover the reasonable cases.
           a) Constant mortality rate
With m5 a constant, ms/at =                mt/at     =       1/(N—t), which is a hyperbolic
hazard rate. Then the LHS of (11) is

                                       N
                        (1/(N—t)) t (s—t)ds              =   1/2.

Thus condition (11) is satisfied.
           b) An objection to a) is that constant mortality rates are not
found in the mortality tables for the elderly. Actual mortality rates
rise until about age 75 and then fall, and the hazard rate always rises.
A function that satisfies both of these requirements is


                        at =   eôe             and


                                           =
                        mt =    -dmt/dt

                                 =   ô&eOt, ô and 6 positive.
                        mt/at

If ô <       1, drn/dt is positive at t = 0, and eventually drnt/dt becomes
negative as required by the data. For large N (which is necessary so




                                           16
 that aN    0) it can be shown that Conaition (11) holds.
      C)   For actual mortality data (11) holds by direct calculation.
      We see, then, that both for   actual mortality rates and for
 reasonaole analytical mortality rate functions, dut/at is, to a linear
 approximation in ,   positive.   This implies that along the consumption
 path that is utility maximizing for all initial wealth such that WN >
 0, ac./dt is negative. This is the maximum consumption path, (c*J.
Along this path the marginal utility of consumption equals the marginal
utility of beQuests after proper accounting for mortality and r—p. For
a given level of annuities, there is a certain minimal level of initial
wealth that corresponds to this consumption trajectory. Call this
                                                                     w.
Any Initial wealth larger than w will lead to wN > 0. The wealth
trajectory (w*) is shown in Figure 1. [w must fall because if it were
ever to rise, it would always rise due to falling consumption. But the
terminal Condition is that WN be zero. All levels of initial wealth
greater than w will produce the consumption path c. As the examples
show, even though they produce the same consumption path, the wealth
paths all lie above (w*), and they all differ. This is an interesting
feature of this moael. Many investigators find beterogenous saving
behavior (Kurz (1985), Diamond and Hausman (1984)). Here individuals
with identical tastes can have very different wealth trajectories.
Therefore, if we observe some individuals with rising trajectories and
some with falling trajectories, it is not necessary to conclude that
preferences are different.


2.3.2 Zerotermjnalwealth


     When initial wealth is less than w, terminal wealth is zero. The
analysis is different from before because the borrowing constraint is
binding on consumption. The consumption path will be below tc1, There
are two possibilities: the medium wealth case in which bequeathable
wealth reaches zero at N and, because the consumer never wants to borrow
against future annuity income, the borrowing constraint is never




                             17
binding; the low wealth case in which bequeathable wealth reaches zero
before N, and the borrowing constraint is binding.


2.3.2.1 Borrowing constraint binding


       This is the low wealth case: it is likely to be found over most
observations. In 1975 in the lower 1O of the wealth distribution,
about 67. of total wealth was bequeathable wealth. Over tre entire
sample bequeathable wealth amounted to about 44 of total wealth (Hurd
and Shoven (1985)).            The consumption path in the low wealth case is
found from the solutions to




(13)              u0 =     utatetP)       +
                                              aem5ds
                                                         =   0,   and
                  WI =     w0erl   + S   (A_c5)eM5)rds

                         = A


where w0 is initial bequeathable wealth. The first equation comes from
the requirement that consumption be continuous in t, so that it must
equal A at 1.     The second equation implicitly defines I to be the time
when bequeathable wealth is exhausted. The third equation comes from
the first—order conditions for utility maximization. In principle one
can solve these equations for I, ct and Wt as functions of the utility
function parameters, w0, A, the mortality rates, and data on heirs.
Typical consumption and wealth trajectories are shown In Figure 2.
       These equations illustrate three important points: first, the
expected present value of annuities does not enter the equations. In
other words annuity wealth is not a deterrninent of behavior. A quantity
that appears is

                  g-1
                        Ae 'cls.
                   0



                                    18
 which is the present value of annuities to trie oate at which the wealth
 constraint becomes binding. But this quantity is a result of the
 utility maximization, not a cause of it. Second, from the point of view
of estimation, both A and w0 are variables that help identify utility
 function parameters. Third, within the utility maximizing framework
considered here, ignoring the borrowing constraint leads to a
spec if i cation error.

     It should be noted that the comparison of consumption paths or
wealth paths across individuals cannot give goon information about
behavioral parameters unless annuities are taken into account. For
example, the wealth trajectory of someone with a bequest motive may
decline more rapidly than someone without a bequest motive if the
initial mix of annuities and w0 differs. Furthermore, one cannot
aggregate bequeathable wealth with annuity wealth to produce a variable
that is useful in investigating behavior.6 For example, with a normal
consumption trajectory, the sum of bequeathable wealth and annuity
wealth wifl decline with age; but the rate of decline will depend on
the parameters of the utility function, the mortality rates, and the mix
of annuity wealth and bequeathable wealth. An extreme case is when the
only wealth is annuity wealth. The rate of decline depends only on the
mortality and interest rates, not on any behavioral parameters.
Therefore, one cannot learn anything about behavior from studying the
path of annuity wealth. In general nothing can be said about the
parameters of the utility function from observing how the sum of
bequeathable and annuity wealth evolves. It should be clear, however,
that the trajectories of consumption and bequeathable wealth have
behavioral parameters embedded in them, but their recovery is not a
simple mattter: the estimation requires the solution of the system of
equations given in (13).
      When there is a bequest motive, the consumption and wealth
trajectories are flatter than without a bequest motive. An interesting
question is whether it is possible for the consumption and wealth




                            19
trajectories to rise over at least part of the retirement period. By
differentiating (13) one finds that


                    f(t) =            =            +      and
                             dut/dt       h(u—a)

                   df(t)/dt =   dh/dt(u—a)         + f(t)(+ht),


where      = p—r   and ht is the mortality hazard rate, mr/at. Again 1 take
the normal case to be         > 0.        1 desire to find the cases in which dutldt
always has the same sign. As Table 1 shows there are just three
possibilities: f(t) is always negative; it is always positive; it is
initially positive but then becomes negative. This Is to say that
dut/dt can change sign only once, and in that case it goes from positive
to negative, and then remains negative. A negative dut/dt implies a
positive acIdt. But a terminal condition is that c1 = A;                therefore it

act/dt is positive1 Ct for t < Twill be less than A, and wealth will
grow. Wealth at I will then be positive which violates the other
terminal condition. We see then that the only possible sign of dut/dt
is positive, or dct/dt negative: consumption always declines. This
implies that wealth always declines because if it were ever to increase
it would always increase due to declining consumption; yet w1                0.

        Consider now a value of w0, w3, which just causes Ct to become
equal to A and wt to become zero at N. Any value of w0 larger than
leaos to       > A and any smaller value causes consumption to reach A
before N.     Let {CJ and Lw) be the consumption and wealth trajectories
associated with w0. They are shown In Figure 3 along with (c and
        which were discussed in the high wealth case. All the consumption
and wealth trajectories in the low wealth case must lie below (ci and
Lw);     in the high wealth case there is only one consumption trajectory,
{c*1, regardless of initial wealth, and all the wealth trajectories must
lie above {w). In the case of medium wealth (c1 > A and wN =              0),     the

consumption trajectory must lie between (C) and (c*) because consumption
trajectories cannot cross. The wealth trajectory must lie between (WI




                                     20
and Cw*1 because wealth trajectories cannot cross.
     Table I also applies to the medium wealth case, but the terminal
condition cT = A no longer holds. That terminal condition was used to

rule out dut/dt negative, so at least in principle one might have a
rising consumption trajectory. But the consumption trajectory must be
bounaed by (ci and tc*1. Consider Ct      to   be a function of w0. The
function will be continuous so that for small departures of w0 from
either w or w0 (ct) will decline. It would, therefore, be surprising
if tc1 did not decline for all w < w0 <        w.
                                               Again, in view of the
terminal condition on wealth, the wealth trajectory would also decline.


2.4 Summary


     The main theoretical results to come from this section are:          i)

The consumption and wealth trajectories are flatter, cet.pj., when
there is a bequest motive than when there is not.       If one is able to
Classify observations into a group that will not have a bequest motive
and a group that may have a bequest motive, one ought to be able to test
informally for the bequest motive by finding whether the consumption and
wealth trajectories of the first group decline faster than the
trajectories of the second group. Ii) With normal mortality rates and
with p >   r,   consumption trajectories decline even with a bequest motive.
If they are observed to rise, one should be worried about the validity
of the underlying model; the bequest motive will not explain such a
rise. Wealth trajectories also decline unless initial wealth is so
large that terminal wealth will be positive. One would think that most
people would have declining wealth trajectories. Therefore, declining
average wealth trajectories should not be taken as evidence in favor of
either the strict life cycle hypothesis or the extended life cycle
hypothesis. iii) There is no theoretical justification for studying
the sum of annuity wealth and bequeathable wealth to determine
behavioral consumption parameters. The annuity stream enters the
problem, but in a complicated, nonlinear way.       iv) Given a constant




                               21
marginal utility of bequests, one would find that individual wealth
trajectories vary greatly, some rising and some falling, even though the
individuals had identical utility functions. All that is needed is
variation in initial wealth.




                               22
3.   Empirical Results


      In this section 1 present evidence from the RHS on two issues: Did
the elderly in the RHS dissave over the sample period? Is there any
emirical evidence of a bequest motive? The results are guided by two
general principles. Tne first is to minimize functional form
assumptions.   I hope to present the data in such a way that no
functional forms beyond those assumea for the aerivation of (3) will De
required. This precludes parameter estimation. The secona general
principle is to study the wealth of the elderly as a group. Thus. I do
not investigate individual behavior.7 My results can best be comDared
with the results from cross—section analysis and from simulations.


3.1 Data


     The data are from the Longituainal Retirement History Survey.
About 11,000 households whose heads were born between 1905 and 1911 were
interviewed every two years from 1969 through 1979. The survey includes
questions about all assets and liabilities with the exception of a
meaningful question on the asset value of life insurance.8 From the
questions one can construct a (almost) complete balance sheet of the
household. Because the asset catagories are so fine, there are missing
values. The results reportea here rely on a method to fill missing
values in such a way as to retain any individual component. Details
will be found the the Appendix.
     The basic unit of ooservation is a household that is intact over
two adjacent surveys. Were I to study changes in intact households over
longer periods, the sample would be reduced due to mortality.
Furthermore, the estimation should allow the households to reoptimize
every two years in response to windfall gains and losses. In addition,
I select only households in which it appears the wage earners are




                            23
retired: that is, a househola enters my active sample when the
responaent, in the case of a single person household, or both the
husDand and wife, in the case ot a couple, has no labor earnings at
present or in the future surveys. As 1 mentioned earlier, the theory is
not easily testable if workers are included in the sample.
       The object of stucy is the change in beciueathable wealth over two
years. There are five two—year periods. Data definitions are given in
the Appendix;    I mention here that the important components of
bequeathab)e wealth are housing wealth, stocks ano bonds, property,
businesses and savings accounts less debts.
       To study wealth changes one would like to estimate the coefficient
in the equation w2 = Xw0 in which w2 ana w0 are real wealth levels in
year 2 and year U respectively, and k Is the wealth retention rate. In
the RHS data there appear to be reporting errors in wealth, so I use an
estimator that is robust to random errors with zero expectation.       I


estimate k by


(14)             K =   Ew2/w0.

The ratio estimator      K =   k(w2/wo)   is not consistent for K. nor is an


OLS estimator.




3.2 Results.


       in Table 2 1 report real wealth changes over the ten year period of
the RHS. They were calculated in the following way: in 1969 all
households that remained intact until the next survey, in 1971, and
which had no present or future labor earnings became the active sample.
K1969 was calculated according to (14) separately for the singles and
couples in that sample. This process was repeated for each of the years
1971, 1973, 1975 and 1977. Thus the sample on which the two year




                                 24
 changes are based changed every two years because of retirement and
 death. The ten—year wealth retention rate is the product of the ks:
 it gives the fraction of a dollar that would remain at the end of ten
 years in real terms.     The table shows the percentage change in real
wealth. There are four sets of results. The columns give wealth
 changes according to whether housing is included in the calculation of
 beQueathaDle wealth or not.     The first three rows are over observations
which have positive bequeathable wealth in the initial period. The
 second three rows are over all observations. A later table (Table 3)
gives information on the number of observations behind the calculations.
        Before I discuss the results in Table 2, 1 outline the rationale
 for the four sets of results.      In principle, all types of bequeathable
assets will change as the consumption trajectory evolves: in practice,
 it is difficult to change the consumption level of housing because of
the costs of transition from one consumption level to another. This is
particularly true for the elderly. If actual consumption adjusts only
slowly to desired consumption, the trajectory of housing wealth will be
flatter than the trajectory of desired housing wealth. In addition,
rates of return on housing appear to have been substantially higher than
the inflation rate for the RHS sample. Therefore, wealth trajectories
that include housing will be flatter than desired wealth trajectories.
Until a complete moael of desired housing services and transactions
costs is developed, probably the best that can be done is to exclude
housing wealth from the bequeathable wealth totals.9 Later results are
based on wealth calculations that do exclude housing;      in this table,
however, I present both kinds of results. It turns out that no
substantive conclusion is changed by including housing in bequeathable
we a 1 t h.


        The idea behind restricting the sample to include only observations
with positive wealth is that households with little wealth will not
follow desired wealth trajectories because they will have reached the
borrowing constraint before two years have passed. The initial rate of
change of wealth would be misrneasured. Furthermore, anyone with




                               25
negative wealth is, in the context of the economic model, observed with
error. Simple errors in variables arguments predict that limiting the
sample to positive initial wealth causes the rates of change to decrease
which, indeed, is what is found in the first rows of the table.     I

believe that at this stage of descriptive statistics it is better to
allow negative wealth than to predispose the wealth changes to be
negative; thus, in later results I use the complete sample.
     Table 2 shows that in all cases the elderly dissave: the estimates
range from 13.9X of initial bequeathable wealth to 29.2X of initial
Dequeathable wealth over the period 1969 to 1979.   In the case that I
believe is most representative of desired wealth changes (housing wealth
excluded, all observations) there is dissaving of 27.3(., which is at a
rate of 3.2Z per year. Both couples and singles dissave, singles more
than couples. This result is predicted by the basic model because the
mortality rates of singles are greater than of couples: the household
composed of a couple will survive longer (possibly not intact) than the
household composed only of a single person. Therefore, the consumption
trajectory of a couple will be flatter according to (1), and the wealth
trajectory will also be flatter. Although this result is predicted by
the theory there are other explanations in the context of the basic
model. The first is that there is a bequest motive:   if there is a
bequest motive that depends on identifiable heirs, the wealth
trajectories of couples will on average be flatter in that a greater
fraction of couples have identifiable heirs than singles. The second
explanation is that couples have different levels of initial wealth and
annuities than singles; wealth and annuities influence the wealth
trajectories.
     Imposing the restriction that initial wealth be positive changes
the results by very little. Most of the excluded observations had zero
initial and second year wealth.
    The wealth changes that include housing wealth are much smaller
than those that exclude housing, probably for the reasons given above.
    The wealth levels in Table 2 were deflated by the CPI to find real




                           26
 wealth changes.   I note here that deflating by a cost of living inoex
 that is tailored to the elderly changes the results by very little. For
 examDle, the Boskin—Hurd index (Boskin and Hurd (1985)) which is defined
 for five age groups of the elderly gives slightly less inflation than
 the CPI over the ten year period (6.7 vs. 7.1%). This produces a rate
 of wealth change of —24.6% against —27.3% In the base case (no housing
 wealth, all observations).

     Table 3 shows percentage changes in real wealth in each of the two—
 year periods and the number of observations. Real wealth declined in
 all years except 1977—79. The table emphasizes an important fact:     all
 the wealth changes in this paper are ex post wealth changes. The theory
 refers to desired or ex ante wealth changes. While one would expect
the two to be equal on average, in any time period they Will differ due
to unanticipated windfall gains and losses. Apparently there were
extraordinary losses in 1975—77 and extraordinary gains in 1977—79. In
fact the wealth changes in the two time periods average to about —7.2%
per period, (geometrical average) which is a reasonable continuation of
the rates in the three periods from 1969 to 1975. An investigation of
the components of the losses and gains in the portfolios of the RHS
households deserves attention, but it is beyond the scope of this paper.
     The table reveals a trend toward increasing rates of dissaving as
the population ages and faces higher conditional mortality rates. The
theory says that consumption declines with rising mortality rates. For
constant initial wealth, therefore, wealth levels will also decline.
However, the results in Table 3 are not conclusive In that neither
initial wealth nor annuities is the same over time periods, so the trend
in wealth changes can only be suggestive.
     One explanation for the results for singles versus couples in Table
2 is a bequest motive. As I mentioned in Section 2, one cannot
distinguish a bequest motive from a wealth—augmented utility function
unless one is willing to specify that the utility of bequests depends on
observable variables. Here I test for a bequest motive by specifying
that it depends on whether the household has living children.° Of




                              27
course, the aefinition could be expanded to include siblings, aunts,
uncles, parents, nieces and nephews, but, as we shall see, the results
are so unpromising that I have not gone further.
     In Table 4 I give the wealth changes according to whether the
household has living children or not, and the average number of
observations in each two—year period. The theoretical work in Section 2
indicated that a bequest motive would flatten the consumption
trajectory; therefore the household would save more. The empirical
result in the table is that households with children actually save less
than households without children; therefore, there is no evidence for a
bequest motive. The empirical result does not depend on whether housing
wealth is included: both singles and couples with children still save
less than singles and couples without children.
     Although the results in Table 4 give no evidence for a bequest
motive, they are certainly not conclusive even within the context of the
model in this paper.   In particular, the theoretical results of Section
2 showed that both w0 and annuities determine the wealth trajectory;
the trajectory is not homogeneous in w0, and annuities enter in a
nonlinear way. If households with living children have different levels
of wealth and annuities than households without children, one would
expect that their trajectories would differ. In particular, decreasing
w0 while holding annuities constant causes w2/w0 to decrease.11 This
can easily been seen when w0 is small comparea to annuities: then,
aecreasing w0 so that w2 goes to zero will cause w2/w0 to go to zero;
thus, w2/w0 is not independent of w0 and annuities.
     Couples with children have about the same levels of annuities as
couples without children, but their levels of initial wealth are quite
different. For example, in 1975 couples with children had initial
wealth excuding housing equity of about $32,000 whereas couples without
children had initial wealth of about $47,000. For singles the
corresponding figures are $10,000 and $19,000. If housing is included
the figures for the couples are raised almost exactly $20,000; the
figures for the singles are raised about $10,000. Over the five sample




                            28
  periods couples without children averaged 587. more initial wealth
 excluding housing than couples with children; for singles the figure is
 727.. These wealth data taken by themselves imply that households with
 cflildren should dissave more in percentage terms than households without
 children; they certainly leave open the possibility that if the wealth
 levels could be made the same, households with children would have
 higher savings rates.
      The experiment with the data I report now holds approximately
 constant the initial wealth and annuity levels. The 1969 sample of
 couples with children was divided into 16 cells according to the Initial
 wealth quartile ana annuity quartile.12 w2/Ew0 was calculated in each
 cell to give wealth retention rates by annuity and wealth quartile. A
 similar calculation was made over the 1969 sample of couples without
 chiloren using the same quartile points. Because the number of
 observations in some cells is small and the initial wealth levels are
 close to zero, it is not meaningful to average the savings rates across
cells. Instead I compare the wealth retention rates for couples with
ana without children in the same quartile cell. In each year 16 such
comparisons can be made across couples and 16 across singles; over five
years a total of 160 comparisons can be made. Holding constant
annuities and wealth, I test for a bequest motive Dy asking whether
households with children had higher wealth retention rates than
households without children. Table 5 shows the fraction of cells in
each year in which households with children had higher rates than
households without children. Under the hypothesis that there is no
bequest motive as reflected in the presence of children, the entries
should average 8/16. Under the hypothesis that there is such a bequest
motive, the entries should be larger. We see that for couples three of
five entries are less than 8/16 and two are exactly 8/16. Summing over
all years we find that in 33 of 80 cells couples With children saved at
a greater rate than couples without children; put differently, in about
597. of the cells the presence of children caused
                                                greater dissaving.
This is of course, the wrong outcome to support a bequest motive. Over




                            29
singles, there is almost no difference by saving rates according to the
presence of children.
     Tne results of Table   are consistent with the results of Table 4:
when there is no stratification by wealth and annuity levels as in Table
4, singles with children saved somewhat less than singles without
children; with stratification as in Table 5 the rates of saving are
about the same.   In Table 4, couples with children save so much less
than couples without children that controlling for initial wealth and
annuities does not reverse that finding.
     The theory in Section 2 suggested that the strength of the bequest
motive could vary from person to person, and I speculated that it might
vary with wealth levels. Perhaps bequests are a superior good. Table 6
gives information that will allow an informal test of that hypothesis.
In each cell I count the number of years in which the wealth retention
rate of households with children exceeded the wealth retention rate of
households without children. That count is recorded in the main body of
the table. The greatest entry possible is five; under the hypothesis
of no bequest motive, 2.5 is expected. The greatest entry in the final
column or row is 20; with no bequest motive, 10 is expected. High
values support a bequest motive.
     Over couples there seems to be no pattern in the table either by
wealth levels or by annuity levels.   I conclude that any differential
wealth retention rate by wealth or annuities is purely random. Over
singles it appears there is some differential by wealth level: singles
With children in the two lowest wealth quartiles had higher wealth
retention rates than singleswithout children in 26 out of 40
comparisons. Singles in those wealth quartiles are poor: for example
in 1975 the quartile points were $1200, $5759 and $18000 excluding
housing wealth. Singles with children would mostly be widows. Although
the annuity variable includes transfers from relatives, it may be that
there are more unrecorded transfers from children in the lowest
quartiles than in the highest quartiles. The effect is not strong
enough in the table to draw any firm conclusion without more




                            30
  investigation.
      A problem with the Classification metnod in Table 6 is that with
 observation errors on    wealth retention rates are bound to be higher
 in the lower wealth quartiles than in the higher wealth quartiles. Put
 differently, the estimator given in (14) is not consistent for w2/w0 in
 each cell when observations are assigned
                                          according to w0. Furthermore,
 the means in the lowest quartile will be small making the variance of
 Ew2/w0 large.     In Table 7, I report similar results but the
 classsificatjon is by quartiles of initial capital income rather than by
 quartiles of initial capital wealth. Again, the quartiles for couples
 are calculated across the capital income of all couples whether or not
 the household has living children, and similarly for singles. This way
 of classification is like instrumental variable classification: under
instrumental variables, the Classification would be from fitted values
of the probability that A household fell in a particular cell where the
predictor would be capital income. When w0 has observation error,
capital income is a good instrumental variable because it comes directly
from the survey data; it is not derived from capital)3
    The results for couples are very similar to those given in Table 6.
As before, there is no pattern by initial capital income or annuity
level. The number of cells in which households with children saved at a
higher rate than households without children is, however, smaller: only
34/80. Under the hypothesis of a bequest motive we would expect more
than 1/2.
     In Table 6 there was some indication that there ore unreported
transfers from children to single parents. The pattern that suggested
the transfers is not evident in Table 714 In fact, it appears that any
differential saving according to whether the household has children is
random with respect to annuities and capital income. The fraction of
cells in whicn saving was higher for households with children fell to
.42. The general impression, as in Table 4, is that there is no
evidence for a bequest motive even when wealth and annuities are held
constant.




                             31
4.   Conclusion


      Over the five two—year periods of the RHS the elderly in the sample
generally decurnulated real wealth. The estimated rate of decumulation
over 10 years is about 3.2 per year. At this rate, a household with a
20 year life expectancy will have reduced its bequeathable wealth to
about half of its initial level. The basic theory suggests that the
rate of decumulation is not constant: the slope of the consumption
trajectory depends on the conditional mortality rate, which increases
with age. This implies that th rate of wealth decurnulation will
increase with age, so that one could expect even smaller wealth levels
after 20 years.
      These results are in contradiction to most cross—section results.
There are a number of reasons why these results are more reliable than
those from cross section;   I study only the wealth changes of the
retired elderly; aifferential mortality by wealth level is not
important as it is in cross—section. Finally, no speculation about
lifetime earnings is necessary. With time separability of the utility
function, the household can remaximize each time period subject to its
wealth; that is, the wealth trajectory at t only depends on wealth at
t, not on past earnings or consumption. In the data, initial wealth can
be calculated from survey questions.
      Bernheim (1984) gives wealth decumulation rates excluding housing.
His results imply 10—year decumulation rates of .41 for couples and .38
for singles. The comparable figures from Table 2 are .15 and .36.     I

believe the results of this paper are more reliable because they are
based on a much larger sample; nonetheless, Bernheims results are
consistent with the conclusion that the elderly dissave.
      There is no evidence for a bequest motive, at least insofar as it
depends on whether the household has living children. In fact, what
little evidence there is suggests the opposite. Furthermore, the




                            32
 houseriolds with children have less bequeathable wealth than households
 without children. It the observed rates of decumulatjon continue beyond
 the ages of the RHS households, the households with children will always
 have less wealth than households without chfldren. In that about 8O of
 the households in the RHS have children, those
                                                households may bequeathe
 more wealth in total than households without
                                              children; but the amount
 per household will certainly be less.

      Although intergenerational transfers are not the focus of this
 paper, some of the findings can by applied to that issue. Kotlikoff and
 Summers (1981) estimate that about 80Z of the capital stock held by
 households arises from intergenerational transfers. The results of this
 paper cannot be used to check that estimate because the wealth
                                                                holdings
 of the RHS sample cannot be aggregated to estimate wealth holdings of
the population. Nonetheless, these results do have implications for the
KotHkoff and Summers findings.
     Even though no bequest motive was detected by the methods of this
paper, there are two ways in which desired bequests could still be an
important part of capital transfers. Bequests could be a superior good
to such an extent that only the very wealthy respond to the bequest
motive. In that the distribution of wealth is highly skewed, a few
large desired bequests could account for most desired bequests. Because
the RHS is a representative sample, such
                                         highly concentrated wealth is
not found in the PHS and probably would not be found in any survey
because the extremely wealth may be reluctant to be interviewed.15     it
should be noted, however, that even in the upper wealth quartile there
was no evidence for a bequest motive. One would imagine that even it
only a few wealthy in the RHS had a bequest motive, It would be detected
in the upper wealth quartile: the estimator of the wealth retention
rate in each cell can be written as


               k =             =
                     Zw2/Ew3       (Z(w2Iw0)w0)/w0.

This is a weighted average of individual rates where the weights are




                                33
initial wealth.
     intervivos giving could be an important part of intergenerational
transfers. The RHS has questions on amounts given to relatives and
children outside the home. The amounts are very small, ranging from $39
to $60 on average depending on the year. While these transfers are
probably highly concentrated and may be important to a few individuals,
they are too small to aftect average rates of decumulation. The RHS
also has questions on the number of children 5upported either fully or
partially and on whether supoort is received from children.    I estimated
the wealth retention rates over the sample which neither supports
children nor is supported by them. The 10—year rates of wealtn change
for that sample along with some excerpts from Table 4 for comparison are


                       Living children           No Living Children
                   No Transfers                         A11*


    Couples           —13.5         —16.8              —1.7Z
                       (769)         (957)             (175)



    Singles           —41.1Z        —38.OV.           —32.6
                       (782)        (1104)             (477)


 *From Table 4. The average number of observations is in parentheses.


There is no change in the basic result: eliminating households in which
there are transfers between the parents and the children increased the
measured saving rate for couples and decreased it for singles, but the
saving rates of households without children remain higher than the
saving rates of households with children. The change in the number of
observations indicates that there are substantial numbers of families
that have some transfers; but apparently the magnitude of the transfers
is small.
  it may be that intervivos giving increases at later ages, but that




                               34
 seems unlikely: households with children already have less wealth than
 households without Children. This wealth differential suggests that
 intervivos transfers take place before retirement, most liKely to
 support consumption and education of the children when they are young.16
 As such these transfers do not enter the stock of capital held by
 households.

      The most straightforewara interpretation of the results of this
paper is that there is no bequest motive in the RHS, and, by extension,
in the elderly population with the possible exceOtion of the very
wealthy. Bequests seem to be simply the result of mortality risk
combined with a very weak market for private annuities. If this is the
case, there is no reason to replace the strict life cycle
                                                          hypothesis Dy
models that emphasize the determinents of intergenerational transfers,
as called for by Kotlikoff and Summers, Of course, one should use a
model that illuminates the question under study. If one is interested
in understanding how most elderly would respond to, say, a change in
Social Security benefits, the strict life cycle hypothesis is surely the
place to start.  If one wants to understand how the capital stock is
accumulated, one would probably want to study the very wealthy.
However, the standard Consumption models may not apply: time
constraints prevent the very wealthy from consurning even the interest
from their wealth.




                           35
                                       ••   I   Annuity Trajectory
                                       a a a * Consumption Trajectory

                                                Wealth Trajectory




Doll8rs




          '0




           A



                                                                     Age
                                                       N




                        Figure 1
               We&th 8nti Consumption 1 rejectories:
                   Termin& We&th Positive



                           36 a.
                                             Annuity Trajectory
                                       oe'   Consumption Trajectory

                                             Wealth Trajectory



Do1rs




        wo
              {W}




        Co




         A




                                  T                 N
                                                                  Age


                      Figure 2

             Wealth and Consumption Trajectories:
               5orrowing Constraint 8inding



                        36 6
                   Figure 3
           We&th nd Consumption Trojectories:
               Termin& We&th Zero

Dollors
            {W4}




                                                Age

Do11rs

          { C' }




      A




                                           N
                                                Age



                          37
                                             TABLE I

                                Determination of the Sign of {Ut/t)

(I4ISES           Ut-a                                           UT-a
   1                +                           not possible   not possible   not possible
   2                +               +                 +               +             +

  3

  4                                 +                4/—.          4/...          *1-

       N.B.T >t

                  In case 4, MJT/b'T can only become negntive while Ut <a. Whenthis occurs, the
                  trajectory switches to case 3.




                                                38
                                           TABLE 2

                           Real Wealth Chdnges from 1969-1979:
                      Houriy Wei11h ind I iquidily wns(rdin( comparison.

                                                               HousnWc8lth -
fflalWeallh            PQpjlaon                                            pUflcluded
Observations            Singles                      -25.2%                 -39.8%
with Positive           Couples                       -2.9%                 - 16.9%
   Only                   All                        -15.0%                 -29.7%

   MI                   Singles                      -224%                  -36.4%
Observations            Couples                       -2.0%                 -14.5%
                         All                         -13.9%                 -27.3%




                                          TABLE 3

                                     Real Wealth Changes
                                  and number of observations

 Veer                jgl                        Couoles             fl
1969-71              -3.9%                        -3.0%            -3.6%
                     (1009)                     (419)              (1428)
1971-73              -6.1%                        -2.5%            -4.2%
                     (1290)                     (740)             (2030)
1973-75             -12.6%                      -0.5%              -7.3%
                     (1552)                     (1204)            (2756)
1975-77             -19.7%                    -25.4%             -22.3%
                     (1864)                     (1511)            (3375)
1977-79               1.0%                      22.9%              10.9%
                     (2187)                    (1790)             (3977)
      N.B. Housing Wealth Is excluded. No liquidity constraint Imposed. Number of observations
           is in parentheses.



                                             39
                                                 TABLE 4

                                 Reel   Wealth Changes from 1969- 1979:
                                               Bequest Motive.

                               LivinaChildren       NoLivinoChildren            fl
   Singles                        -38.0%                 -32.6%              -36.4%
                                   (1104)                (477)               (1581)
   Couples                       -16.8%                    -1.7%             -145%
                                  (957)                  (175)               (1132)
   All                           -282%                   -24.2%               -27.3%
                                  (2061)                 (652)               (2713)


   N.B. Housing Wealth is excluded. No liquidity constraint imposed. Number in parentheses       is
         the average number of observations in h two-year period.




                                                TABLES

                                        Comparison of Saving Rates


             1969-71          1971-73         1973-7b            1975-77     j972zfl j
Couples          8/16            4/16           7/16               6/16         8/16      33/80

Singles          6/16           12/16           6/16               8/16         10/16     42/80

          N.B.   Entries are the fraction of annuity-wealth cells in which households withchildren
                 had higher saving rates than hOusehOlds without children.




                                                    40
                                                  TABLE 6



                                        Comparison of saving rates by
                                    initial wealth and annuity quartiles.


A. Couples

                             Annuity Quartiles                              AU Annuity
    Wealth      •1              2           3               4                Levels
  Quartiles


            1        2/5        2/5           4/5           2/5               10/20

          2          1/5        1/5           3/5           2/5              7/20
          3          1/5        4/5           2/5           1/5              8/20
          4          2/5        2/5           2/5           2/5              8/20


fl Wealth
 Levels              6/20       9/20          11/20         7/20             33/80

B. Singles

                             Annuity Quartiles                              AU Annuity
    Wealth      .1              2             3             4                Levels
  Quartiles



            1        3/5        3/5           2/5           3/5               11/20

          2          5/5        3/5           4/5         3/5                 15/20
          3          2/5        2/5           0/5         3/5                7/20
          4          3/5        2/5           1/5         3/5                9/20

AU Wealth
 Levels              13/20      10/20        7/20           12/20            42/öO


       N.B. Entries are the frtlon of years In which saving rates of households with children
            exedi the saving rates of households without children.




                                                    41
                                                 TABLE 7


                                  Corn panson of saving rates by initial
                                  capital income and annuity quartiles.


A. Couples

                             Annuity Quartiles                             flAnn1tv
     Income      •1            2            3              4
   Quartil

             1        2/5       2/5         3/5            2/5               9/20
             2        2/5       2/5         3/5         2/5                  9/20
             3        1/5       2/5         3/5            1/5               7/20
             4        2/5       2/5         1/5         4/5                  9/20

Afl Income
  jjyei               7/20      8/20        10/20       9/20                 34/80

8. Singles
                             Annuity Quartiles                             All Annuity
     Income      .1            2            3           4                    Levels
   Quartfles


             1    3/5           0/3        2/5          2/5                  7/18
           2      2/5           2/5        2/4          2/4                 8/18
           3      2/5           2/5        3/5          3/5                  10/20
           4      3/5           2/5        2/5          0/5                 7/20

All Income
 1.evels          10/20         6/18       9/19         7/19                32/76

       N.B. Entries are the fraction of years in which saving rates of households with children
             exceeded the saving rates of households without children.




                                                  42
                              footnotes


 1.   See the survey by King (1985)
2.    In his paper, Bernneim says that a gooc apDroximation to the true
value of an annuity stream is its sirTwle discounted sum, not weighted Dy
the life rates. Although I believe this is not always accurate, his
presentation of the problem has influenced the approach I give in
Section 2.
3.    Bernheim calculated the 1969—1975 wealth changes over just 574
households, and the 1975—1979 changes over 1047 households. From the
same data set I use an average of 2071 households over the first period
and an average of 3673 households over the second period.
4.    Although there seem to be no reliable estimates based on
microeconomic data in the literature, two kinds of evidence support the
claim that p >   r.   Surveys and psychological experiments in which peoDle
are asked to choose between a present and a future reward typically show
very high rates of time preference (Fuchs (1982)). Many people pay high
rates of interest on borrowing even though their incomes seem to be
roughly constant over time. On the other side, however, growth models
in optimal steady state imply that p <    r,   and that assumption is often
used in simulations (Davies (1981)).
5.    This formulation is the same as Yaari's (1965).
6. Bernheim (1984) takes the sum of w0 and Air       to   be a good
approximation to total wealth. How good an approximation dpends on how
large i is. Many households in the RHS have very low ratios of w0/A;
it would be surprising if those households would have large values of 1.
7. King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982), Kurz (1984), and Diamond and Hausman
(1984) emphasize the heterogeneity of wealth holdings and behavior of
the elderly. There is certainly substantial variation in wealth
holdings in this data set. See Hurd and Shoven (1985).
8. Hurd and Shoven (1985) describe the categories in detail.
9. King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982) advocate a similar approach.




                              43
 10. Because of the age of the heads of the households, most of the
 children probably are between 30 and 45 years old. Thus, very few
households have children at home. Excluding households in which children
are present does not change the basic results.
11. Bernheim makes this point in a model in which the mortality rate is
constant. In this model in which mortality rates vary, simulations of
'trajectories from the constant relative risk aversion consumption
 function verify the result.
12. The classification method I use here is exactly the same as an
instrumental variable method if there is positive correlation between
capital income and wealth, and the instrumental variable method
classifies according to the quartiles of fitted w0.
13. The annuity classification is only approximate.      According to the
basic theory the entire annuity trajectory influences the wealth path.
I used annuity wealth to reduce the trajectory to a single number, which
was used for the classification. This is preferable to classifying by
annuity income in that some early retirees must wait several years to
begin to receive Social Security and private pensions.
14. There were no single households in four cells;    thus, there are
only 76 comparisons.
15. A further problem in the RHS is that the maximum entry in any asset
catagory is $999,999.
16. The lower wealth cannot be explained by lower earnings: tyDically
men with children have higher incomes than men without children.




                           44
                              Append ix


     1.   Begueathable wealth. The RHS includes very detailed questions
on assets and liapilities. They were aggregated to form the following
assets: net business wealth, net real property, net vehicle value, U.S.
Savings Bonos, Stocks and bonds, loans owned, checking and savings
accounts. Detts were: medical, store, bank and debts to private
individuals. Bequeathable wealth is the sum of these assets less the
sum of the liabilities.   In Table 2, net housing equity was adaed.
     2. Annuity wealth. The expected present value of Social Security.
Railroad Retirment, military, government and private pensions were added
to expected present value of transfers from relatives, Supplemental
Security Income, welfare, Medicare and Medicaid. and private annuities.
     3. Capital Income. This is the sum of interest and dividends, a
service flow from housing equity, and rental income.
     4.   Imputation methods. Because there are more than 40 asset and
liability catagories, there are missing values. To eliminate
observations on the basis of any missing values would be to reduce
suDStantially the working sample; therefore, missing values were
imputed. The imputation methods is described in detail in Hurd and
Shoven (1985); Dut here I give a brief description. The goal of the
imputation method was to retain information about the asset holdings of
the individual. If a respondent indicated he had an asset but the amount
was missing, other suvey years were searched to find a valid value of
the asset. A median rate of growth was applied to the valid entry to
impute a value in the year in which it was missing.    If no valid values
could be found, the median over observations with positive values by
marital status was imputed.    If, in a particular year, a question about
a particular asset was not asked, an interpolation for that individual
from adjacent years was used. This did not happen for the important
asset catagories.




                              45
                      Re ferences



 Bernheini, D. (1984), Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the Pure Life
   Cycle Hypothesis, presented at the NBER conference on Pensions and
   Retirement in the United States, April, 1984, San Diego
 Boskin, M., and M. Hurd (1985), Indexing Social
                                                 Security Benefits: A
   Separate Price Index for the Elderly?, Public Finance
                                                         Ouarterly, 13
   (October, 1985), pp 436—449
Danziger, 5., J. van der Gaag, E. Smolensky, and M.
                                                      Taussig (1982),
  The Life—Cycle Hypothesis and the Consumption Behavior of the Elderly,
  Journal of Post Keynesian Economics. v (Wir;ter). pp Dd—2i
Darby, M. (1979), The Effects of Social Security on Income and the
  Capital Stock, American Enterprise nstitute for Public Policy
  Research, Washington, D.C.
Diamond, P. and J. Hausman (1984), Individual Retirement and
                                                               Savings
  Behavior, Journal of Public Economics, 23, pp 81—114
Flavjn, M. (1981), The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
  Expectations about Future Income, Journal of Political Economy, 89, pp
  974-1009

Friedman, B. and M. Warshawsky (1985), Annuity Yields and Saving
  Behavior in the United States, presented at the NBER conference
  on Pensions in the U.S. Economy, March, 1985, Baltimore, Md.
Fuchs, V.R. (1982), Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study,
  in Economic Aspects of Health, V. Fuchs, ed., NBER and the U. of
  Chicago Press
Hall, R. (1978), Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent
  Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Political Economy,
  86

Hall, R. (1985), Real Interest and Consumption, NBER working paper 1694
Hall, P., and F. Mishkin (1982), The Sensitivity of Consumption to
 Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,
  Econometrica, 50, pp 461—481
Hayashi, F. (1982), The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and




                            46
  Testing by Instrumental Variables, Journal of Political Economy, 90
  (October) pp 895—918
Hayashi, F. (1985), Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical
  Survey, NBER working paper 1720
Hurd, M., and J. Shoven (1983), The Economic Status of the Elderly, in
  Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, 2. Bodie and 3.
  Shoven, eds., NBER and the University of Chicago Press
Hurd, t'l., and J. Shoven (1985), Inflation Vulnerability, Income, and
  'iealth of the Elderly, 1969—1979, in Horizontal Equity, Uncertainty,
  and Economic Well—Being, M. David and T. Smeeding, eds., NBER and the
  University of Chicago Press
King, M. (1985), The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent
  Contributions, in Frontiers of Economics, K. Arrow and S. Harkapohja,
  eds., Basil Blackwell, Oxford
Kng, M., and L—D. Dicks—Mireaux (1982), Asset Holdings ana the Life—
  Cycle, The Economic Journal, 92 (June), pp 247—267.
Kotlikoff, L., and L. Summers (1981), The Role of Intergenerational
  Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation, Journal of Political
  Economy, 89 (August, 1981), pp 706—732
Kurz, M. (1984), Capital Accumulation and the Characteristics of
  Private Intergenerational Transfers, Economica, 51 (February), pp 1—22
Kurz, M. (1985), Heterogeneity in Savings Behavior: A Comment, in
  Frontiers of Economics, K. Arrow and S. Harkapobja, eds., Basil
  Blackwell, Oxford
Menchik, P., and M. David (1983), Income Distribution, Lifetime Savings
  and Bequests, American Economic Review, 73, pp 612—690
Mirer, T. (1979), The Wealth—Age Relation Among the Aged, American
  Economic Review, 69 (June) pp 435—443
Modigliani, F. and R. Brumberg (1954), Utility Analysis and the
  Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross—section Data, in K.
  Kurihara, ed., Post—Keynesian Economics, Rutgers University Press, New
  Brunswick, N.J.,
White, 8. (1978), Empirical Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis, American




                            47
  Economic Review, 68 (September) pp 547—560
White, B. (1984), Empirical Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis:
  Reply, American Economic Review, 74 (March), pp 258—259
Yaarl, H. (1965), Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the Theory of
 the Consumer, Review of Economic Studies, 32, pp137—150




                          48
