NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CONNECTION BETWEEN IMPORTED INTERMEDIATE INPUTS AND EXPORTS:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE FIRMS
Ling Feng
Zhiyuan Li
Deborah L. Swenson
Working Paper 18260
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18260
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012

Collaboration in this research project was facilitated by grant funding from the German Volkswagen
foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Connection between Imported Intermediate Inputs and Exports: Evidence from Chinese
Firms
Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson
NBER Working Paper No. 18260
July 2012
JEL No. F10,F15,F23,F31
ABSTRACT
We use data on Chinese manufacturing firms to study the connection between individual firm imports
and firm export outcomes. Since our panel covers the years 2002 to 2006, we can use changes in import
tariffs associated with China’s WTO entry as instruments. Our regression results show that firms that
expanded their intermediate input imports expanded the volume of their exports and increased their
export scope, though the magnitude of the effects differed by import source, firm organizational form,
and industry R&D intensity. On these dimensions, we find that imported intermediate inputs from
OECD rather than non-OECD countries generated larger firm export improvements, that private Chinese
firms derived larger benefits from imported inputs than did foreign invested firms, and that imported
intermediates were especially helpful in expanding the exports of firms operating in high R&D intensity
industries. Taken together, these results suggest that product upgrading facilitated by technology or
quality embedded in imported inputs helped Chinese firms to increase the scale and breadth of their
participation in export markets.
Ling Feng
School of Finance
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China, 200433
feng.ling@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Zhiyuan Li
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance & Economics
777 Guoding Road, Shanghai, P.R. China. 200433
zhyli97@gmail.com

Deborah L. Swenson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
deswenson@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
It is widely believed that China’s WTO entry, with its promised market opportunities and
guarantees, spurred the exceptional growth in China’s exports. Much less noted is the fact that
China’s imports have grown almost as rapidly as China’s exports. For example, in 2002 - China’s
first full year as a WTO member - China’s imports of intermediate inputs by manufacturing firms
grew at a rate (58.3%) that exceeded its rate of manufacturing export growth (47.7%). Thus, while
the rapid growth of China’s imports and exports might be uncorrelated, the coincidence of these
trends raises a number of important questions. First, has China’s WTO-related trade liberalization
contributed to the rise of China’s imports? Second, has growing access to imported intermediate
inputs contributed to Chinese firms’ improved export ability? And third, if firms do benefit from
imported inputs, are the effects universal, or are the effects concentrated in particular sectors as
related to firm-ownership or industry characteristics?
In general, the benefit of utilizing a variety of inputs is well-known. For example, the benefits of
input variety are rigorously and simply demonstrated by Ethier (1982), who shows that holding
input level constant, increased input scope raises output. This idea implies that firm productivity
will rise when firms import new input varieties. The connection between firm productivity and
imported inputs is now an empirical regularity that is documented in many cases, including
Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008) for Chile, Halpern, Koren and Szeidl (2009) for Hungary, Smeets
and Warzynski (2010) for Denmark and Bas and Strauss-Kahn (2011) for France. Similarly, in
work on trade liberalization Amiti and Konings (2009), Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and
Topalova (2010), Lileeva and Trefler (2010) and Yu (2011) link firm productivity increases to
industry level reductions in tariffs on imported inputs. Indeed, the productivity benefits of
importing intermediates may be greater yet if there are complementarities between domestic and
foreign inputs, or if new technologies are embodied in foreign versions of the imported inputs.1
1

At the national level, Acharya and Keller (2009) show that technology spillovers are mediated by imports, and that
the strength of technology diffusion differs by source country. Similarly, Kugler and Verhoogen’s (2009) finding that
Colombian firms paid higher prices when they imported intermediates rather than using domestic varieties, and that
the use of imported intermediates allowed firms to sell their domestic output at higher prices, suggests that use of
imported intermediates helps firms improve product quality.

1

While many studies document a strong connection between imported inputs and firm productivity,
studies examining the effects of imported intermediate inputs on firm exports are limited. Bas and
Strauss-Kahn’s (2011) work with French firm data, for example, shows that firms who increased
their imported varieties of intermediates were able to increase exports on the extensive margin.
The importance of imported intermediates for exports is also implied by Bas (2012), who finds that
Argentine firms who experienced falling intermediate input tariffs expanded exports more rapidly
than did Argentine firms that did not benefit from similar reductions in input tariffs. Finally,
Kasahara and Lapham (2007) model the linkages between imported inputs and exports in a
heterogeneous firm setting. An important message of their work is that trade barriers that reduce
imported input usage may impair firm productivity, and therefore curtail firm exports. However, in
the absence of detailed measures of imported inputs, conclusions in this literature are based on
correlations with industry tariff changes, rather than observed changes in firm-level usage of
imported intermediates.
To study the connection between firm intermediate input imports and export outcomes, we study
the activities of Chinese manufacturing firms between 2002 and 2006. This setting is especially
useful for addressing this question, since it is possible to assemble detailed firm-level data on firm
imports, exports and operational characteristics and because it captures a period with tariff and
trade policy changes due to China’s December 2001 WTO entry. As Column (3) of Table 1 shows,
China’s tariff reductions during this period were non-negligible and varied substantially across
industries. For example, tariff reductions ranged from a low of 5% in the Smelting & Pressing of
Ferrous Metals sector to a high of 46% in the tobacco industry. Thus, we can exploit cross sector
heterogeneity in the magnitude of tariff changes as an instrument for firm-level import decisions.
This time period is also relevant for studying the relationship between firms’ import decisions and
export outcomes, since China’s membership in the WTO provided Chinese firms with guaranteed
future access to export markets, instead of year-to-year uncertainty about the renewal of mostfavored nation tariff treatment by importing countries.
Analysis of Chinese trade data reveals a number of robust links between firm-level imports and
firm-level exports. First, we find that Chinese firms that increased their expenditure on imported
2

inputs, or expanded their range of imported inputs, expanded the value and scope of their exports.
Our IV estimates suggest that a one percent increase in imported input value boosted firm export
value by 1.35 percent, while a one percent increase in the diversity of imported inputs increased
firm exports by 1.69 percent. Second, we find that the contribution of imported intermediate inputs
from OECD countries was as much as fifty percent larger than the benefits attained through nonOECD intermediates import. Third, we find that the benefits of importing were strongest for
Private Chinese firms- firms that were arguably more distant from the technological frontier than
were foreign invested enterprises. Finally, when we test how the benefits of importing inputs are
related to industry characteristics, we discover that the connection between increased imported
intermediates and growth in firm exports was most pronounced for firms in high R&D intensity
industries.
Our paper contributes to a number of literatures. First, our work advances the literature on trade
liberalization and firm outcomes, by establishing a more direct connection between import tariffs,
imported input usage, and firm exports. While Amiti and Konings (2009) and Goldberg,
Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010), and Bas (2012) are able to demonstrate the connection
between industry-level liberalization of tariffs on imported inputs and firm productivity, their data
do not provide firm-level information on imported intermediates. For this reason, since Chinese
data provide firm-level information on the volume, variety and industry composition of firm
imports, we are able to evaluate this question more directly.
The results from our paper also contribute to the literature on firm export decisions and capability.
By now, evidence from detailed firm-level datasets has established that “better”, i.e. larger, older
or more capital-intense, firms are more likely to export.2 From Melitz’s (2003) foundation, this
literature interprets these regularities as showing that firms are more likely to export due to a core
firm attribute which is generally interpreted as firm-specific productivity. However, while firm
sorting based on productivity is now well-understood, it is an open question whether firms can
enhance their capability by taking further steps such as engaging in innovation or importing
2

Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott (2007) survey this literature, and provide examples from detailed U.S. Census
data on firm trade. Notably, Chinese exporting firms are more labor-intense than are Chinese domestic firms, a factor
Lu (2010) and Ma, Tang and Zhang (2011) attribute to China’s comparative advantage in labor-intense industries.

3

intermediate inputs. 3 For this reason, by providing evidence on the interplay between trade
environment changes, firm input sourcing decisions, and firm export outcomes, it is our goal to
provide evidence that firm export capability is enhanced by the use of imported intermediate
inputs.
Our results also provide insights into the nature of technological diffusion, since we are able to
demonstrate that the benefits of imported intermediates on firm exports were heterogeneous,
though systematically related to firm ownership type, import source, and industry R&D intensity.
In particular, while the literature has long shown that international R&D spillovers are related to
imports, the presence of firm identifiers in our data set allows us to verify that the benefits of
imported inputs were disproportionately accrued by Private Chinese firms, who were at a
technological disadvantage, rather than being captured by multinational firms that were active in
China, and heavy users of imported inputs.4 Further, since the benefits are stronger when inputs
are purchased from richer and more technologically advanced OECD locations, and because the
benefits are larger for firms that operate in R&D intense sectors, our estimates suggest that firm
capability and export are improved by the import of higher-quality and higher technology inputs.
Finally, our work sheds light on the exceptional output and productivity growth of Chinese firms.
In particular, Brandt, Van Biesbroeck and Zhang (2009) note that a number of favorable conditions
in China’s manufacturing sector, including China’s entry to the WTO, may have contributed to the
rapid productivity growth of Chinese firms between 1998 to 2006. Thus, by showing that firms’
ability to increase imports helped firms to expand their exports, our work suggests that China’s
trade liberalization contributed to the high productivity growth achieved by many Chinese firms
during this period.

3

In related work, Amiti and Khandelwal (forthcoming) provide evidence that firms upgrade export product quality
when tariff reductions increase import competition in the home market. Mechanisms supporting changes in product
quality are shown by Bustos (2011), who finds a connection between trade liberalization and Argentine firm
innovation, and Verhoogen (2008) who shows how competition introduced by currency shocks caused Mexican firms
to improve product quality.
4
The Chinese technological gap by firm ownership is documented by Brambilla’s (2009) work that reveals that private
Chinese firms developed only 50% as many new products as were developed by multinational firms. See Keller
(2010) for a comprehensive discussion of international trade and spillovers.

4

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our data and provides some
background on recent import and export developments in China. Section 3 provides a theoretical
framework for our empirical investigation. Section 4 describes our empirical strategy for
estimating the impact of imported intermediate inputs on firm export performance and summarizes
our results. To demonstrate the robustness of the results, Section 5 details work with a number of
alternative specifications. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data
Our data set is formed by combining firm-level operating data on Chinese firms with firm-level
customs data on trade transactions for the years 2002 to 2006. We choose this time period since it
provides significant changes in trade policy, due to China’s December 2001 WTO entry, which we
exploit to identify the connection between firm imports and firm exports. 5
The first data set, Chinese Customs data on imports and exports, provides detailed information on
the universe of China’s trade transactions. In addition to firm identifiers, this dataset includes
information on many important transaction characteristics, including customs regime (e.g.,
processing trade or ordinary trade), 8-digit HS product code, transaction value, quantity, and
source or destination country. By using firm-identifiers that are provided in the Customs data set,
we are able to construct our key variables which describe firm-level imports and exports.
The second key dataset for our project is from China's National Bureau of Statistics, which
conducts firm-level surveys on manufacturing enterprises. These data collected from Chinese
firms include key operational data, such as firm employment, ownership type (eg. State-owned
enterprise, foreign invested firm, or private firm), sales value, R&D expenditure and industry.
Although the two data sets use different firm identifiers, both datasets include extensively detailed
5

China implemented major reclassifications of their Harmonized System Codes in 2002 and 2007. Thus, to ensure
consistency in our measurement of export and import scope (measured by the number of distinct HS codes) data
sample is restricted to the years 2002 to 2006.

5

firm contact information (e.g., company name, telephone number, zip code, contact person). For
this reason, by matching on contact information, we are able to generate firm-level observations
that combine information on the trade and operational activities of Chinese firms. 6 Fuller
discussion of the datasets and variable construction are included in the Data Appendix.
The sample is limited to manufacturing firms, since we are interested in learning how imported
intermediate inputs contributed to firm export outcomes.7 Next, following Arkolakis, Demidova,
Klenow and Rodriguez Clare (2008), we use UN BEC groups to identify imported intermediate
inputs. Finally, since processing trade firm activities are not suitable for our exercise, we limit our
focus to firms’ engaged in ordinary export. One reason for this choice is the fact that firms
engaged in processing trade produce their products solely for export. Thus, since these firms are
selected into export by definition, imported inputs have no effect on the export decisions for this
group of firms. Second, since processing trade firms export all of their output, they are exempt
from all tariffs. Consequently, lack of tariff variation for this firm subgroup is problematic, since
tariff changes are the key instrument for firm intermediate input imports.8
Summary statistics from our dataset reveal a positive connection between a firm’s intermediate
input imports and firm exports.9 If we define importers as firms that imported in at least one of the
years between 2002 and 2006 and non-importers as those firms that didn’t import in any of those
years, Table 2’s Panel A shows that importing firms exported portfolios that had greater product
scope. For example, while the average non-importing firm exported less than one unique [(HS-8
product), (export-destination)] pair in 2002, the average importing firm had a product-destination
export scope of 10.2. The contrasting export scope of importing versus non-importing firms
persisted, and was equally strong in 2006. Similarly, Table 2’s Panel A illustrates the contrast in
export values for importing versus non-importing firms: exports were much larger for importing
6

To address noise or misreported data values, the data were cleaned according to the process of Feenstra, Li and Yu
(2011).
7
Retail, wholesale, or intermediary firms are excluded from the sample. Since firm activities are classified by 4-digit
Chinese Industrial Classification (CIC) industry codes, we are able to use each firm’s CIC code to link our firm-level
observations with industry data (eg. Industry R&D intensity, External Finance Dependence of the industry).
8
Manova and Yu’s (2011) finding that Chinese firms selecting into processing trade are different than firms engaged
in ordinary export, further suggests against the pooling of ordinary and processing exporters in a single analysis.
9
Hereafter, unless otherwise noted, “import” refers to imports of intermediate inputs by non-processing firms,
while“export” refers to exports by firms engaged in ordinary trade.

6

firms than for non-importing firms. For example, in 2002 the average export by non-importing
firms was about 63 thousand dollars while the value for importing firms was roughly 20 times
larger.
Since non-importers were more likely to operate exclusively in the domestic market, the contrast in
export outcomes is not entirely unexpected. Thus, it is important to note that the contrast remains,
even if we restrict our comparison of importers and non-importers to the group of exporting
firms.10 Among exporting firms, Panel B in Table 2 indicates that the average product-country
export scope for importing firms was twice as large as the product-country export scope for nonimporting firms. In addition, the export value shipped by non-importing Chinese exporters was
only half as large as the export value shipped by Chinese exporters who imported intermediate
inputs.
Finally, Panel C of Table 2 shows that the firm probability of transitioning from no export to
export was very different for importing versus non-importing firms. Among non-exporting firms
66% of importing firms started to export in the next year. In contrast, only 8% of firms that were
both non-importing and non-exporting made the transition to export.
While the raw data clearly show that importing firms had greater export success and engagement
than did non-importing firms, these data correlations alone are not sufficient to prove whether firm
import activity was causally linked to firm export outcomes. To explore the connection more
formally, we model the connection between intermediates and exports, and then move to a more
formal empirical analysis of the question.

10

Exporters are defined as firms that exported during at least one of our sample years.

7

3. A Model of Firm Incentives, Importing and Exporting
We assume that firms have heterogeneous capability as in Melitz (2003). Firms pay a fixed cost to
enter into business, and upon entry, the firm learns its productivity ζ. Based on the firm’s
productivity draw, the firm’s production function is:

(1) Y = eζ K βk Lβl  
0


N (d )

m( j )

θ −1
θ


dj 


β mθ
θ −1

As in Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008), we assume that firms combine capital K, labor L and
intermediate materials M according to a Cobb-Douglas production function. The one element that
deserves attention is the input of materials.

Here, the contribution of materials inputs is

represented not only by the quantity of materials utilized, m( j ) , but by the diversity of inputs,

N (d ) . Firms may decide to source inputs from home (d=0) or to source globally (d=1). If the firm
sources its inputs from home, its range of inputs is limited to the range of inputs available
domestically, N h . By contrast, if the firm sources globally, the range of available inputs is

N g (> N h ) . In the case where intermediate inputs are symmetric, firms source an equal amount of
each input, m , and total input usage is given by M = N ( d ) m . In this symmetric case, output can

be rewritten as:
βm
θ −1

(2) Y = e N (d ) K βk Lβl M βm
ζ

In turn, this production function implies that total factor productivity, A, is:
(3) ln A(d , ζ ) =

βm
ln( N (d )) + ζ
θ −1

As originally shown in Ethier (1982), holding inputs constant, firm output is elevated by increased
input variety. In this setting, the firm’s productivity, based on the firm’s entry draw, rises when
firms increase their scope of imported intermediate inputs.
While firms could maximize output by utilizing the full range of intermediate inputs, we do not
observe this in practice. Presumably, firms draw from a narrower range of inputs since expanding
8

the range of intermediate inputs involves fixed costs.11 To capture this feature of import behavior,
we assume that importing firms face a per-period importing cost fi for each additional input
imported by the firm. In addition, as in Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2009), we assume that the perproduct importing cost is non-uniform, and the per-period costs can be ranked in ascending order:
f1 < f 2 < f3 . < .. f N . Thus, firms will import intermediate inputs in order from 1 to N, stopping at
the input where the marginal increase in firm profitability due to the import of the last input no
longer exceeds the fixed cost of importing the next input.
Naturally, firms will only import inputs if the marginal increase in per-period profits associated
with the input exceeds the per-period fixed cost of utilizing the imported input. However, it is
important to note that the marginal cost of utilizing input i is pi (1 + τ i ) , where pi is the cost of
importing product i and τ i is the tariff assessed on import product i . For this reason, when tariffs
fall, the marginal cost of production falls, while the marginal contribution of new inputs remains
fixed holding output and factor prices constant. Thus, when tariffs reduce the marginal cost of
using imported inputs, we expect that firms will increase their import of intermediate inputs. In
turn, because additional imported inputs elevate the firm’s productivity, the firm in a Melitz (2003)
setting will experience an increase in profitable export opportunities. While the benefits of
importing will not affect the export decisions of all firms, firms whose marginal profits from
exporting rise more than the fixed cost of exporting will be able to increase the level or scope of
their export market participation.

11

Halpern, Koren and Szeidl’s (2009) estimates from a cross-section of Hungarian firms suggests that the cost of
importing an additional type of input was $3,300 for the average firm and $1,000 for the median firm.

9

4. Estimation
Our goal is to study the link between firm intermediate input imports and the expansion of firm
exports, especially in the case where import utilization was facilitated by trade liberalization. To
this end, the analysis is divided into two parts. First, we study the connection between firm
intermediate input imports and firm export growth, both in terms of export value and the diversity
of export products and destinations. In addition, to understand the factors underpinning the
connection, we explore how the strength of the relationship relates to the origin of the imports,
firm ownership type, and R&D intensity at the industry level. Following the initial analysis, the
second section uses instrumental variables based on industry tariff changes to address the potential
endogeneity of firm-level import decisions. The results from IV estimation confirm a causal and
stronger connection between intermediate imports and export performance.
4.1 Imported Inputs and Firm Exports
4.1.1 Baseline Results
We begin by estimating a number of panel regressions that assess whether firm exports were
related to the use of imported intermediate inputs. Our basic regressions relate the log of firm i (in
industry j) export value in year t, to the firm’s use of imported intermediate inputs and a set of
controls. 12
(4)

ln( ExportValue)ijt = α + β ln(Im_ Inputs )ijt + γ X ijt +  t δ t + ε ijt .

Our controls include firm characteristics, X ijt , such as firm size, labor productivity and firm age,
and a set of time dummies, δt. The firm-period error term εijt =ζij +ηijt includes a firm fixed effect

ζij and an iid component ηijt .
Since we are interested in learning whether Chinese firm exports were related to the level and/or
diversity of imported intermediate inputs, we experiment with different measures of imported
intermediates when we estimate equation (4). Our results displayed in Table 3/Panel A confirm a
positive relationship between the use of imported intermediates and the level of firm exports. In
12

To avoid undefined values, we add one to all variables before taking logs.

10

column (1), for example, the regression coefficient suggests that a 10% increase in imported
intermediate inputs elevated firm exports by 1.84%. Columns (2) and (3) show that firm exports
also rose when firms increased the diversity of their imported intermediate inputs, as measured by
the number of unique HS-8 product counts (Import_prod) and the number of import source
countries (Import_cty) or the number of unique HS-8 product-country intermediate import
combinations (Import_prod_cty). Finally, since contributions due to import value and import
diversity may not be mutually exclusive, we simultaneously include regressors for imported
intermediate input value and diversity in the specifications of Column (4) and (5). The results
indicate that firm increases in import levels and import diversity both boosted firm export.
While our initial specification includes firm fixed effects to control for time-invariant factors that
lead to a correlation between imported intermediate inputs and exports, it is possible that both
imported intermediate inputs and exports are endogenously determined by variables that are timevarying. For instance, factors such as firm size, productivity or firm age lead to the appearance of
co-moving exports and imported intermediate inputs, even if there is no causal connection between
the two. To account for such firm-level variation over time, our next regressions include measures
of firm employment to control for firm size, output per worker to control for firm labor
productivity and firm age. However, as shown in the last five columns of Table 3 Panel A,
inclusion of firm characteristics does not change the sign or magnitude of the coefficients on
imported intermediate inputs.
Although the initial specification assumes that the benefits of intermediate input usage are quickly
realized, the validity of this assumption is tested by the regressions in Table 3 Panel B. The new
specifications modify equation (4) by including both contemporaneous and lagged measures of
imported inputs. We note two results in this modified setting. First, while firm exports are
positively related to both lagged and contemporaneous values of imported intermediate inputs,
coefficients on lagged import values are only about half as large as those for contemporaneous
import value. Second, lagged measures of firm import scope either have no effect on current
exports, or have a positive but much smaller impact than that of the contemporaneous measures of
import scope. As before, the estimated coefficients on import value or import scope are not
11

affected by the regressions’ inclusion or exclusion of firm characteristics, such as employment, age
or labor productivity. Thus, since the key import coefficient estimates are not affected by the
inclusion or exclusion of time-varying firm regressors the remainder of the paper only reports
regression results from the original specification (4) which includes firm fixed effects, but not
time-varying firm characteristics.
While our full sample results reveal a positive relationship between imported intermediate inputs
and firm exports, the sample response is based on firms that were differentially engaged in export.
This pooling of firms may obscure important differences in firm export responses to the import of
intermediate imports. For example, some domestic firms imported intermediate inputs but only
produced for the domestic market. Thus, imported intermediate inputs had no influence on the
export levels or export diversity for this group of firms. The sample also includes firms that started
out as purely domestic and later transitioned to export. Compared with firms that exported
continuously, the effect of improved access to imported intermediate inputs on firm exports may
have been especially large for these firms, as their export decision included both the extensive
margin decision (to start export), as well as the intensive margin decision (about the level of
export).
Due to the potential for differential responses related to a firm’s international engagement, we
divide our data into subsamples that separately examine “traders” - firms that had at least one
import or export transaction during the sample period - and “exporters” - firms that exported in at
least one of the sample years. We also delineate “importers” - firms that imported in at least one
of the sample years - and “survivors” - the subset of firms who were present in each of the sample
years from 2002 to 2006. Our new regressions are displayed in Table 4 Panel A. Notably, the
imported input coefficients are very similar to those from our full sample, which suggests that
selection into export or import do not affect our estimated coefficients on intermediate input
imports.
Since organizational form may influence the sensitivity of firm exports to firm imported inputs, the
next set of regressions divides the data into four ownership groups: Private, SOE (state-owned
enterprises), non-HMT (Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) foreign and HMT foreign. We run
12

regressions for each firm group individually, and display the results in columns (5) to (8) of Panel
A in Table 4. While we find a positive association between imported inputs and export outcomes
for all firm groups, the responsiveness of Private and SOE firm exports is roughly twice the
magnitude noted for HMT and non-HMT foreign firms.
We complete our exploration of effects by firm group by adding the product and country scope of
firm imports to the regression framework. In the new regressions, shown in Table 4 Panel B, the
importance of import value is just as strong as it was in Panel A. However, we now find that firm
exports are also increased by firm import scope. Nonetheless, while the coefficients on import
scope are all positive and significant, differences across firm groups are not statistically distinct. 13

4.1.2 Industry R&D Intensity and Firm Export Responses
While our panel regressions strongly confirm that increasing firm intermediate imports boosted
firm exports, it is natural to ask whether specific mechanisms support this connection. Two factors
seem particularly important. First, if imported inputs convey embedded technology or qualityenhancing product improvements, the technology or quality contained in imported intermediates
will affect the strength of the connection between intermediates imports and firm exports.
Formally, Equation (1) assumes that all intermediate inputs contribute symmetrically to output,
regardless of source location. However, since imported inputs are likely to differ in terms of their
embedded technology or quality level, inputs with a higher technology or quality level will provide
a greater contribution to TFP, and thus may contribute more to export expansion.
Since Chinese trade data do not provide direct information on technology or quality level of
imported intermediates, we draw inferences based on source country income. To test whether
inputs imported from rich countries were particularly helpful in supporting firm export
13

In above regressions we exclude processing trade due to the fact that all imported intermediate inputs in processing
trade are exempt from all tariffs so that we cannot use tariff changes as an instrumental variable for processing
imports. It is however reasonable to expect that imported intermediate inputs also play a similar role in processing
trade. When we extend our sample to include processing trade as well as ordinary trade, our estimated coefficients for
imported intermediate inputs becomes larger than those reported here. Similarly, we also study how imported
intermediate inputs affect firms’ export as a share of firms’ total sales. We find that firms shifted their focus toward
export sales when they import more intermediate inputs. Results of these extra regressions are unreported for brevity
but available upon request.

13

performance we introduce separate import measures in specification (4), which enable us to
observe how the benefits of inputs imported from richer OECD countries compared with the
benefits of non-OECD input imports.14 Our new results, which are shown in Table 5 examine the
responses for the full sample as well as the trader and surviving firm samples. Regardless of
sample, we find that the export expansion benefits due to OECD-sourced inputs were about fifty
percent larger than the benefits of sourcing intermediates from non-OECD countries. In contrast,
although our full sample estimates suggest that OECD based import diversity is more beneficial
than the diversity of non-OECD intermediate inputs the differential benefits are not also evident in
the trader and survivor subsamples.
If technological connections help explain the importance of imported intermediates, industry
characteristics may also affect the strength of the connection between intermediate input imports
and firm exports. For example, if firms in R&D intensive industries are more reliant on the
embedded technology or quality contained in imported inputs, imported inputs may contribute
more to firm export expansion in high R&D intensity industries. If so, this implies that β m in
Equation (2) is larger for firms in high R&D industries, and therefore from Equation (3) firms in

R&D intensive sectors will derive a greater benefit from imported inputs than do firms in
industries that are less reliant on R&D.
Due to export quotas governed by the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) and its successor, the
Agreement on Textile and Clothing (ATC), firm export responses in Textile and Clothing sector
faced constraints during our sample period.15 Thus, before we test for differential responses based
on industry R&D intensity, we test whether the Textile and Clothing industry had export responses
that differed from other industries. To this end, the first two columns in Table 6 Panel A include
two textile industry interaction terms: the terms interact firm imported input value and firm
14

Since OECD membership has evolved over time, we define OECD countries based on OECD membership before
1990. In addition, due to differences in technological development, we include Israel and exclude Turkey from the
OECD group. Countries included in our OECD group are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Israel,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. Alternatively, we also check the different
impacts for imported inputs from G-7 countries. The results are similar to those based on OECD membership.
15
Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott (2010) and Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2011), describe the impact of these
policies.

14

product-country import counts with an indicator for textile and clothing firms. While we do not
find any evidence that imported input scope had any differential effect on firms in the textile and
clothing sector, our estimates indicate that the contribution of imported input value to firm export
was 25-30% smaller in the textile and clothing sector, and the difference was highly significant.
Thus, since textile and clothing firms respond differentially, and the differential response is
consistent with quota limits on exports, our regressions for cross-industry export responses focus
on the universe of all firms excluding firms from the textile and clothing sector.
To look for the importance of sectoral R&D intensity, our next estimation specification adds
interactions between firm intermediate input imports and measures of industry R&D intensity.16
Our interaction terms are based on two different measures of industrial R&D intensity: the first is
the industry R&D expense as a fraction of industry sales (R&D) while the second is the industry’s
median level of firms’ new product shares in output (Newprod). The results from our R&D
regressions are reported in columns (3)-(6) of Table 6 Panel A. Regardless of our choice of R&Dintensity measure, we find that imported input usage provided a greater boost to the exports of
firms that operate in R&D-intense industries.17
Next, since R&D intensity is often correlated with other industry characteristics, we need to verify
that our R&D results remain, even if we control for other sector characteristics, such as capital
intensity, industry intensity of imported input use or industry external finance dependence. For
example, if an industry relies heavily on imported intermediate inputs, then imported inputs may
be more important for the export success of firms in the industry than is the case for firms in other
industries.

Similarly, trade in imported intermediates may require the support of credit and

financial intermediaries just as exports do.18 Thus, if credit constraints limit firm utilization of
imported inputs, and credit constraints bind more differentially for firms in R&D intense sectors,
R&D interaction terms will reflect information about the importance of credit constraints.
16

Industry R&D intensity is not added as a regressor, since industry R&D intensity is time invariant, and therefore
absorbed by the firm fixed effects.
17
The relatively large coefficients of the interaction terms between log level of import value and R&D expense share
in columns (3) and (4) are due to the small value of R&D intensities measures in most of the industries.
18
Amiti and Weinstein (2009), Auboin (2009), Bricogne et al (2009), Campbell et al (2009), Chor and Manova
(2010), Haddad et al (2010), and OECD (2009) all show evidence of trade contraction associated with contraction in
trade finance.

15

To verify that R&D interaction effects are related to technology rather than other correlated
industry characteristics, we expand our regression specification to simultaneously include
interactions between firm use of imported intermediates and additional industry characteristics,
and provide the results in Table 6 Panel B. While a few of the new interaction terms have
marginally significant results, as is the case for interactions based on industry capital intensity, the
coefficient on the R&D interaction term remains positive and highly significant. In fact, the
coefficient on the interaction between firm-level imported inputs and industry R&D intensity is
larger in magnitude than the earlier coefficients of Table 6 Panel A.
We are also able to demonstrate that the importance of R&D intensity is not driven by industry
differences in the intensity of imported inputs. To measure industry-level reliance on imported
inputs, we construct the ratio of imported inputs to total exports for each industry.19 We find that
the coefficient on the import intensity interaction term is negative and insignificant, while the
coefficient on the R&D intensity interaction term remains positive and highly significant. In
Column (5) of Table 6 Panel B we uncover a positive and significant coefficient on the interaction
term between firm imports and industry-level external finance dependence, which indicates that
imported inputs are more helpful in promoting export growth for firms that are in industries more
reliant on external financing. However, when the industry importance of external finance and
R&D intensity are both included, the results from Column (6) demonstrate that the positive and
significant coefficient on the external finance dependence interaction and the earlier positive and
significant coefficient on the R&D intensity interaction term are both preserved.
As a final check, we include interactions between import value and all of the above mentioned
industry characteristics: R&D intensity, capital intensity, imported input intensity and external
finance dependence. The results are shown in column (7) of Table 6 Panel B. Notably, while the
coefficients on the new interaction terms are consistent with our earlier findings, the R&D
intensity interaction also remains positive and significant.

19

Thus, it appears that imported

We also tried an alternative measure of import intensity: the industry’s share of imported inputs as a ratio of the
industry’s total output. However, the results do not change.

16

intermediate inputs are particularly helpful in increasing the exports by firms in R&D intensive
industries.
4.1.3 The Effect of Imported Inputs on Export Scope
To test whether firm-level imports affect export scope, the dependent variable for Equation (4) is
replaced by firm-level counts of unique HS-8 product-country destination pairs. Because the
dependent variable is now a non-negative count variable, the specification is estimated via
negative binomial panel regressions and the results are reported in Table 7.20 Our results based on
the full sample, which are displayed in Columns (1)-(2) show that firms that increased their
reliance on imported intermediates were more successful in increasing their export scope,
regardless of whether we measure the imported inputs with import values or with a combination of
import value and the import variety. If we repeat the analysis after dividing the sample into
subgroups based on firm ownership our results in Columns (3)-(6) demonstrate that firm-level
imported intermediate inputs were especially helpful in expanding the export scope of private
Chinese firms. Indeed the estimated coefficient for private firms is almost twice as large as the
coefficient for foreign invested firms.
We also examine whether the effect of firm imports on export scope depends on the source country
origin of firm imports. Columns (7), for example, shows that the value of inputs imported from
OECD countries expanded firm export scope 60% more than did imported inputs from non-OECD
countries. However, column (8) shows that the benefit of import variety, which was positive and
significant, was similar regardless of import origin.21
To summarize our results, panel regressions strongly confirm that firm-level intermediate input
imports (measured by value or variety) helped Chinese firms to export larger volumes of

20

Due to our inclusion of firm fixed effects, the results in Table 7 have fewer observations per group than those in
Table 4. This is because the negative binomial model with firm fixed effects excludes firms that had no change in the
dependent variable during the panel years. To retain the full sample, we repeated our analysis, and treated the firm
effects as random. Although use of random effects restores our ability to utilize data from the full sample, the
estimated coefficients for the import variables are essentially unchanged.
21
We also examined whether the impacts of firm imports on its export scope rely on industry characteristics. However,
we do not find any evidence of differential effects due to industry R&D intensity of imported input on export scope.

17

manufactured goods and to achieve greater export scope. In addition, imported inputs generated
stronger export benefits for Chinese private firms than for foreign invested firms, and the benefits
were also related to industry characteristics and country of origin. Indeed, since imports from
OECD countries have a larger effect on firms’ export performance than imported inputs from nonOECD countries, and because the effects are larger for firms operating in more R&D intensive
industries, the data suggest that technology or quality embedded in the imported inputs support
firm-level export growth.

4.2 Endogeneity
Our initial regressions include firm fixed effects and time-varying measures of firm characteristics
to control for non-causal correlations between imported inputs and exports. However, due to
potential endogeneity issues, we now turn to instrumental variables estimation and use import
tariffs as instruments for firm-level intermediate input import decisions
4.2.1 Tariffs and Firm Import Decisions
As shown in section 3, the marginal benefit of imported intermediates is determined by technology
while tariff reductions reduce the marginal cost of importing inputs [ pi (1 + τ i ) ]. Thus, since tariff
reductions increase the marginal profits associated with intermediate input import expansion, we
expect to see a negative association between China’s import tariffs and the use of imported
intermediates.
After joining the WTO, China phased-in tariff reductions according to its negotiated accession
agreements. However, since firms often import more than a single input, we examine how changes
in an industry’s average tariff affect a firm’s import level and scope. For this purpose, we define
the duty on imported inputs in industry j in year t as:
(5) Duty jt =  pj=1 ω pjτ pt
P

Time varying product tariffs (τpt) are levied on each product p in year t according to the tariff code.
The number of importable inputs for industry j is Pj, and the importance of each product for
18

production in industry j is represented by the weight ωpj with ∑ωpj = 1. Since we do not have
product-level information on inputs that the firm sources domestically, we use data on firm imports
at the industry level in 2006 to define the range of importable products Pj for each industry. In our
main specifications, we use data on the value shares in total imported inputs of each imported input
at the industry level in 2006 to form the weights ωpj.22
To assess the effect of tariffs on firm-level imports, we examined three import response margins:
1) firm import value, 2) dichotomous firm import decisions and 3) firm product-country import
scope. Regressions linking each of these import decisions to import tariffs are reported in Table 8.
Whether we run OLS with controls for ownership type and industry-year fixed effects, as in
Column (1), or a panel regression with year and firm fixed effects, we find that tariffs had negative
and significant effect on imports. Both regression specifications indicate that a one log point tariff
reduction increased firm import value by 4.7%.
The data also show that import tariffs influenced firms’ dichotomous decision to import. Since the
dependent variable takes the value of zero or one (if the firm imports), the regressions shown in
Columns (3) and (4) are based on probit estimation instead. Further, since import decisions may
depend on the firm’s previous import status, we add an indicator variable that is set to one if the
firm imported any inputs in the previous year. Regardless of our method for controlling for firm
effects and heterogeneity across groups, the results in Columns (3) and (4) show that higher tariffs
discouraged firms from importing. The regressions also show that firm import decisions were
positively related to previous import activity, as would be the case if firms face sunk costs of
importing.
Our final analysis turns to firm import scope. For this test, we measure firm import scope as the
count of each firm’s distinct (HS-8 product)-(Source-country) import pairs and run regressions
using panel negative binomial models. Our results are robust to the type of firm effect included:
22

To test for robustness, we constructed alternative tariff measures based on other input weights. For example, since
Head, Jing, and Ries (2011) note geographic differences in the pattern of Chinese imports, which suggests the
possibility of heterogeneous production techniques by province, we experimented with weight ωpjk - the average 2006
use of imported input p by industry j firms in province k. We also generated a firm-level tariff measure based on firm
imports of intermediate inputs in 2006, where the firm’s expenditure shares on each product p were used as weights.

19

firms that benefited from import tariff reductions expanded their range of imported inputs. 23
Similar to our results regarding firm import participation, we find that firm import scope was
positively related to the firm’s import scope in the previous period.
Since the regressions uniformly confirm that firms increased their imports of intermediate inputs as
industry-level import tariffs declined we now use China’s WTO-entry tariff reductions as
instruments for firm use of intermediate inputs.

4.2.2 Imported Inputs and Firm Exports: IV Estimation
Our IV specification returns to Equation (4), but now uses our industry tariff measure, ln(Duty), as
an instrument for imported inputs. As before, we include firm fixed effects to control for timeinvariant firm specific shocks and report our results in Table 9. The new IV estimates indicate that
increasing a firm’s imported intermediate input value by a one percent increased the firm’s export
value by 1.35 percent. Since the elasticity estimate from the standard panel estimation was much
smaller it appears that the failure to control for endogeneity of imported inputs causes a downward
bias in the estimated effects on exports.24 The role of endogeneity is also observed if we measure
firm import intensity by import scope at the product and country or product-country level, rather
than by using import value. 25 For all measures of firm import variety, we find that the IV
estimates are larger in magnitude. Further, the estimates are economically meaningful. For
example, the IV results based on product-country import scope predict that if a firm increased its
(HS-8 product)-(country) import diversity by one percent, the firm would increase its export value
by 1.69 percent.
To learn whether firm-ownership differences are still meaningful in an IV setting, we apply our IV
specification to each firm subgroup and report the results in columns (5) to (8) of Table 9. Notably,
23

Firm effects are treated as random in Columns (5) and (6) and fixed in Columns (7) and (8). Because firm fixed
effects exactly identify firms that had constant import scope over the panel, Columns (7) and (8) estimates are only
based on firms that changed their import score during the sample period.
24
The standard panel estimate of the same equation without IV, as shown in Table 3 column (1), was (0.184).
25
Since we are instrumenting for count measures of import activity, the first stage regressions are panel negative
binomial estimations. The effects of using IV can be seen by comparing columns (2), (3), and (4) in Tables 3 and 9.

20

we continue to find the patterns we observed earlier. First, for all types of ownership, aside from
SOEs, the IV estimates suggest larger impacts of imported intermediate inputs on exports than the
impacts estimated without IV. Second, the estimated benefits of imported intermediate inputs are
twice as large for Private Chinese firms as they are for foreign invested firms. This, it appears that
China’s tariff liberalization created the largest export benefits for Private Chinese firms.
Next, to evaluate how R&D intensity affected the connection between imported intermediates and
firm exports while using IV estimation, we classified industries as high or low R&D based on the
median R&D intensity of 4-digit CIC industries. As before, we measure industry R&D intensity by
two measures- one based on R&D expenses (R&D), while the other is based on new product shares
in output (Newprod).
Table 10 reveals a stark contrast: firms in high R&D industries derived great benefit from the
import of intermediate inputs, while there is no apparent connection between imported
intermediates and exports for firms in less R&D intense sectors. For example, if industry R&D
intensity is measured by the R&D expense measure, the coefficient on imported intermediate
inputs for high R&D industries is 1.122 and highly significant. This coefficient is very similar to
the full sample estimate of 1.350, and is in direct contrast with the negative and insignificant
results for the low R&D sectors. Since the lack of response by low R&D sectors might reflect
policy driven export constraints on textile firms, we exclude textile and clothing firms, and repeat
our low R&D sector regressions. However, the low R&D sector response is still negative and
lacking in statistical significance.

Finally, since the dichotomous importance of imported

intermediates is noted when we turn to the R&D measure based on the new product measure, we
are confident in concluding that imported intermediates are especially helpful in allowing firms in
high R&D sectors to increase their exports.

21

5. Robustness Checks
To further confirm the stability of our results, we ran a number of robustness checks that
investigate our choice of specification, provide controls for other sources of shocks, and which
provide alternative measures for our IV strategy. Each of these experiments is discussed in turn.

5.1 Changes Specification
While our panel is based on annual observations, it is possible that firms require more than a year
to realize the full benefits arising from their import of intermediate inputs, or that firms require
more than a year to respond to tariff changes. Thus we use specification (6) to run IV regressions
based on firm-level export changes over the period of 2002 to 2006:

(6)

Δ ln( ExportValue)ij = α + β Δ ln(Im_ Inputs)i + γ X ij ,2002 +  j λ j +  g Ψ g + κ ij

In this analysis, the dependent variable is the change in log export value for 2006 compared with
2002 for firm i in industry j. The independent variables are defined similarly as the difference in
the log level of imported intermediate input value for 2006 minus the log value of the variable in
2002.26 We generate similar variables for tariff changes that we can use to instrument the changes
in imported intermediate inputs. Though firm fixed effects drop out when we apply time
differences to the original regression given by (4), we add in the 2002 values of firm employment
and per-worker sales, X ij ,2002 , to control for heterogeneity in firm size and productivity. Finally,
to account for the possibility of differential time trends by industry, j, or firm ownership type, g,
we add time-trend variables λ j , Ψ g to our estimating equation. We assume that the error term κ ij
is iid.
Table 11 reports the IV estimation results for our new estimating equation. The estimated elasticity
displayed in Column (1) indicates that one percent increase in a firm’s import value helps the firm
to boost its export value by 1.948 percent. While this new estimate fails to attain the original level
26

The one exception is our treatment of the import variable when we run regressions based on import scope. In this
case the independent variable is defined as the difference between the firm-level count of unique HS-8 productcountry imports in 2006 minus the firm-level count of unique product-country imports in 2002.

22

of significance (the p-value is 0.173), the estimate is close in magnitude to the Table 9 IV
regression run in the panel setting.

Similarly, the changes specification is applied to groups of

firms identified by ownership type, the results shown in Columns (2), (3) and (4) are again a bit
less statistically significant than they were in the earlier panel IV regressions run in levels.
However, the qualitative finding that imported inputs measured by import value, had the greatest
benefit for Private firms, is maintained.
The full sample result displayed in Column (5) implies that if a firm adds an additional productcountry import its export value will increase by 0.49 percent. While the new estimate is only of
borderline significance (p-value of 0.117), and is slightly lower than the estimate from the earlier
Panel IV results, it is nonetheless significantly higher than our non-IV results reported in Table 3.
Finally, when we test for the effects of imported input diversity on export value by firm ownership
type, our estimates for private firms grow further, and are highly significant. Thus, all three tests
strongly show that the benefits of import diversity are larger for private firms than they are for
foreign invested enterprises.
5.2 Trade Shocks and Import Competition
While our results demonstrate a strong relationship between the use of imported intermediate
inputs, and firm export, such a correlation could arise if time-varying firm-level shocks are
responsible for these simultaneous changes in inputs usage and export. One shock that may be
especially problematic would be shocks to export demand. While there are no available measures
of firm-specific export demand, it is reasonable to assume that changes in a firm’s year to year
export demand will be tied to developments at the industry level. Thus, to evaluate this conjecture,
we add the log level of 4-digit industry export value to our IV regressions.
Similarly, domestic firms may also be affected by inflows of competing imports stimulated by
trade liberalization. If trade liberalization due to tariff cuts on final goods imports stimulates local
competition, and causes firms to increase their productivity it is possible that firms will be able to
improve their performance in export markets. 27 To make sure that our results are due to the
27

For related arguments, see Amiti and Konings (2007), Topalova and Khandelwal (2001) and Yu (2011).

23

reductions of intermediate input tariffs rather than China’s reductions in final goods tariffs, we add
the log level of 4-digit industry final output tariff to our IV regression specifications. 28
Since we want to ensure that the results are not driven by firms that had large export shares, we
restrict the sample by excluding the largest firms. Table 12 presents the results for these
subsamples of firms. Columns (1) to (3) of Table 12 exclude exporting firms that are above 95th
percentile ranked according to their export shares in each 4-digit CIC industry, with pure domestic
firms excluded when firms are ranked. Columns (4) to (6) instead exclude exporting firms that are
above 75th percentile. 29 The results show that the inclusion of the export demand and output
import competition variables does not have significant effect on the estimated coefficients on
import levels (compared with the results in Table 9). Thus it does not appear that industry level
shocks to export demand or output import competition or inclusion of large exporters were
responsible for the positive correlation between firm imported input use and firm exports that we
report.

5.3 Import Real Exchange Rates as Instrumental Variables
In order to further check the robustness of our IV results, we construct an alternative instrument
variable, the industrial level import real exchange rate. Similar to the construction of industrial
tariff, the industrial import real exchange rate (RERimp) for industry j in year t is defined as a
weighted average of real exchange rate:

(7) RERimp jt =  c =j1 ωcj rerct
C

where rerct is the real exchange rate between China and country c in year t, expressed as Chinese
units of baskets per basket of foreign country, obtained from Penn World Table. The total number
of countries industry j imports from is Cj and ωcj is the share of imports from country c in industry

28

The 4-digit industry output tariff is constructed in a similar way as the intermediate input tariff. We follow Equation
(5) but use the value shares in total export value for each exported output at the industry level in 2006 as the weights.
29
Within exporting firms, the median export share was 0.15%, while the average export share was 1.1%. Columns (1)
to (3) of Table 12 exclude firms with more than 4.4% of industry export share, eliminates top 5% of exporting firms as
measured by market share. Columns (4) to (6) impose more stringent restrictions, excluding firms with more than
0.6% of industry export share so that the top 25% of exporting firms are dropped.

24

j’s total imports averaged over years 2002-2006.30 Using constant weights for real exchange rates
of different years enables us to exploit the time series variations of the real exchange rates so that
our measure is not affected by changing bilateral trade volumes. Similarly, we construct industrial
level export real exchange rate (RERexp) based on Equation (7) as well but using export shares as
the weights. 31
We use import real exchange rate as an instrumental variable for imported intermediate inputs and
include export real exchange rate as a regressor to control export changes due to the changes of
export real exchange rates. IV regressions are estimated following the specification (4). Table 13
presents the results. Column (1) uses import real exchange rate as the sole IV and column (2)
includes both import real exchange rate and import tariff as IVs. The results present an elasticity of
export values to imported intermediate inputs at around 2.6 to 3.3. Compared with the results using
tariff as the sole IV, the estimated elasticity is a bit larger but the magnitudes are still comparable.
In columns (3) and (4), when we restrict the sample to “Traders” or “Survivors” and use import
real exchange rate as the sole IV, the estimated elasticity becomes slightly smaller. Since all these
estimates are highly significant, they again confirmed the causal relation between imported
intermediate inputs and exports. Finally, in columns (5) and (6) we run similar IV regressions for
domestic Private firms and foreign firms respectively. We found that the benefits from imported
inputs are about twice as large for Private firms than those for foreign firms. This again is
consistent with our previous findings.
5.4 Endogeneity of the Instruments
One final concern regarding the use of intermediate input tariffs as instruments is that the
intermediate input tariff itself might be endogenous. A possible explanation for our findings is that
reductions in destination country tariffs after China’s WTO accession increase China’s exports,
and that these destination country tariff reductions were positively correlated with China’s tariff
reductions.
30

Alternatively, we use real exchange rates from International Financial Statistics (IFS) of IMF to construct our
measures. The results are similar.
31
When we include our export-weighted measure of the real exchange rate the import-weighted real exchange rate will
not have a direct effect on exports.

25

We argue that our results are very unlikely to be driven by the tariff reductions in the destination
countries. First, if destination country tariff reductions do increase Chinese exports, our measure of
industrial export demand controls for these changes. In fact, as Table 12’s results demonstrate,
controlling export demand does not affect our results in any significant way. Second, even if
import tariffs are endogenous, destination country tariff changes should not affect the bilateral real
exchange rates. As reported in Table 13, using real exchange rates, instead of input tariffs, as
instruments for imported intermediate inputs confirms that imported intermediate inputs do
contribute to firms’ export success.
Third, we can explicitly control for the effects of destination country tariff changes, if we construct
an index of industry-specific destination tariffs as follows:


2006

X pcj



Dest _ duty jt =  p =1  c =1
τ 
Cj
2006  pct 
  Pj
X
   c =1  p =1 pcj 

Pj

Cj

2006
is the export value of product p by industry j to country c in 2006 and τ pct is
In this formula X pcj

product p’s ad valorem tariff imposed by export destination country c in year t. This measure of
destination tariff is then included in the IV regressions. We find that including this destination
tariff measure does not have significant impacts on our estimation of the effects of imported
intermediate inputs. 32

32

The results are available upon request.

26

V. Conclusions
Our paper uses firm-level trade and operational data from a large dataset of Chinese manufacturing
firms to test how the use of imported inputs contributes to firm export activity. Controlling for
time-invariant firm fixed effects, we find that firms that expanded the value or variety of their
intermediate input imports expanded the value and scope of their exports. Since our analysis
encompasses the years following China’s WTO entry, we are able to exploit China’s tariff changes
as instruments for firm-level import decisions. When we use these tariff changes as instruments,
we uncover a stronger connection. The estimates imply that a one percent increase in a firm’s
intermediate input import value will expand the firm’s exports by 1.35 percent. These results,
suggest that China’s WTO entry tariff liberalization has indeed helped to spur China’s export
growth.
While our study finds a strong positive effect of imported intermediate imports on firm exports, we
find that the strength of the relationship differs systematically on a few notable dimensions which
all suggest that export improvements occur when imports provide local firms with intermediate
inputs of superior quality or technology. First, if we distinguish firms by ownership type, we find
that Private Chinese firms derived larger benefits from imported inputs than did foreign invested
firms. Since Private Chinese firms began the decade at a disadvantage relative to their foreign
competitors, the differential benefit suggests that China’s increasing openness, due to
improvements in access to imported inputs, facilitated productivity improvements by Private
Chinese firms. Our paper also shows evidence that the benefits due to intermediate input imports
are related to source country. Here, the fact that the contribution of imported intermediate inputs
from the more technological-advanced OECD countries is larger than that of imports from nonOECD countries also suggests that imported intermediates are most beneficial when they convey
superior technology or quality. Finally, we find that imported intermediates are especially helpful
in expanding the exports of firms that operate in R&D intense industries. Taken together, these
results suggest that firm access to high quality or sophisticated imported intermediates helps
explain the strength of the connection between firm-level imports and the development of
individual firm export capability.
27

Table 1: Chinese Industry Characteristics and Tariff Reductions

Industry Name
Food Processing
Food Manufacture
Beverages
Tobacco
Textiles
Apparel, Footwear & Hats
Leather, Fur, & Feather Products
Timber, Wood, Bamboo, Rattan, Palm
& Straw Products
Furniture
Paper & Paper Products
Printing, Reproduction of Recording
Media
Articles For Culture, Education &
Sporting Activities
Processing of Petroleum, Coking, &
Fuel
Raw Chemical Materials
Drugs
Chemical Fibers
Rubber
Plastics
Non-metallic Mineral goods
Smelting & Pressing of Ferrous
Metals
Smelting & Pressing of Non-ferrous
Metals
Metal Products
General Purpose Machinery
Special Purpose Machinery
Transport Equipment
Electrical Machinery & Equipment
Computers & Electronic Equipment
Measuring Instruments & Machinery
for Cultural Activity & Office Work
Artwork

R&D

New
Product
Intensity

Capital
Intensity

Import
Intensity

(3)
17.452
21.778
28.683
46.868
30.002
35.654
20.292

External
Finance
Dependence
(4)
1.005
1.024
1.031
0.911
1.117
1.167
1.064

(5)
0.0004
0.0009
0.0016
0.0035
0.0014
0.0005
0.0003

(6)
0.015
0.023
0.043
0.008
0.045
0.019
0.018

(7)
54.044
49.104
83.346
174.050
36.648
13.847
21.142

(8)
0.135
0.211
1.104
25.513
0.071
0.025
0.042

2.156

26.873

1.049

0.0004

0.028

28.894

0.621

21
22

8.667
4.958

29.646
10.512

1.116
1.045

0.0007
0.0005

0.033
0.019

30.378
52.058

0.038
4.488

23

8.385

31.256

0.984

0.0010

0.048

55.065

2.368

24

9.918

17.737

1.128

0.0014

0.042

24.108

0.059

25

5.267

7.418

1.135

0.0008

0.031

86.013

0.408

26
27
28
29
30
31

6.558
7.093
8.392
10.767
9.444
7.079

18.975
12.434
26.443
13.890
29.708
16.504

1.060
0.970
1.124
1.119
1.116
1.067

0.0027
0.0087
0.0019
0.0009
0.0008
0.0015

0.054
0.140
0.100
0.044
0.036
0.051

55.901
87.379
83.842
36.646
45.441
43.471

0.795
0.207
2.785
0.730
0.655
0.276

32

1.737

5.495

1.078

0.0016

0.060

53.127

1.568

33

2.360

8.074

1.046

0.0014

0.061

52.412

0.310

34
35
36
37
39
40

7.272
7.035
7.349
8.895
6.992
3.520

10.342
11.079
14.051
17.150
16.485
19.349

1.161
1.207
1.182
1.187
1.309
1.179

0.0013
0.0045
0.0059
0.0053
0.0049
0.0093

0.035
0.092
0.121
0.105
0.123
0.174

30.403
36.629
38.740
40.004
33.110
42.405

0.161
0.520
0.747
0.894
0.460
1.543

41

5.591

19.927

1.150

0.0109

0.126

31.443

1.043

42

10.030

23.493

1.055

0.0006

0.027

17.026

0.022

CIC
Code

Tariff
(%)

Tariff
Reduction (%)

(1)
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

(2)
9.792
14.115
9.602
7.555
9.356
13.489
8.758

20

Notes: Column (2) reports the median 4-digit CIC (Chinese Industrial Classification) industry tariff level (average over 2002-2006) within
each CIC 2-digit industry. Column (3) reports the median 4-digit CIC industry tariff reduction during 2002-2006 in percentage terms
relative to its level in 2002 for each 2-digit industry. In columns (4) to (8), the reported values for each 2-digit CIC industry are the median
value of the 4-digit CIC industry measures within each 2-digit industry.

28

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics on Firm Imports and Firm Export Performance
____________________________________________________________________
Panel A: Export Performance of Importers vs. Non-importers: All Firms
Non-Importers
Year

Obs.#

2002
2006

(1)
148463
256100

Importers

Export Product
Country Pair
(2)
0.68
1.31

Export
Value
(3)
63648
160551

Obs.#
(4)
24986
39730

Export Product
Country Pairs
(5)
10.20
16.64

Export
Value
(6)
1130821
2886438

Panel B: Export Performance of Importers vs. Non-importers: Exporting Firms
Non- Importers
Year

Obs.#

2002
2006

(1)
14503
26510

Export Product
Country Pair
(2)
6.92
12.64

Importers
Export
Value
(3)
651550.3
1551011

Obs.#
(4)
20228
31801

Export Product
Country Pairs
(5)
12.60
20.78

Export
Value
(6)
1396811
3606118

Panel C: Export Participation Rate for Non-Exporting (t-1) Firms
Participation Rate

Non-Importers
0.08

Importers
0.66

Notes: Panel A shows the number of firms, average number of unique export product-country pairs and average export value of importers and nonimporters in year 2002 and 2006. Firms are classified as “Importers” if they imported during any year in the sample. “Non-Importers” had no
imports in any year between 2002 and 2006. Panel B reports a number of outcomes - average number of export product-country pairs and average
export value of importers and non-importers – for "exporters", defined as firms that exported during any year in the sample from 2002 to 2006.
Panel C shows the export participation rates for importing and non-importing firms that were not exporters in the previous year. “Export Product
Country Pairs” reports the number of distinct product (8-digit HS) and country destination pairs exported by the firm. “Export Value” is the
average value of firm exports in dollars. “Participation Rate” is the percentage of non-exporting firms that become exporters in the next year,
reported by firm import category.

29

Table 3: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports
Panel A: The Effect of Contemporaneous Imported Intermediate Inputs
Dep Variable

Ln (import value)
Import_prod

(1)
0.184***
(0.003)

Import_cty
Import_prod_cty

(2)

(3)

0.011***
(0.002)
0.392***
(0.011)

Ln(employment)

0.023***
(0.002)

(4)
0.139***
(0.003)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.194***
(0.010)

Ln (export_value)
(5)
(6)
0.175***
0.176***
(0.003)
(0.003)

0.014***
(0.002)

Firm age
Per worker output
Constant
Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

1.642***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.041
0.225
0.191

1.709***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.036
0.116
0.105

1.796***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.023
0.043
0.038

1.618***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.045
0.201
0.178

1.629***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.043
0.211
0.184

0.524***
(0.010)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.223***
(0.006)
-1.997***
(0.069)
Yes
Yes
1058924
3.13e+05
0.048
0.223
0.204

(7)
0.010***
(0.002)
0.374***
(0.010)
0.526***
(0.010)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.228***
(0.006)
-1.960***
(0.070)
Yes
Yes
1058924
3.13e+05
0.043
0.151
0.141

(8)

0.022***
(0.002)
0.563***
(0.011)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.243***
(0.006)
-2.133***
(0.071)
Yes
Yes
1058924
3.13e+05
0.032
0.102
0.095

(9)
0.135***
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.182***
(0.010)
0.507***
(0.010)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.217***
(0.006)
-1.906***
(0.069)
Yes
Yes
1058924
3.13e+05
0.052
0.214
0.198

(10)
0.168***
(0.003)

0.013***
(0.002)
0.516***
(0.010)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.220***
(0.006)
-1.953***
(0.069)
Yes
Yes
1058924
3.13e+05
0.050
0.219
0.201

Panel B: Contemporaneous and Lagged Imported Intermediate Inputs
Dep Variable

Ln (import value)
Lag Ln (import value)
Import_prod
Lag Import_prod
Import_cty
Lag Import_cty
Import_prod_cty
Lag Import_prod_cty
Ln(employment)

(1)
0.154***
(0.004)
0.075***
(0.003)

(2)

0.011***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.318***
(0.012)
0.114***
(0.009)

(3)

0.019***
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.001)

(4)
0.118***
(0.004)
0.064***
(0.004)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.155***
(0.012)
0.028***
(0.010)

Ln (export_value)
(5)
(6)
0.147***
0.150***
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.073***
0.072***
(0.003)
(0.003)

0.012***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)

Firm age
Per worker output
Constant

2.134***
2.243***
2.367***
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
N
751112
751112
751291
Groups
3.13e+05
3.13e+05
3.13e+05
R-2 Within
0.031
0.024
0.013
R-2 Between
0.234
0.119
0.048
R-2 Overall
0.222
0.114
0.044
Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

2.104***
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
751112
3.13e+05
0.034
0.212
0.202

2.116***
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
751112
3.13e+05
0.032
0.223
0.211

30

0.461***
(0.014)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.212***
(0.009)
-1.014***
(0.101)
Yes
Yes
747704
3.12e+05
0.035
0.238
0.230

(7)

0.010***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.309***
(0.012)
0.108***
(0.009)

0.469***
(0.014)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.219***
(0.009)
-0.981***
(0.102)
Yes
Yes
747704
3.12e+05
0.029
0.151
0.146

(8)

0.018***
(0.002)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.506***
(0.014)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.236***
(0.009)
-1.124***
(0.103)
Yes
Yes
747880
3.12e+05
0.018
0.101
0.099

(9)
0.116***
(0.004)
0.062***
(0.004)
0.010***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.149***
(0.012)
0.025***
(0.010)

0.447***
(0.014)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.206***
(0.009)
-0.943***
(0.100)
Yes
Yes
747704
3.12e+05
0.038
0.225
0.217

(10)
0.143***
(0.004)
0.070***
(0.003)

0.011***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.455***
(0.014)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.209***
(0.009)
-0.982***
(0.101)
Yes
Yes
747704
3.12e+05
0.037
0.232
0.224

Table 4: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports – Effects by Firm Type
Panel A: Import Value and Firm Exports
Dep Variable
Ln (import value)
Constant
Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Trader
(1)
0.170***
(0.003)
6.967***
(0.027)

Exporter
(2)
0.226***
(0.004)
7.840***
(0.030)

Importer
(3)
0.175***
(0.003)
6.430***
(0.033)

Ln (export value)
Survivor
Private
(4)
(5)
0.189***
0.240***
(0.004)
(0.005)
2.275***
0.753***
(0.011)
(0.009)

SOE
(6)
0.266***
(0.020)
0.573***
(0.012)

Non-HMT Foreign
(7)
0.136***
(0.006)
5.919***
(0.040)

HMT Foreign
(8)
0.108***
(0.005)
4.251***
(0.029)

Yes
Yes
264991
69515.000
0.083
0.002
0.011

Yes
Yes
233807
61188.000
0.097
0.012
0.043

Yes
Yes
164722
41767.000
0.096
0.001
0.016

Yes
Yes
422556
84558.000
0.049
0.278
0.213

Yes
Yes
745224
2.31e+05
0.050
0.167
0.139

Yes
Yes
95638
30123.000
0.054
0.346
0.321

Yes
Yes
109869
34907.000
0.043
0.093
0.079

Yes
Yes
113816
36007.000
0.033
0.075
0.059

Importer
(3)
0.166***
(0.003)
0.013***
(0.002)
6.347***
(0.035)

Ln (export value)
Survivor
Private
(4)
(5)
0.181***
0.234***
(0.004)
(0.006)
0.013***
0.015*
(0.002)
(0.009)
2.254***
0.752***
(0.011)
(0.009)

SOE
(6)
0.243***
(0.019)
0.023***
(0.006)
0.569***
(0.012)

Non-HMT Foreign
(7)
0.122***
(0.005)
0.013***
(0.001)
5.852***
(0.041)

HMT Foreign
(8)
0.097***
(0.005)
0.019***
(0.002)
4.223***
(0.030)

Panel B: Import Value, Import Variety and Firm Export
Dep Variable
Ln (import value)
Import_prod_cty
Constant

Trader
(1)
0.162***
(0.003)
0.013***
(0.002)
6.918***
(0.028)

Exporter
(2)
0.217***
(0.004)
0.013***
(0.002)
7.786***
(0.031)

Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N
264991
233807
164722
422556
745224
95638
109869
113816
Groups
69515.000
61188.000
41767.000
84558.000
2.31e+05
30123.000
34907.000
36007.000
R-2 Within
0.084
0.098
0.099
0.051
0.050
0.059
0.048
0.035
R-2 Between
0.000
0.013
0.003
0.253
0.164
0.313
0.091
0.069
R-2 Overall
0.012
0.042
0.021
0.205
0.138
0.294
0.081
0.058
Note: “Trader” firms are defined as firms that had at least one import or export transaction during the sample period. “Exporter” firms are firms that exported in at least one of the
sample years, and “importer” firms are firms that imported in at least one of the sample years. “Survivor” firms are firms that were active in all years between 2002 and 2006. SOE are
state-owned enterprises. Private firms are non-SOE domestic firms. HMT are foreign firms from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan and non HMT Foreign are foreign firms from other
foreign countries. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

Table 5: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports- Differential Effects by Import Origin
Dep Variable
Sample

Constant

1.647***
(0.008)

Full Sample
(2)
0.141***
(0.003)
0.103***
(0.003)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.008**
(0.003)
1.639***
(0.008)

Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.041
0.201
0.174

Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.042
0.191
0.169

Ln (import value) OECD
Ln (import value) Non-OECD
Import_prod_cty OECD

Full Sample
(1)
0.148***
(0.003)
0.109***
(0.003)

Import_prod_cty Non-OECD

Ln (export value)
Trader
Trader
(3)
(4)
0.135***
0.129***
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.100***
0.094***
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
0.010***
(0.003)
6.992***
6.962***
(0.027)
(0.027)
Yes
Yes
264991
69515.000
0.083
0.000
0.012

Yes
Yes
264991
69515.000
0.083
0.000
0.013

Survivor
(5)
0.152***
(0.004)
0.108***
(0.004)

2.280***
(0.011)

Survivor
(6)
0.146***
(0.004)
0.102***
(0.004)
0.010***
(0.002)
0.009***
(0.003)
2.266***
(0.011)

Yes
Yes
422556
84558.000
0.049
0.243
0.194

Yes
Yes
422556
84558.000
0.050
0.227
0.188

Note: “Trader” firms are defined as firms that had at least one import or export transaction during the sample period. “Survivor” firms are firms that were active in all years between
2002 and 2006. OECD countries refer to countries that are OECD member before 1990 but exclude Turkey and include Israel. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01

31

TABLE 6: Industry R&D Intensity and the Effects of Imported Inputs
Panel A: Industry R&D Intensity Interacted with Imported Intermediate inputs.

Dep Variable

Full Sample

Full Sample

(1)
0.191***
(0.003)

(2)
0.182***
(0.004)
0.014***
(0.002)
-0.047***
(0.008)
0.004
(0.003)

Ln (import value)
Import_prod_cty
Ln (import value)* Textile Indicator
Import_prod_cty* Textile Indicator

-0.048***
(0.008)

Ln (import value)* R&D

Ln (export value)
Non-Textile
Non-Textile
Sector
Sector
(3)
(4)
0.184***
0.175***
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.014***
(0.002)

2.068***
(0.470)

Import_prod_cty* R&D
Ln (import value)* Newprod

Non-Textile
Sector
(5)
0.174***
(0.004)

Non-Textile
Sector
(6)
0.165***
(0.005)
0.015***
(0.002)

0.213***
(0.035)

1.916***
(0.515)
-0.057
(0.087)

Constant

1.639***
(0.008)

1.626***
(0.008)

1.463***
(0.008)

1.450***
(0.009)

1.462***
(0.008)

0.200***
(0.036)
-0.013*
(0.007)
1.449***
(0.009)

Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.041
0.219
0.187

Yes
Yes
1064547
3.13e+05
0.043
0.207
0.181

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.045
0.244
0.212

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.046
0.231
0.205

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.045
0.242
0.211

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.047
0.230
0.205

Import_prod_cty* Newprod

Note: The zero/one Textile Indicator is set to one for firms in the textile and clothing sectors. Industry R&D is the share of industrial R&D expenses over industrial sales. Newprod is
the median level of firms’ new product share in their output for firms within each industry defined by 4-digit CIC code. Column (3) to (6) exclude the textile and clothing sector.
Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Panel B: Imported Intermediate Input use Interacted with other Industry Characteristics

Dep Variable

Ln (import value)
Ln (import value)* K intensity
Ln (import value)* Import intensity

(1)
0.201***
(0.006)
-0.000*
(0.000)

(2)
0.196***
(0.006)
-0.000**
(0.000)

Ln (import value)* External Finance Dep
Ln (import value)* R&D
Constant

1.464***
(0.008)

2.202***
(0.475)
1.463***
(0.008)

Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.044
0.248
0.214

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.045
0.246
0.214

(3)
0.193***
(0.004)

Ln (export value)
(4)
0.185***
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.000)

-0.001
(0.000)

1.465***
(0.008)

2.113***
(0.470)
1.463***
(0.008)

Yes
Yes
928950
2.75e+05
0.044
0.247
0.214

Yes
Yes
928950
2.75e+05
0.045
0.246
0.213

(5)
0.077***
(0.020)

(6)
0.069***
(0.020)

0.100***
(0.017)
1.463***
(0.008)

0.101***
(0.017)
2.088***
(0.468)
1.462***
(0.008)

(7)
0.078***
(0.022)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.097***
(0.018)
2.167***
(0.473)
1.462***
(0.008)

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.045
0.245
0.213

Yes
Yes
929001
2.75e+05
0.045
0.243
0.212

Yes
Yes
928950
2.75e+05
0.045
0.245
0.213

Note: K intensity (capital intensity) is measured by the median level of firms’ capital labor ratio for firms within each industry of 4-digit CIC code. Import intensity is the share of
imported inputs as a ratio of the total export for each industry. External Finance Dependence is the median level of external financing dependence by 4-digit CIC industries
constructed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). R&D is the share of industrial R&D expenses over industrial sales. All Columns exclude textile and clothing sector. Standard errors
in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

32

TABLE 7: Firm Imports and Export Scope
Dep Variable

Full
Sample
(1)
0.056***
(0.001)

Ln (import value)
Import_prod_cty
Ln (import value) OECD

Number of Export Product Country Pairs

Full
Sample
(2)
0.054***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.000)

Private

SOE

Non-HMT
Foreign

HMT
Foreign

(3)
0.057***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)

(4)
0.070***
(0.003)
0.002***
(0.000)

(5)
0.031***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.000)

(6)
0.029***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.000)

Full
Sample
(7)

Full
Sample
(8)

0.043***
(0.001)
0.027***
(0.001)

Constant

0.237***
(0.009)

0.237***
(0.009)

-0.346***
(0.014)

0.065
(0.047)

1.054***
(0.017)

0.883***
(0.018)

0.262***
(0.008)

0.041***
(0.001)
0.025***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.263***
(0.008)

Year FE
Firm FE
N
Log lik.
Chi-squared
Groups

Yes
Yes
189307
-3.45e+05
28420.773
49551

Yes
Yes
189307
-3.45e+05
29564.217
49551

Yes
Yes
79393
-1.41e+05
16412.618
21222

Yes
Yes
5542
-9038.332
533.741
1484

Yes
Yes
57573
-1.02e+05
6261.378
16069

Yes
Yes
41436
-7.41e+04
3208.982
11616

Yes
Yes
189307
-3.45e+05
28550.231
49551

Yes
Yes
189307
-3.45e+05
29325.569
49551

Ln (import value) Non-OECD
Import_prod_cty OECD
Import_prod_cty Non-OECD

Note: All columns are Panel Negative Binomial regressions with firm fixed effects and year fixed effects controlled. All columns exclude textile and clothing sectors. SOE are stateowned enterprises. Private firms are non-SOE domestic firms. HMT are foreign firms from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan and non HMT Foreign are foreign firms from other
foreign countries. OECD countries refer to countries that are OECD member before 1990 but exclude Turkey and include Israel. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.

TABLE 8: Import Duties and Firms’ Imports
Dep Variable
Ln (Duty)
Lag Import Status
Ownership FE
Industry-Year FE
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Random Effects
Year FE
N
Groups
Log lik.
Chi-squared
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall
F

Ln (import value)
(1)
(2)
-0.046***
-0.047***
(0.009)
(0.012)

Yes
Yes

Yes

-2.56e+06

Yes
1064547
313435
-1.85e+06

0.220
58100.550

0.001
0.001
0.001
213.498

984214

Current Import Status
(3)
(4)
-0.072***
-0.022***
(0.009)
(0.005)
2.400***
2.781***
(0.007)
(0.006)

(5)
-0.135***
(0.011)

Count of Import Product-Country Pairs
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.147***
-0.082***
-0.055***
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.016)
4.301***
0.340***
(0.009)
(0.010)

Yes
Yes

676325
-1.10e+05
2.81e+05

Yes
Yes
731909
306267
-1.21e+05
2.15e+05

Yes
Yes
1064547
313435
-5.52e+05
866.872

Yes
Yes
731909
306267
-3.81e+05
2.10e+05

Yes

Yes

Yes
164686
41747
-2.54e+05
727.934

Yes
108284
33526
-1.59e+05
1171.032

Note: Column (1) is estimated by OLS, while column (2) is estimated using panel regression with firm fixed effects. Column (3) runs probit regression while column (4) run panel
probit with firm random effects. Including random effect instead of fixed effect is because panel probit regression has no fixed effect option. Columns (5) to (8) are estimated by Panel
Negative Binomial regressions. Columns (5) and (6) control firm random effects while Columns (7) and (8) control firm fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p
< 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

33

TABLE 9: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports—Instrumental Variables Estimation
Dep Variable

Ln (import value)
Import_prod_cty

Full Sample

Full Sample

Full Sample

(1)
1.350***
(0.500)

(2)

(3)

Import_prod

1.691***
(0.451)

Import_cty

1.068***
(0.285)

Ln (export value)
Full Sample
Private
(4)

Constant

0.219
(0.538)

0.637**
(0.276)

0.825***
(0.226)

0.572***
(0.153)
-10.707***
(3.303)

Firm FE
Year FE
N
Groups
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Yes
Yes
929001
274709
.
0.262
0.230

Yes
Yes
929001
274709
0.019
0.000
0.001

Yes
Yes
929001
274709
0.019
0.000
0.001

Yes
Yes
929001
274709
0.019
0.000
0.001

Ln (import
value)

Import
prod_cty

Import_prod

Import_cty

-0.044***
(0.014)
1.169***
(0.029)
Yes
Yes
929001
274709
-1.59e+06

-0.036***
(0.013)
0.686***
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
929001
274709
-4.90e+05
697.841

-0.056***
(0.013)
0.910***
(0.029)
Yes
Yes
929001
274709
-4.71e+05
661.707

-0.105***
(0.011)
21.848***
(2.889)
Yes
Yes
929001
274709
-3.44e+05
1356.830

First Stage Results
1st Stage Dep. Var.
Ln (Duty)
Constant
Firm FE
Year FE
N
Groups
Log lik.
Chi-squared
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall
F

0.001
0.000
0.000
186.900

SOE

(5)
2.027*
(1.227)

(6)
39.017
(478.529)

Non-HMT
Foreign
(7)
0.095
(1.207)

HMT
Foreign
(8)
1.217
(1.319)

0.294
(0.316)

-16.277
(208.083)

6.127
(6.155)

1.336
(3.464)

Yes
Yes
745224
231362
.
0.197
0.164

Yes
Yes
95638
30123
.
0.346
0.321

Yes
Yes
109869
34907
0.041
0.081
0.067

Yes
Yes
113816
36007
.
0.091
0.072

Ln (import value)
-0.025**
(0.012)
0.303***
(0.027)
Yes
Yes
653648
203934
-9.44e+05

-0.005
(0.033)
0.433***
(0.071)
Yes
Yes
91828
28858
-1.17e+05

-0.074
(0.070)
5.701***
(0.150)
Yes
Yes
92525
29547
-2.00e+05

-0.011
(0.073)
2.993***
(0.158)
Yes
Yes
91000
29030
-1.98e+05

0.003
0.000
0.000
269.197

0.001
0.000
0.000
6.573

0.002
0.000
0.000
25.469

0.001
0.000
0.000
12.058

Note: All regressions use Ln (Duty) as instrumental variable for imported inputs variables. Column (1), (5), (6), (7) and (8) present linear panel IV regression results with firm and
year fixed effects included. Column (2), (3) and (4) use Panel Negative Binomial regressions in the first stage and linear panel regressions with fixed effects in the second stage. SOE
are state-owned enterprises. Private firms are non-SOE domestic firms. HMT are foreign firms from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan and non-HMT Foreign are foreign firms from
other foreign countries. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

34

TABLE 10: R&D Intensity and the Impact of Imported Inputs - Instrumental
Variables Estimation
Dep Variable
R&D Measure

Ln (import value)
Constant
Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
Chi-squared
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Ln (export value)
R&D Expenses as a share of industry sales (R&D)
Median of new product share in firms’ output (Newprod)
Low R&D
Low R&D no
High R&D
Low Newprod
Low Newprod no
High Newprod
Textile
Textile
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-3.770
-0.845
1.122***
-10.042
-1.814
0.834***
(5.096)
(0.787)
(0.288)
(24.387)
(2.123)
(0.280)
5.186
2.536***
0.211
10.445
3.316*
0.649
(4.285)
(0.678)
(0.434)
(20.491)
(1.835)
(0.424)
Yes
Yes
576474
183565
80310.193
0.199
0.165

Yes
Yes
460507
148815
3.93e+05
0.205
0.173

Yes
Yes
407740
130016
3.75e+05
0.298
0.269

Yes
Yes
583390
184661
12899.612
0.201
0.168

Yes
Yes
461384
148072
1.68e+05
0.212
0.181

Yes
Yes
400824
127132
4.62e+05
0.296
0.265

Note: All regressions are estimated using linear panel IV regressions and all use Ln (Duty) as instrumental variable for log imported inputs. Column (1) reports the IV results for
industries with low R&D intensity, where R&D intensity is measured by the share of industrial R&D expenses over industrial sales (R&D) and high/low R&D intensity is defined
based on whether the industry’s R&D intensity is above the median R&D intensity among 4-digit CIC industries. Column (2) repeat column 1 but exclude Textile and Clothing sectors
(CIC 2-digit code “17” and “18”). Column (3) reports the IV results for industries with high R&D intensity. Columns (4) to (6) repeat columns (1) to (3) but use the median level of
firms’ new product shares in their outputs for firms within each industry defined by 4-digit CIC code (Newprod) to measure R&D intensity. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

TABLE 11: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports, IV on Changes Estimation
Dep Variable

ΔLn (import value)
Δ(Import_prod_cty)
Ln(emp) in 2002
Per worker Sale in 2002
Constant
Firm Ownership FE
Sector FE
N
Chi-squared

Full Sample

Private

(1)
1.948
(1.428)

(2)
2.883
(3.395)

Non-HMT
Foreign
(3)
1.195
(2.085)

-0.053
(0.047)
0.042
(0.036)
0.080
(0.283)

-0.156
(0.208)
-0.138
(0.224)
1.624
(2.065)

-0.041
(0.066)
0.007
(0.071)
-0.274
(0.650)

ΔLn (export value)
HMT
Full Sample
Foreign
(4)
(5)
1.930
(2.351)
0.490
(0.312)
-0.163
-0.116*
(0.266)
(0.070)
0.158
(0.170)
-0.818
-0.017
(1.009)
(0.349)

Yes
Yes
76930
366.678

Yes
50794
154.990

Yes
10454
136.713

Yes
10089
33.835

Yes
Yes
77099
298.844

Private
(6)

Non-HMT
Foreign
(7)

HMT
Foreign
(8)

0.513***
(0.070)
-0.112***
(0.030)

0.083
(0.101)
-0.030
(0.049)

0.150
(0.132)
-0.059
(0.092)

0.784***
(0.177)

-0.294
(0.327)

0.001
(0.532)

Yes
50869
347.392

Yes
10477
215.343

Yes
10094
103.495

Note: All regressions are IV regressions. First four columns use changes in Ln (Duty) from year 2002 to year 2006 as instrumental variables. Instruments in columns (5) to (8) are
Δln(Duty), Lag import status and the interaction between Lag importer status and Δln(Duty). Private firms are non-SOE domestic firms. HMT are foreign firms from Hong Kong,
Macau and Taiwan and non-HMT Foreign are foreign firms from other foreign countries. State-owned enterprises are suppressed due to relatively less observation and highly
insignificant estimates. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

35

TABLE 12: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports: Controls for Export Demand and
Import Competition
Dep Variable

Ln (import value)
Export demand
Import competition
Constant
Year FE
Firm FE
N
Groups
Chi-squared
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall

Ln (export value)
Firms with export share < 4.4%
Firms with export share < 0.6%
Full Sample
Private
Foreign
Full Sample
Private
Foreign
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1.769**
3.469
1.071*
1.116**
1.499
0.614
(0.688)
(4.388)
(0.564)
(0.448)
(1.480)
(0.393)
0.073***
0.031
0.144***
0.101***
0.067***
0.224***
(0.014)
(0.058)
(0.027)
(0.010)
(0.022)
(0.024)
0.042
0.117
0.091
-0.001
0.010
0.075
(0.042)
(0.207)
(0.058)
(0.032)
(0.075)
(0.056)
-1.484***
-0.928*
-1.615
-1.508***
-1.006***
-2.181*
(0.545)
(0.534)
(1.819)
(0.291)
(0.131)
(1.146)
Yes
Yes
1054754
312632
4.94e+05
0.234
0.196

Yes
Yes
741270
230969
63379.033
0.182
0.145

Yes
Yes
218543
63958
6.19e+05
0.114
0.092

Yes
Yes
1017179
307691
5.62e+05
0.202
0.162

Yes
Yes
726243
228871
1.53e+05
0.141
0.108

Yes
Yes
197160
60826
5.99e+05
0.108
0.087

Note: All regressions are IV regressions, using Ln (Duty) as instrumental variable for Ln (import value). Export demand is the log value of industry level export value and Import
competition is the log value of China’s importing tariff charged on products that are exported by each industry. Import competition is constructed in a similar way as Ln (Duty). The
only difference is that Ln (Duty) uses industry imports in 2006 as weights for each product while Import competition uses industry exports in 2006 as weights. Columns (1) to (3)
exclude firms with more than 4.4% of industry export share, eliminates top 5% of exporting firms as measured by market share. Columns (4) to (6) impose more stringent restrictions,
excluding firms with more than 0.6% of export share so that the top 25% of exporting firms are dropped. Private firms are non-SOE domestic firms. Foreign firms are foreign owned
firms including both foreign firms from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan and foreign firms from other foreign countries. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p
< 0.01.

36

TABLE 13: Imported Inputs and Firm Exports: IV with Real Exchange Rates
Dep Variable
Instrumental Variable
Sample
Ln (import value)
Ln(RERexp)
Constant
Firm FE
Year FE
N
Groups
Chi-squared
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall
First Stage Results
1st Stage Dep. Var.
Ln(RERimp)
Ln(RERexp)
Ln (Duty)
Constant
R-2 Within
R-2 Between
R-2 Overall
F

Ln(RERimp)

Ln (export value)

Full Sample
(1)
3.303***
(0.812)
0.297
(0.258)
-2.048**
(0.813)

Ln(RERimp) &
Ln(Duty)
Full Sample
(2)
2.612***
(0.586)
0.396*
(0.204)
-1.394**
(0.595)

Trader
(3)
3.064***
(0.986)
1.440*
(0.871)
-6.964*
(3.863)

Survivor
(4)
2.562***
(0.712)
0.556*
(0.312)
-2.095*
(1.083)

(5)
4.758**
(1.885)
0.054
(0.440)
-0.493
(0.379)

(6)
2.742**
(1.083)
0.939
(0.646)
-6.069
(4.282)

Yes
Yes
984163
290932
1.91e+05
0.240
0.207

Yes
Yes
984163
290932
2.91e+05
0.240
0.207

Yes
Yes
262867
69087
2.29e+05
0.004
0.001

Yes
Yes
385629
77430
1.64e+05
0.270
0.220

Yes
Yes
699709
216814
37464.651
0.197
0.162

Yes
Yes
220536
63570
1.69e+05
0.115
0.096

-0.279***
(0.068)
0.123*
(0.069)

-0.250***
(0.069)
0.134*
(0.069)
-0.029**
(0.014)
1.317***
(0.117)
0.002
0.000
0.000
159.742

Ln (import value)
-0.750***
-0.401***
(0.237)
(0.108)
0.311
0.153
(0.253)
(0.108)

-0.160**
(0.064)
0.159**
(0.064)

-0.560***
(0.215)
-0.069
(0.230)

4.769***
(0.422)
0.005
0.005
0.000
165.627

0.280**
(0.109)
0.003
0.001
0.000
237.037

4.609***
(0.384)
0.002
0.002
0.001
40.036

1.301***
(0.117)
0.002
0.000
0.000
185.623

1.961***
(0.184)
0.003
0.000
0.000
158.037

Ln(RERimp)
Private

Foreign

Note: All regressions are IV regressions. Column (1) is for the full sample using Ln (RERimp) as instrumental variable for imported inputs. Column (2) includes Ln(Duty) together
with Ln (RERimp) as instrumental variables. Columns (3) to (6) are IV regressions for subgroup of firms using Ln (RERimp) as instrumental variable. “Trader” firms are defined as
firms that had at least one import or export transaction during the sample period. “Survivor” firms are firms that were active in all years between 2002 and 2006. Private firms are nonSOE domestic firms. Foreign firms include both foreign firms from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan (HMT) and non-HMT Foreign frims. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

37

References
Acharya, R. C., and Wolfgang Keller. (2009) “Technology Transfer Through Imports,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, 42(4): 1411-48.
Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal and Shang-Jin Wei (2011), "The Role of Intermediaries in
Facilitating Trade," Journal of International Economics, vol. 84(1), pages 73-85.
Amit K. Khandewal, Peter K. Schott and Shang-Jin Wei (2011), "Trade Liberalization and
Embedded Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters", Manuscript.
Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings. (2007) “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and
Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1611-38.
Amiti, Mary and Khandelwal. (forthcoming) “Import Competition and Quality Upgrading,”
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Amiti Mary, and David E. Weinstein. (2009) “Exports and Financial Shocks,” NBER Working
Paper No. 15556, December.
Arkolakis, Costas, Svetlana Demidova, Peter J. Klenow, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. (2008)
“Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade,” American Economic Review 98(2):444-450.
Auboin, Marc. 2007. “Boosting Trade Finance in Developing Countries: What Link with
theWTO?” Economics and Statistics Division Discussion Paper, World Trade Organization.
Geneva:WTO.
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts and Daniel Yi Xu, (2011) “R&D Investment, Exporting, and
Productivity Dynamics,” American Economic Review 101 (June 2011): 1312–1344
Bas, Maria (2012) “Input-trade Liberalization and firm export decisions: Evidence from
Argentina” Journal of Development Economics.
Bas, Maria and Vanessa Strauss-Kahn. (2011) “Does Importing More Inputs Raise Exports?”
CEPII Working Paper, no. 2011-15.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott (2007).
“Firms in International Trade.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3):105-130.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. (2010) “Multi-Product Firms and
Trade Liberalization,” Manuscript.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. (2009) “Creative Accounting or
Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing,” NBER
Working Paper 15,152.
38

Brambilla, Irene, Amit K. Khandewal, and Peter K. Schott (2010), "China's Experience under the
Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC)", in
China's Growing Role in World Trade, (eds.) R.C. Feenstra and S.-J. Wei, Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Brambilla, Irene (2009) “Multinationals, Technology, and the Introduction of Varieties of
Goods,” Journal of International Economics, 79(1):89-101.
Broda, Christian Joshua Greenfield, and David E. Weinstein. (2010) “From Groundnuts to
Globalization: A Structural Estimate of Trade and Growth”.
Bustos, Paula (2011) “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review, 101(1):304340.
Campbell, Douglas L., David Jacks, Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. (2009) “The
Role of Trade Costs in the Great Trade Collapse” In: „The Great Trade Collapse: Causes,
Consequences and Prospects‟ edited by Richard Baldwin, Vox EU Ebook 27, pp. 161169.
Chor, Davin and Kalina Manova. (2009) “Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and
International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis,” Stanford University manuscript.
Constantini, James and Marc J. Melitz. (2008) “The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to
Trade Liberalization” The organization of firms in a global Economy. Ed. E. Helpman, D. Marin
& T. Verdier. Harvard University Press.
Ethier, Wilfred J., (1982). National and international returns to scale in the modern theory of
international trade. American Economic Review 72(3):389–405.
Feenstra, Robert C. Zhiyuan Li and Miaojie Yu. (2011) “Exports and Credit Constraints under
Incomplete Information: Theory and Evidence from China,” NBER working Paper, 16940.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova
(2010), “Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1727-1767.
Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman. (2011) “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,”
Manuscript.
Hale, Galina and Cheryl Long. (2010) “If You Try, You’ll Get By: Chinese Private Firms’
Efficiency Gains from Overcoming Financial Constraints.”
Hallak, Juan Carlos. (2010) “A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, August, 92(3): 453–466.
39

Hallak, Juan Carlos. (2006) “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of
International Economics 68:1 (2006), 238–265.
Halpern, Laszlo, Miklos Koren and Adam Szeidl. (2009) “Imported Inputs and Productivity”
Manuscript.
Head, Keith, Ran Jing and John Ries, (2011) “Import Sourcing of Chinese Cities: Order versus
Randomness,” University of British Colombia Manuscript.
Iacovone, Leonardo and Beata S. Javorcik. (2010) “Getting Ready: Preparation for Exporting,”
Manuscript.
Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Beverly Lapham (2006) “Import Protection as Export Destruction,”
University of Western Ontario working paper, #2006-2.
Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Joel Rodrigue (2008) “Does the use of imported intermediates increase
productivity? Plant-level evidence.” Journal of Development Economics, 87:106-118.
Keller, Wolfgang. (2010) “International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment and Technology
Spillovers,” in B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg eds., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
North-Holland: Elsevier, chapter 19.
Khandelwal, Amit K. (forthcoming) “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders”, Review of
Economic Studies.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, (2008) “How Much of Chinese Exports is Really
Made in China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added When Processing Trade is Pervasive?”
NBER Working Paper 14109.
Kroszner, Randall S. & Laeven, Luc & Klingebiel, Daniela, 2007. "Banking crises, financial
dependence, and growth," Journal of Financial Economics, Elsevier, vol. 84(1):187-228.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen (2009) “Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and an
Interpretation,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May.
Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler. (2010) “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises PlantLevel Productivity … for Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):1051-1099.
Lu, Dan. (2010) “Exceptional Exporter Performance? Evidence from Chinese Manufacturing
Firms” University of Chicago manuscript.
Ma, Yue, Heiwai Tang and Yifan Zhang (2011) “Factor Intensity, Product Switching, and
Productivity: Evidence from Chinese Exporters,” Manuscript.
Manova, Kalina, Shang-Jin Wei and Zhiwei Zhang. (2011) “Firm Exports and Multinational
Activity Under Credit Constraints,” NBER Working Paper, No. 16,905.
40

Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang. (forthcoming) “Export Prices across Firms and
Destinations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (NBER Working Paper 15,342).
Manova, Kalina and Zhihong Yu. (2011) “Processing vs. Ordinary Trade,” Stanford and
Nottingham manuscript.
Melitz, Marc J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71: 1695-1725.
Park, Albert Dean Yang, Xinzheng Shi and Yuan Jiang. (2010) “Exporting and Firm
Performance: Chinese Exporters and the Asian Financial Crisis,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 92(4):822-842.
Smeets, Valerie and Frederic Warzynski. (2010) “Learning by Exporting, Importing or Both?
Estimating productivity with multi-product firms, pricing heterogeneity and the role of
international trade,” Manuscript.
Verhoogen, Eric A. (2008) “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 489-530.
Yu, Miaojie. (2011) “Processing Trade, Firm’s Productivity and Tariff Reduction: Evidence
from Chinese Products”, mimeo, Peking University.

41

Data Appendix
Firm Level Variables

China's National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) conducts an annual survey of manufacturing
enterprises. When aggregated to the industry level, these data are the basis of the industrial
statistics reported in China's Statistical Yearbook. Two types of firms are included in the survey:
(1) all SOEs, and (2) non-SOEs with annual sales at or above five million Renminbi. From this
data set, we attain information on individual firm operations and financial statistics, such as firm
employment and firm sales. This data set also provides information on the ownership structure of
the firms that allows us to assign firms to one of the following four designations: (1) State
Owned Enterprise, or SOE, (2) Private, (3) Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, or HMT, and (4)
other non- HMT foreign. Due to noise or misreporting in the data, the data are cleaned following
the procedures of Feenstra, Li and Yu (2011).
The NBS data set for 2002 to 2006 was matched to firm-level data on imports and exports, which
is constructed from the transaction level Chinese Customs data (hereafter Customs data set).
Since the two datasets use different firm identification numbers, the first round of matching is
based on the firm names provided in the two data sets. However, to verify firm identity, and to
maximize the number of successful matches while excluding spurious matches, the matching
process is extended to a number of firm identifiers including zip-code, phone number, street
address and manager’s name.
There are two ways to evaluate the success of the matching procedure. We first compare the
matched vs. non-matched firms in the Customs data set. On the export side, we matched 52% of
total number of observations but 80% of total export values. On the import side, we matched
64% of total number of observations and 66% of total import values. Although these numbers,
especially the matched import value, might seem low, there are reasons that these numbers could
underestimate the true successfulness of the matching. One possible reason is that although we
exclude the intermediaries and wholesalers in the Customs data set according to their names
when we perform the matching, there might be leftover intermediaries and wholesalers in the
Customs data set while the NBS data set only covers manufacturing firms.33
The second but more accurate way to evaluate the matching process is to compare the matched
vs. non-matched firms in the NBS data set. The NBS data set also reports each firm’s total export
value. For all firms that report positive export value in the data, we matched 77% of the total
number of firms and 86% of the total export value of these firms. These numbers are
significantly higher than those from the Customs data. Unfortunately, the NBS data set does not
report the import value so we cannot evaluate the success of the match on import side from this
dataset. However, it is reasonable to believe that it should also be higher than those evaluation
numbers from the Customs data set. Either way, the matched sample coverage of trade value is
comparable to, if not better than, the 75% value match reported in Bernard, Jensen and Schott
(2010) for US firms.
33

Following Ahn, Khandelwal and Wei (2011), we identify the set of intermediary firms based on Chinese
characters that have the English-equivalent meaning of “importer”, “exporter”, and/or “trading” in the firms’ name.

42

After firm-identifiers for the NBS and Customs data sets were matched, we merged the trade
data to the information on firm characteristics and operations. The original Customs data record
all firm-level trade transactions according to the Chinese 8-digit HS code and import country of
origin, or export country of destination. Observations that list China as the export destination or
China as the source country for imports were excluded. Finally, since processing trade imports
are not subject to tariffs and may have different economic determinants than ordinary trade, our
core data set is based on the subset of firms that were not engaged in processing trade.
For each of the years in our sample, we constructed our firm-level trade measures by summing
over the relevant firm import or export transactions. On the export side, our measures of firm
export performance include Export Value, the total value of firm exports in the year, and Export
Prod-Cty, which is a count variable representing the number of unique HS-8 digit product,
export country destination pairs present in the firm’s export activity. Before we generated our
firm-level import measures, we identified imported intermediate inputs, following Arkolakis,
Demidova, Klenow and Rodriguez Clare’s (2008) work, that defines intermediate input imports
as any imports of products belonging to the UN BEC groups, 41, 521, 111, 121, 21, 22, 31, 322,
42 and 53. As with the export data, we formed our annual firm-level measures of imported
intermediate input value, Import Value, as the sum of all intermediate input import transaction
value of the firm. Import Prod-Cty, which is a count variable representing the number of unique
HS-8 digit product, country source pairs present in the firm’s intermediate input imports.
Similarly, Import_prod is the count of unique HS-8 digit product intermediate input imports by
the firm, while Import_cty is the count of unique country sources in the firm’s intermediate input
import activity.
To characterize tariffs faced by Chinese firms, we used Equation (5) to generate tariff measures
for each 4-digit Chinese CIC industry. These tariff measures attached the tariff measures to
firms, according to the firm’s 4-digit industry code. The tariff data are from WTO.34 Similarly, in
order to construct firm import real exchange rates and export real exchange rates, we generated
the real exchange rate measures for each 4-digit Chinese CIC industry according to Equation (7),
and then attached the real exchange rate measures to firms according to their industry codes. The
bilateral real exchange rate data were taken from the Penn World Table.
Industry Level Variables

To study how the benefits of imported intermediate inputs are related to industry characteristics,
we used the NBS data set to construct industry level variables following Kroszner, Laeven and
Klingebiel (2007). These industry variables include industry measures of external finance
dependence, R&D intensity, new product intensity, imported input intensity and capital intensity.
The industry medians for these variables at the 2-digit CIC level are reported in Table 1.
External finance dependence is defined as the fraction of capital expenditures not financed by
cash flows from operations. Since the NBS data set does not include direct measures of capital
expenditures, we construct a measure of capital expenditure which is defined as the sum of the
34

See http://tariffdata.wto.org/ReportersAndProducts.aspx.

43

firm’s increase in its long term investment, fixed assets and intangible assets as well as the firm’s
current year capital depreciation. 35 Cash flow from operations is defined as in Rajan and
Zingales (1998, p564): the sum of cash flow, plus inventory reductions, and reductions in
receivables. 36 The median level of external finance dependence in each 4-digit CIC industry
averaged over the years 2004-2006 is used as the external financing dependence measure for
each industry.
Our measure of R&D intensity (R&D) is the share of industrial R&D expenses over industrial
sales by 4-digit CIC industry for the period 2005-2006.37 We also create an alternative measure
of industry R&D intensity which is defined as the median level of new product share in the total
output (Newprod) for firms within each 4-digit CIC industry. Similarly, the Capital-to-labor ratio
(K intensity) is the median level of the ratio of fixed assets over number of employees by 4-digit
CIC industry for the period 2002-2006.
Finally, we define imported input intensity as the imported inputs as a ratio to the total exports
for each 4-digit CIC industry over the period 2002-2006. We also created an alternative measure,
which defines imported input intensity as the ratio of imported inputs to total output for each 4digit CIC industry. However, our results were similar, regardless of measure chosen.

35

In contrast with the Compustat dataset of US firms, which records capital expenditures directly (Compustat
variable #128), the NBS does not have a direct measure. Capital expenditure are incurred when businesses spend
money to buy fixed assets or intangible assets, or to add to the value of any existing fixed asset with a useful life
extending beyond the taxable year.
36
Since the NBS data set does not include a measure of payables, we are not able to include payables in our
construction of cash flows from operations.
37
In contrast with Kroszner, Laeven and Klingebiel (2007) we are not able to measure R&D intensity as the median
level of R&D expenses over sales in each 4-digit CIC industry. This is because many firms engage in no R&D and
consequently the median levels of R&D many Chinese CIC industries is zero. Moreover, R&D expenses are
reported in the data set only in year 2005-2006.

44

