                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AS CERTAIN AS DEBT AND TAXES:
ESTIMATING THE TAX SENSITIVITY OF LEVERAGE FROM EXOGENOUS STATE TAX CHANGES

                                               Florian Heider
                                            Alexander Ljungqvist

                                            Working Paper 18263
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w18263


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          July 2012




    We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Laurent Bach, Vicente Cunat, Todd Gormley,
    John Graham, Evgeny Lyandres, Thomas Noe, Olga Kuzmina, Stefano Rossi, Clemens Sialm, Irina
    Stefanescu, Sheridan Titman, and Margarita Tsoutsoura (our discussants); and Heitor Almeida, Malcolm
    Baker, Bo Becker, Dick Brealey, Francesca Cornelli, Peter DeMarzo, Joan Farre-Mensa, Murray Frank,
    Oliver Hart, Zhiguo He, Stewart Myers, Josh Rauh, Amit Seru, Phil Strahan, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
    Toni Whited, and various seminar audiences. We thank Alexandre Da Cruz, Katerina Deligiannidou,
    Geoffroy Dolphin, Petar Mihaylovski, and Edvardas Moseika for competent research assistance and
    Ashwini Agrawal and David Matsa for sharing data constructed from the 2007 Commodity Flow
    Survey. Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the generous hospitality of the European Central Bank
    while working on this project. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of
    the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
    Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18263.ack

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2012 by Florian Heider and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
    to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
As Certain as Debt and Taxes: Estimating the Tax Sensitivity of Leverage from Exogenous
State Tax Changes
Florian Heider and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 18263
July 2012, Revised April 2014
JEL No. G0,G32

                                               ABSTRACT

We use a natural experiment in the form of 121 staggered changes in corporate income tax rates across
U.S. states to show that tax considerations are a first-order determinant of firms’ capital structure choices.
Over the period 1990-2011, firms increase long-term leverage by 104 basis points on average (or $32.5
million in extra debt) in response to an average tax increase of 131 basis points. Contrary to static
trade-off theory, the tax sensitivity of leverage is asymmetric: firms do not reduce leverage in response
to tax cuts. Using treatment reversals, we find this to be true even within-firm: tax increases that are
later reversed nonetheless lead to permanent increases in a firm’s leverage – an unexpected and novel
form of hysteresis. Our findings are robust to various confounds such as unobserved variation in local
business conditions, union power, or unemployment risk. Treatment effects are heterogeneous and
confirm the tax channel: tax sensitivity is greater among profitable and investment-grade firms which
respectively have a greater marginal tax benefit and lower marginal cost of issuing debt.


Florian Heider
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29 D-60311
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
and florian.heider@gmail.com
florian.heider@ecb.int

Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu
As is well known, debt confers a tax benefit on firms when interest payments can be deducted from

taxable income. While this tax advantage of debt has been a cornerstone of corporate finance since

at least Modigliani and Miller (1963), its empirical relevance continues to be disputed: opinions in

the literature range from irrelevance to the belief that taxes are the key driver of debt policy. 1

      We contribute to this debate by providing well-identified evidence showing that taxes are a first-

order determinant of U.S. firms’ capital structure choices. In the past, identifying the effect of taxes

on capital structure has proven to be empirically challenging owing to a variety of endogeneity

problems. We address this identification challenge by exploiting variation in corporate income tax

rates across U.S. states and time. Unlike federal tax changes, which occur infrequently and affect all

firms simultaneously, many states change their corporate tax rates (we identify 121 changes over

the period 1989 to 2011). Importantly, they do so at different times. The staggered nature of the tax

changes provides a set of counterfactuals for how leverage would have evolved in the absence of

the tax changes and so allows us to disentangle the effect of taxes on leverage from other forces

shaping debt policy. Because the tax changes vary firms’ marginal benefit of debt without, as we

will show, affecting their marginal cost of debt, we can trace out the marginal-cost-of-debt curve for

U.S. firms.

      Our first contribution is to show that leverage responds to tax changes. Using a difference-in-

difference approach, we find that firms increase the amount of debt in their capital structure

following an increase in the rate at which their home state taxes corporate income, relative to a set

of control firms operating in the same industry at the same time but located in states without tax

changes. Total assets are unchanged, implying that firms swap debt for equity when tax rates rise.

      Interestingly, the estimated tax sensitivity is asymmetric: while firms borrow more in response

to tax rises, tax cuts do not lead to a corresponding cut in leverage. This is true even within-firm: tax

rises that are later reversed nonetheless increase leverage permanently. This dynamic pattern

suggests that leverage not only responds asymmetrically to tax changes but also is path-dependent

and so exhibits hysteresis. While hard to reconcile with static models, asymmetry (arising from
1
    See Graham and Leary (2011) for a recent survey documenting this range of opinions.

                                                                                                        1
differences in adjustment costs) is often imposed by assumption in dynamic models of capital

structure; our results lend support to this assumption. Hysteresis is a dynamic implication of

asymmetry: if shareholders have a preference for leverage increases, leverage will ratchet up over

time (see Admati et al. (2013) for a model rationalizing our findings). Uncovering asymmetry and

hysteresis, neither of which has previously been documented, is our second contribution.

    To understand our identification strategy and relate our findings to the literature, consider the

ideal experiment. The capital structure argument typically found in finance textbooks 2 decomposes

the value of a levered firm into the value of the unlevered firm plus the tax benefit of debt minus the

(net) cost of debt. 3 The optimal level of debt then equates the marginal tax benefit and the marginal

cost. Figure 1a illustrates this textbook “trade-off theory” of capital structure. The ideal experiment

to test the trade-off theory is shown in Figure 1b: it consists of randomly assigning different tax

rates to firms and then comparing their debt policies to see if higher tax rates lead to higher

leverage. Random assignment would ensure that observed differences in leverage could not be

caused by unobserved firm-level heterogeneity. This, in turn, would allow us to estimate the

marginal-cost curve from shifts in the marginal (tax) benefit curve.

    Observational data are, of course, not random. Many empirical studies relate observed

differences in debt policies among firms to differences in their actual tax rates. This approach is

fraught with difficulties; it risks falsely attributing observed differences in leverage to differences in

taxes when other unobserved differences across firms also likely affect leverage. For example, prior

work exploits the fact that higher profits put firms into a higher tax bracket. As a result, high-profit

firms may borrow more to take advantage of tax shields, as shown in Figure 1c. But it is equally

possible that they borrow more because their default risk is lower than that of low-profit firms.

Figure 1d illustrates the extreme case in which the null hypothesis of irrelevance (i.e., taxes have no

effect on leverage) is true. As drawn, we would falsely reject the null, as all of the observed change


2
  See, for example, Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2011), chapter 18.
3
  Debt is costly due to bankruptcy (Kraus and Litzenberger (1973)) and debt-overhang inefficiencies (Myers (1977)). To
isolate the tax benefit of debt, non-tax benefits of debt (e.g., curbing free-cash flow problems (Jensen (1986)) are
usually counted as negative costs for expositional purposes (see, e.g., van Binsbergen, Graham, and Yang (2010)).

                                                                                                                    2
in leverage in Figure 1d is due to differences in the marginal cost of debt. Studies of this kind can

thus not identify the causal relation between leverage and taxes. The upshot is that in the presence

of unobserved differences in marginal costs, the effect of taxes on debt is not identified. This is the

challenge our natural experiment is designed to overcome.

    A simple example serves to illustrate the essence of our identification strategy and potential

challenges to it. In 1991, North Carolina raised its top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8.06%.

Following this tax rise, firms headquartered in NC increased long-term leverage from 18.8% to

20.8% on average. The tax rise is plausibly exogenous from the viewpoint of an individual firm in

NC: for a start, firms presumably do not lobby for tax increases. 4 But this is not sufficient to

establish causality since other coincident developments could be responsible for the leverage

increase. For example, NC may be home to firms from an industry that suffered some other, non-

tax-related leverage-increasing shock in 1991. Or investment opportunities in NC may have

changed in 1991 in a way that made an increase in debt desirable, regardless of the tax rise.

    To control for such contemporaneous industry- and state-specific developments, we compare

leverage changes among North Carolina firms to the contemporaneous changes in leverage among

firms that operate in the same industry but are located in states without tax changes in 1991, say in

South Carolina. To the extent that SC firms face similar investment opportunities as NC firms,

holding industry constant, the contemporaneous change in their leverage provides an estimate of

how NC firms’ leverage would have evolved absent the tax increase. The difference-in-differences,

i.e., the difference (across firms in different states operating in the same industry) of the within-firm

change in leverage, gives the desired estimate of the tax sensitivity of corporate debt policy.

    The identifying assumption central to a causal interpretation of our diff-in-diff estimates is that

treated and control firms share parallel trends. Our tests show that their pre-treatment trends are

indeed indistinguishable. The question, as in any diff-in-diff set-up, is whether post-treatment trends

would have continued to be parallel had it not been for the tax change. Our empirical design takes


4
 Unions might conceivably do so, but as we will show, this does not appear to be the case. We will address other
potential confounds at length throughout the paper.

                                                                                                                   3
several steps to mitigate this concern.

   First, we include industry-year fixed effects. This ensures that we are comparing treated and

control firms operating in the same industry, allowing us to difference away unobserved time-

varying industry shocks to post-treatment trends in leverage. Second, we condition on changes in

standard firm-level covariates of leverage (such as profits or asset tangibility) that could cause

trends to diverge post-treatment for reasons unrelated to the tax changes. We find that adding such

controls has virtually no effect on the estimated tax sensitivity. This implies that the tax shocks are

close to random at the firm level, such that they do not coincide systematically with changes in firm

characteristics. Third, we exploit the fact that many firms are treated repeatedly over our long

sample period. This allows us to difference away unobserved firm-specific trends in leverage levels.

   These design choices deal with firm- and industry-level challenges to the parallel-trends

assumption. Two further challenges remain. The first is that state tax changes are triggered by some

observed or unobserved factor that in turn causes firms to adjust their leverage for reasons unrelated

to the tax change itself. For example, we show that tax increases are more likely when the state runs

a budget deficit, and vice versa for tax cuts. This suggests that tax changes are countercyclical at the

state level. Korajczyk and Levy (2003) show that leverage also tends to move countercyclically. It

is thus possible that local business cycle variation triggers both tax changes and leverage changes.

   To disentangle how much of the observed leverage changes comes from changes in local

business conditions and how much comes from tax changes, we first condition on observed

variation in local business conditions, such as changes in state growth or unemployment rates.

(Nationwide business conditions are held constant through the inclusion of industry-year fixed

effects.) This reveals that leverage is neither countercyclical nor procyclical with respect to state

growth, though leverage increases in state unemployment rates.

   The geographic richness of our data allows us to go further, removing the effects of unobserved

variation in local economic conditions. We exploit the fact that economic conditions are likely to be

similar in neighboring states whereas the effects of state tax policy stop at the state’s border. This

policy discontinuity allows us to difference away unobserved local variation in economic conditions

                                                                                                          4
and so to disentangle what part of the observed leverage change is due to tax changes. In other

words, by comparing treated firms to their neighbors, we can ensure that leverage trends are parallel

after removing the effects (if any) of variation in local economic conditions. 5

      Interestingly, we find a roughly 30% stronger treatment effect when we difference away

unobserved changes in local economic conditions by restricting control firms to those located in

states bordering a treated state or by focusing on treated and control firms located in contiguous

counties on either side of a state border. To the extent that neighboring firms share similar economic

conditions, this shows that unobserved changes in local conditions cannot be driving the observed

sensitivity of leverage to tax increases. At the same time, the observed increase in tax sensitivity is

of independent interest. It suggests that treated firms’ leverage responses to tax increases spill

across state borders, inducing their untreated neighbors to reduce their leverage in response. Since

this finding holds within-industry, treated firms’ neighbors are likely to be product-market

competitors, which may account for the spillover (see Brander and Lewis (1985)). Documenting

evidence of such geographic interdependencies in corporate debt policies is our third contribution.

      The only remaining confound our research design cannot difference away is an omitted variable

that varies within states across time in a way that coincides with the tax changes and whose

influence on leverage stops at the state border. An obvious example is the possibility that when

changing tax rates, states systematically enact other (non-tax) legislation that plausibly causes firms

to adjust their leverage. A thorough review of the political economy surrounding each of the major

tax changes finds no evidence that corporate tax changes coincide systematically with other policy

changes that could affect leverage independently. Nor do we find that union strength – which could

influence tax policy and so have an indirect effect on leverage that stops at the state border – drives

our results. But the caveat, as in any research design that uses policy variation, is that we cannot

rule out the existence of unexplored confounds whose influence coincides geographically with that

of the variation in tax policy we exploit for identification.

      The magnitude of the estimated tax sensitivity is economically meaningful. In our baseline
5
    Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) use this logic to test whether higher minimum wages destroy low-skilled jobs.

                                                                                                                   5
model, the average treated firm responds to the average tax rise of 131 basis points by increasing its

long-term leverage by 104 basis points, from 18.3% to 19.34%. This corresponds to an extra $32.5

million of debt and a tax elasticity of 0.53. The implied marginal cost of debt curve is fairly flat,

with a slope of $403 in extra cost for every $1 million in new debt, consistent with the low leverage

ratios listed firms tend to have in the U.S.: on average, listed firms have ample debt capacity.

    Our elasticity estimate assumes that the average firm is exposed to the full amount of the change

in its state tax rate. This would not be the case if it could deduct state taxes from federal taxes;

however, the federal Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax limits such deductions. It also would not

be the case if a sizeable portion of its tax base lay outside its home state. Firms do not disclose

which states they are taxed in, but when we explore a relevant proxy, we find that the tax elasticity

of firms taxed predominantly in their home states is 0.63, only a little larger than the estimated

baseline elasticity of 0.53.

    Theory suggests that the value of tax shields varies with the interplay of personal and corporate

taxes (Miller (1977)), profitability, marginal tax rates, and debt capacity. This suggests four

validation tests. The first exploits Miller’s insight that high personal tax rates on equity income

should dampen the impact of a corporate tax change on leverage. Using a proxy for personal taxes

that varies in the cross-section, we find evidence to support this comparative static. The second test

shows that unlike profitable firms, loss-making firms do not borrow more in response to tax rises.

This is consistent with a link between taxes and leverage since loss-making firms have no profits to

shield from taxes. The third test shows that firms with higher effective marginal tax rates respond

more strongly to tax increases. The fourth test shows that the sensitivity of debt to tax increases is

concentrated among investment-grade firms (which have flatter marginal-cost curves) and absent

among firms rated junk. Each of these validation tests supports the presence of a tax channel.

1. Related Literature

    While the literature on capital structure and taxes is vast (Graham’s (2008) survey cites more

than 200 published articles), ours is the first study to exploit changes in U.S. states’ corporate taxes

over time. This quasi-experimental setting has the potential to offer a clean causal interpretation of

                                                                                                           6
the estimated effect of taxes on firms’ capital structure decisions.

    The early empirical literature found inconclusive results, leading Myers (1984) to remark that “I

know of no study clearly demonstrating that a firm’s tax status has predictable, material effects on

its debt policy.” 6 Subsequent work has tried to fill the gap, but at least Fama (2011) remains

unconvinced, commenting that “the big open challenge in corporate finance is to produce evidence

on how taxes affect … optimal financing decisions.” This is the challenge we seek to take up.

    To clarify our contribution, we briefly discuss prior attempts at exploiting variation in tax rates

to identify the tax sensitivity of debt, beginning with cross-country studies. Rajan and Zingales

(1995) find that firms in countries with higher corporate tax rates use more debt. Similarly, Booth et

al. (2001) find a positive relation between country-level tax rates and country averages of leverage

in a sample of 17 countries. Faccio and Xu (2013) use variation in tax rates across and within 29

OECD countries to show that leverage increases with taxes but only in countries with low tax

evasion. (Unlike us, they do not allow for asymmetry and do not study dynamics.)

    A common concern in cross-country studies is that treated and control firms are located in

different countries and so may differ in unobserved ways that affect debt policies. Single-country

studies can potentially sidestep this problem. A popular exogenous shock is the Tax Reform Act of

1986 (see Gordon and MacKie-Mason (1991), Givoly et al. (1992), and van Binsbergen, Graham,

and Yang (2010)). 7 But since this change in federal taxes affected all firms at (roughly) the same

time, there is no obvious control group with which to disentangle the impact of the Act from other

concurrent changes that could affect debt policies (such as changes in interest rates, inflation, the

business cycle, or financial regulation). 8 Using state-level tax changes, which are staggered across

states and time, thus provides potentially cleaner identification.



6
  MacKie-Mason (1990) and Graham (1996a,b) find a positive correlation between estimates of a firm’s estimated or
simulated marginal tax rate and its debt policy. However, Fama and French (1998) caution that cross-sectional studies
of this kind are vulnerable to endogeneity biases as firms’ effective tax rates may correlate with omitted variables.
7
  Alternative one-off shocks that have been used include the 2003 Bush cuts in personal taxes (Lin and Flannery (2013))
and Belgium’s 2006 introduction of a notional tax charge benefiting the use of equity (Panier et al. (2013)).
8
  Van Binsbergen, Graham, and Yang (2010) cleverly exploit slight timing differences in exposure to the 1986 tax
reform due to variation in firms’ fiscal-year ends.

                                                                                                                     7
2. State Corporate Income Taxes

     Most states tax corporate activities within their borders, 9 usually by taxing profits. 10 Firms are

taxed in every state they have “nexus” with, i.e., where they have a physical presence. States

distinguish between multi-state firms (those with nexus with multiple states) and single-state firms.

Under the Uniform Division of Income for Tax Purposes Act, multi-state firms pay taxes in each

nexus state. This involves apportioning the firm’s federal taxable income to each nexus state,

typically using an apportionment formula based on an average of the fractions of the firm’s total

sales, payroll, and property located in that state. 11 The federal Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax

limits firms’ ability to deduct their state taxes when computing their federal income tax liability.

     Data on which states each firm has nexus with are not available. Clearly, a multi-state firm will

have less exposure to a given state’s tax change than a single-state firm. While this does not matter

for identification, it does affect the interpretation of the estimated economic magnitudes. We return

to this issue in Section 5.3.2.

     State taxes are a meaningful part of U.S. firms’ overall tax burden. For the average (median)

sample firm, state taxes account for 21% (13.7%) of total income taxes paid. In 2012, top marginal

tax rates vary from a low of 4.63% in Colorado to a high of 12% in Iowa. They have also varied

considerably over time, and it is this variation that we exploit to identify the tax sensitivity of

corporate debt policies. 12

2.1 Variation in State Corporate Income Taxes

     Appendix A lists 43 tax increases in 24 states affecting 2,212 sample firms in fiscal years 1989-

2011. For example, in 1999, New Hampshire increased its top corporate tax rate from 7% to 8% for




9
  The exceptions, as of 2012, are NV, SD, and WY.
10
   The exceptions, as of 2012, are OH, TX, and WA, which use a gross receipts tax assessed on revenue rather than on
income. In a gross-receipts tax environment, interest expenses are not tax-deductible.
11
   The focus on sales, payroll, and property reduces the scope for firms shifting profits into low-tax states by way of
transfer pricing arrangements.
12
   For the purposes of our experiment, it is immaterial that state taxes are small relative to federal taxes. Variation in
state tax rates directly translates into variation in the total taxes a firm pays. In other words, what is important for our
experiment is the magnitude of the variation in tax rates, not the level of state tax rates vs. federal tax rates.

                                                                                                                               8
firms with fiscal years ending on or after July 1, 1999. 13 The average tax shock increases rates by 93

basis points, a 13.8% increase from a year earlier. The tax rise experienced by the average treated

firm is larger, at 131 basis points, because more sample firms are located in states with larger tax

rises. (The firm-level median is 89 basis points and the standard deviation is 117 basis points.)

     Appendix B lists 78 tax cuts in 27 states affecting 7,283 firms. For example, in 2001, New York

cut its tax rate from 8% to 7.5% for firms with fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2001. The

average tax cut in our sample reduces state tax rates by 55 basis points. Given the geographic

distribution of firms, this corresponds to an average cut of 69 basis points for the average sample

firm. (The firm-level median is 46 basis points and the standard deviation is 90 basis points.)

     To put these numbers into perspective, consider the effect on firms’ tax bills. In the year before

a tax rise, the average (profitable) sample firm headquartered in that state earns pre-tax income of

$224.9 million. Relative to this baseline, a tax rise would cost it an additional $2.9 million in taxes a

year, absent a response. In the year before a tax cut, the average (profitable) firm earns $226.6

million. A tax cut would save it $3.1 million in taxes a year, all else equal.

     Figure 2 maps treated states over consecutive five-year periods to show the time-series and

geographic distribution of the tax shocks. Twenty-four of the 43 tax increases occurred in 1989-

1999 and 19 after 2000, while 45 of the 78 tax cuts occurred in 1989-1999 and 33 after 2000. (As

we will show, our results are nearly identical in either time period.) The busiest quinquennia for tax

increases are 1989-1993, 1999-2003, and 2009-2012. Tax cuts are spread fairly evenly across the

sample period. Figure 2 reveals little geographical clustering for either tax increases or cuts. 14

2.2 Do State Tax Changes Coincide With Other Leverage-Relevant Changes?

     Our identification strategy assumes that absent a tax change, treated firms’ leverage would have

evolved in the same way as that of suitable control firms. This parallel-trends assumption would be

violated if state corporate tax changes coincided systematically with variation in the business cycle

13
   In coding which firms are affected by tax changes when, we are careful to capture whether a tax change affects firms
with fiscal years ending or beginning on or after the effective date. This affects when it makes sense for a firm to react.
14
   There are only two cases of neighboring states raising taxes at the same time: IL/KY (1989) and MO/NE/OK (1990).
Of the 78 tax cuts, 60 are isolated cases. The remaining 18 form 9 pairs: AZ/CO (1990), CO/NE (1993), ME/NH
(1993), NJ/PA (1994), NY/CT (1999), AZ/CO (2000), NY/CT (2000), KY/OH (2005), and NY/VT (2007).

                                                                                                                          9
or labor market conditions or with changes in other taxes or state policies that affect firms’ demand

for debt regardless of the corporate tax change. For example, if states raise taxes in economic

downturns, and downturns induce firms to borrow more as Korajczyk and Levy (2003) argue, we

would observe a spurious (rather than causal) correlation between taxes and leverage. Alternatively,

tax increases may reflect strong union power in the state. This could lead to a spurious correlation if

firms use leverage strategically when bargaining with their unions, as Matsa (2010) argues.

    To get a sense of the scope for such confounds, we relate states’ tax policies to their economic

and political conditions. Columns 1 to 3 of Table 1 report summary statistics of our explanatory

variables. (For all variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C.) As

expected, economic and political conditions play an important role in states’ tax policies. Compared

to states that cut taxes, those that raise taxes are significantly more often governed by a Democrat

(62.2% versus 39.2%, p=0.022), tend to run budget deficits (averaging 2%, compared to surpluses

averaging 4.3% among tax-cutting states), are more likely to have suffered a credit-rating

downgrade, and experience slower growth in gross state product (GSP, averaging 1.8% versus

3.0%). Unemployment rates and union penetration rates, on the other hand, are statistically similar

in tax-cutting and tax-raising states.

    States’ fiscal policies do not exist in a vacuum: the fiscal policies of their neighbors also likely

play a role. To capture the effects of tax competition among states, we compare each state’s

corporate tax rate to the rates levied by the states it borders. This reveals an interesting pattern.

States that raise tax rates previously charged substantially lower taxes than their neighbors, while

states that cut taxes were previously among the highest-taxing states in their region. To illustrate,

before raising tax rates, the average state’s rate is two percentage points below the highest rate

levied by its neighbors. By contrast, before cutting taxes, the average state’s tax rate is only 50 basis

points below that of its highest-taxing neighbor. This suggests that states cut taxes when their rates

are uncompetitive relative to their neighbors and feel freer to raise taxes when their neighbors levy

higher taxes still, all else equal.

    Next, we estimate linear-probability models of states’ decisions to raise or cut corporate taxes.

                                                                                                        10
The models include year and state fixed effects and cluster the standard errors at the state level.

Column 5 shows that the variable with the largest economic effect on tax rises is the election cycle:

states are 5.3 percentage points more likely to raise taxes if the next gubernatorial election is three

years away than in an election year (p=0.028). Given an unconditional probability of taxes rising of

3.3% per year, this is a sizeable effect. Tax rises are also more likely the larger (more negative) the

state’s budget deficit the year before (p=0.05) and less likely if the state’s tax rate is already high

relative to its neighbors’ rates (p=0.003). None of the other economic conditions has a significant

effect, nor do Republican and Democratic governors differ in their propensity to raise taxes.

   The election cycle is also the largest determinant of corporate tax cuts in column 6. Cuts are six

percentage points more likely in the year before an election than in other years (p=0.045). Further

evidence that politics plays a role in tax cuts comes from the governor’s party affiliation:

Democratic governors are 3.7 percentage points less likely to cut taxes than are Republican

governors (p=0.026). Budget surpluses increase the likelihood of a tax cut (p=0.067) while a ratings

downgrade reduces it by a sizeable amount (5.9 percentage points, p=0.024). Tax competition also

has a large economic effect: for every percentage point by which a state’s tax rate exceeds that of its

neighbors, the likelihood of a tax cut increases by 3.6 percentage points (p<0.001). This is large

relative to the unconditional mean of 6.6%.

   Columns 7 to 9 model the magnitude (rather than likelihood) of the tax changes, with similar

results: the main factors are the election cycle, the governor’s political affiliation, the state’s budget

balance, ratings downgrades, and tax competition.

   While the political factors revealed in Table 1 have no obvious link to corporate capital structure

decisions, the economic factors do. As a result, our diff-in-diff specifications will control for

observed variation in economic conditions at the state level. In a separate test using firms that are

geographically close, we exploit the inherent discontinuity of tax policy (i.e., the fact that it stops at

the state’s border) to difference away unobserved variation in local economic conditions.

   The only challenge to the parallel-trends assumption that remains is that corporate tax changes

might coincide with other important state-level changes that could affect firms’ demand for debt. To

                                                                                                          11
investigate this, we collect data on changes in state taxes on personal income, capital gains, or banks

as well as data on changes in state investment incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment,

R&D, and job creation). Changes in personal taxes could either amplify or attenuate the effects of

corporate taxes on leverage (Miller (1977)). Changes in bank taxes affect the supply of credit in a

state (Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2013)). And changes in investment incentive programs could

change firms’ demand for debt independent of any contemporaneous tax effect.

     Panel B of Table 1 tabulates the results. Around half of the 43 tax rises coincide with increases

in personal income and capital gains tax rates, but as we will show, these do not confound our

results. Corporate tax cuts rarely coincide with changes personal taxes, and when they do, personal

taxes are about as likely to go up as down. 28 of the 43 corporate tax rises coincide with increases in

bank taxes, so firms’ demand for debt often increases at the same time as the supply of loans in their

state falls. For firms that are financially dependent on local banks, this could affect their ability to

borrow more in response to tax rises and so reduce the estimated sensitivity to corporate tax

increases. 15 Our estimates may thus be conservative (to the extent that our sample includes a

substantial number of treated firms that are financially dependent on local banks). There is little

evidence that corporate tax changes coincide with changes in state investment incentive programs.

     Finally, the Internet Appendix provides thumbnail sketches of the political economy

surrounding the largest tax changes (those with 100 or more treated firms). These show that the

largest tax changes in our sample do not systematically coincide with anything in particular.

3. Sample and Data

3.1 Firm-level Sample

     Our firm-level sample consists of all U.S. companies traded on the NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq in

the 1989-2011 fiscal years that satisfy the following filters. From the merged CRSP-Compustat

Fundamentals Annual database, we exclude financial firms (SIC=6; 43,105 observations), utilities

(SIC=49; 4,950 observations), public-sector entities (SIC=9; 1,271 observations), non-U.S. firms

15
  More problematic would be if corporate tax rises coincided with bank tax cuts, for then we could not be sure whether
an observed increase in leverage reflected the effect of corporate tax on capital structure or the effect of increased local
loan supply on financially dependent firms. Luckily, corporate and bank taxes are always changed in the same direction.

                                                                                                                         12
(14,040 observations), and firms traded OTC or in the Pink Sheets (1,648 observations). We also

drop firm-years with negative or missing total assets (138 observations) or missing return on assets

(568 observations), and firms with a single panel year (968 observations) or a CRSP share code >11

(REITS etc.; 1,255 observations). Finally, while cleaning up firms’ headquarter states (see below),

we filter out 1,000 observations of firms that were headquartered outside the U.S. The final sample

consists of 91,487 firm-years for 10,112 firms (though the need to lag certain variables as well as

gaps in the panel structure of some firms will reduce the sample size used in our regressions).

3.2 Firms’ Use of Debt

     Table 2 reports summary statistics for sample firms’ use of debt and for our control variables.

(For all variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C.) There are many ways

to measure how much debt a firm uses to fund its operations. Most studies use a leverage measure

(measured either in book or market value terms) and focus either on total leverage (the sum of

short-term and long-term debt over total assets) or on long-term leverage.

     Our results are robust to using any of these measures, but there are at least two good reasons to

expect long-term book leverage to be the most sensitive to tax changes. First, short-term debt is

often used for working capital needs and so is unlikely to be altered in response to tax changes, a

conjecture that proves to be true in the data. Second, with a positively sloped yield curve, long-term

debt generates larger tax shields for a given amount of new borrowing than does short-term debt. 16

     Firms have greater control over book leverage (which is a function of debt outstanding and the

size of the balance sheet) than over market leverage (which in part reflects share prices). Thus, book

leverage is a cleaner measure of debt policy (though as we will show, we obtain similar results

using market leverage). As Table 2 shows, long-term book leverage averages 17.2% in the overall

sample, 18.3% before a tax rise, and 17.2% before a tax cut.

     It is useful to model not just leverage but also debt levels. Being ratios, variation in leverage

measures could capture variation in the denominator (the book or market value of assets) rather than


16
  Long-term debt can be measured with or without the portion of long-term debt that is due within a year and so is
classified as short-term. As we will show, we obtain similar results in either case.

                                                                                                                     13
the numerator (the level of debt). This could give a misleading picture of a firm’s response to tax

changes, for example if firms systematically sell assets when faced with a tax rise.

3.3 Control Variables

   We control for the standard firm-level variables commonly found in empirical models of debt

(see, for example, Frank and Goyal (2009)): profitability (return on assets), firm size (total assets),

tangibility (the ratio of fixed to total assets), and investment opportunities (market-to-book). As

Table 2 shows, the average sample firm has ROA of 3.4% and $1,683 million in total assets, 26.4%

of which is tangible, and trades at a market-to-book ratio of 1.84. In addition, we use the default

spread (the difference between the yield on Baa and Aaa rated corporate bonds, measured in each

firm’s fiscal-year-end month) to control for conditions in the credit markets. This averages 0.956%.

Finally, we control for economic conditions in a firm’s home state using the growth in gross state

product and the state unemployment rate. These average 2.9% and 5.8%, respectively.

3.4 Firm Headquarter Locations

   Compustat’s location data suffer from a major flaw: Compustat reports the address of a firm’s

current principal executive office, not its historic headquarter location. Ignoring this will lead to

bias. If the null of no association between tax and leverage is false, false negatives (firms that are in

fact located in a tax-change state but appear not to be) will reduce the estimated tax sensitivity, as

their leverage changes despite the (apparent) absence of a tax change. Similarly, false positives

(firms that appear to be located in a tax-change state but in fact are not) will seem to fail to respond

to a tax change (though of course there was none). Either will bias the test in favor of a false null.

   To remedy this, we extract historic headquarter states from regulatory filings. Specifically, for

each fiscal year, we look up each sample firm’s HQ state as listed in the firm’s most recent 10-Q

prior to the fiscal year-end using the SEC’s EDGAR service (from May 1996 onwards) and

Thomson Research (between 1989 and May 1996). Errors prove widespread, affecting a non-trivial

fraction of the Compustat universe. Overall, Compustat’s location data are incorrect in 9,268 firm-

years (10.1% of the total) affecting 1,541 firms (15.2% of all non-financial and non-utility U.S.

firms in Compustat). Not surprisingly, the problem gets worse the further back in time we go: while

                                                                                                         14
4% of firms’ HQ states are misrecorded for fiscal year 2011, 16.6% are misrecorded 20 years

earlier. 17 Thus, where firms are located today is often quite different from where they were located a

decade or two ago. Cleaning up these data allows us to remedy 192 false positive and 286 false

negative tax increases and 596 false positive and 635 false negative tax cuts.

4. Empirical Strategy

     We use a standard difference-in-difference approach to examine the effect of changes in states’

corporate income tax rates on firms’ use of debt. To inform our empirical specification, Figure 3

tests graphically whether and when leverage responds to tax changes. It plots the average annual

within-firm change in long-term leverage in years t = –2 to t = +2 for the group of firms

experiencing a corporate income tax change in their home state at t = 0 (‘treated’ firms) and, for

comparison, the group of firms not subject to a tax change in their home state (‘control’ firms).

Time-varying changes in industry conditions are removed by including industry-year fixed effects.

     Figure 3a shows responses to tax rises. In the two years before a tax rise, leverage changes are

tiny and statistically insignificant for both treated and control firms, confirming there are no pre-

trends. In the year of the tax rise, neither group adjusts leverage much. In year t+1, on the other

hand, we see sizeable and significant increases in leverage among treated firms, averaging 96 basis

points (p<0.001 clustered by state), while the leverage of control firms falls by an insignificant 13

basis points on average. The diff-in-diff estimate of 109 basis points is highly significant (p=0.001).

It is consistent with the interpretation that firms respond to higher taxes in their home state by

borrowing more, with a one-year lag. There is no evidence in the figure that firms subsequently

reverse these leverage increases in year t+2.

     The effect of tax cuts, shown in Figure 3b, is quite different. Neither treated nor control firms

change their leverage by much, if at all, in the five years surrounding a tax cut. In year 0, treated

17
   The COMPHIST file available on WRDS, which provides limited historical HQ information, unfortunately starts only
in 2007. A new database, the WRDS SEC Analytics Suite, aims to provide users “historical information on state of
incorporation and headquarters”, among other items. SEC Analytics appears to pull HQ information not from the filing
itself, but from EDGAR’s “filing detail page.” Unfortunately, this page is frequently out of date for years at a time,
apparently because the SEC does not update its database on firm locations in a timely fashion. SEC Analytics also has
problems matching filings to the correct gvkey, for example (but not exclusively) when two firms merge. As a result,
SEC Analytics misses around one third of the corrections we make to Compustat’s HQ location variable.

                                                                                                                   15
firms reduce their leverage by a little relative to control firms, but the diff-in-diff estimate measures

only 9 basis points. One year later, treated firms increase their leverage by 1 basis point on average,

and then reduce is again by 2 basis points in year 2. None of these diff-in-diff estimates is

statistically significant. Overall, firms appear to respond to tax changes asymmetrically.

     The patterns in Figure 3a could potentially be driven by coincident changes in firms’ financial

characteristics that are unrelated to the tax changes or they could reflect variation in state-level

conditions that cause both tax changes and leverage changes. To control for these, we estimate

regressions of the following form:

                      Dijst   Tst1  Tst1  X it 1  Z st 1   jt   ijst                         (1)

where i, j, s, and t index firms, industries, states, and years;  is the first-difference operator; Dist is

a measure of debt usage; Tst1 and Tst1 are indicators equaling 1 if state s increased or cut its top

marginal corporate income tax rate in year t–1, respectively; 18 Xit–1 and Zst–1 are time-varying firm-

and state-level control variables; jt are SIC4 industry-year fixed effects which remove unobserved

time-varying industry shocks; 19 and ijst is the usual error term. Standard errors are clustered at the

state level; later, they will be validated using randomly generated pseudo shocks.

     First-differencing removes unobserved firm-specific fixed effects in the corresponding levels

equation and, unlike a levels specification with firm fixed effects, can easily accommodate repeated

treatments (i.e., the possibility that a firm experiences a sequence of tax increases or tax cuts over

its time in the panel), treatment reversals (a tax increase followed some time later by a tax cut, or

vice versa), and asymmetry in firms’ responses to tax changes.

     Regression (1) generalizes the illustrative example in the introduction in two ways. First, it

exploits variation in taxes across many states and years, rather than just North Carolina’s 1991 tax

18
   We also relate changes in leverage to the magnitude of the tax change, but when we do so, we lose two tax increases
(CA 2002 and NJ 2002) and one tax cut (TX 2008) which cannot be quantified in terms of changes in marginal tax
rates. Their directional effects on firms’ tax shields, however, are unambiguous (see Appendix A and B), allowing us to
include them when estimating equation (1).
19
   This is preferable to including average industry leverage as a regressor, as is often done in the capital structure
literature. Gormley and Matsa (2012) show analytically that accounting for unobserved group-level heterogeneity by
including the group average of the dependent variable as a control can lead to bias. To ensure consistency of the
parameters of interest, models should instead include group fixed effects (here: industry-year fixed effects).

                                                                                                                    16
increase. For any change in corporate income tax in state s at time t, the potential control states are

all those states that did not change their corporate income tax rates at that time (though we will also

consider finer control sets). Second, regression (1) allows for covariates that vary at the firm- or

state-level and over time. For example, we can control for time-varying factors at the state level that

may be correlated with changes in both state taxes and firm leverage, while firm-level covariates

control for other firm-level correlates of debt policies. Including industry-year fixed effects allows

us to compare treated and control firms within the same industry at the same point in time.

   The key identifying assumption is that conditional on covariates Xit–1 and Zst–1 and on industry-

year fixed effects, treated and control firms share parallel trends in the absence of a tax change. In

that case, the estimates of  and  in regression (1) give the causal treatment effects of tax increases

and tax cuts on debt. We examine the plausibility of this identifying assumption in Section 5.6.

5. The Effects of Tax Changes on Corporate Debt Policies

5.1 Sensitivity to Tax Rises

   Table 3 reports our baseline results. The estimates show that following a tax rise, firms increase

their long-term leverage by 104 basis points on average (p<0.001), measured relative to other firms

in the same industry that are not subject to tax changes in their own headquarter state that year.

Compared to the average pre-treatment leverage ratio of 18.3% (see Table 2), this represents an

increase of 5.7% (=0.0104/0.183).

   The coefficient estimate is nearly identical to the unconditional leverage increase of 109 basis

points found in Figure 3a, despite adding firm-level controls. This indicates that state tax changes

are essentially random at the firm level, such that they do not coincide systematically with changes

in firm characteristics. Economically, the firm-level controls have quite modest effects: one

standard deviation changes in profitability, size, tangibility, or market-to-book are associated with at

most a 25 basis point change in leverage – less than a quarter of the observed sensitivity to tax rises.

The effect of lagged changes in state unemployment rates is positive and statistically significant,

consistent with firms borrowing more when economic conditions in their home state worsen. But it

is fairly small: a one-standard deviation increase is associated with only a 17 basis point increase in

                                                                                                         17
leverage. Lagged changes in GSP growth have no significant effect on leverage (p=0.207). 20

       To assess the impact of cleaning up firms’ historic HQ locations, column 2 uses Compustat’s

backfilled location data. This yields an estimated sensitivity to tax increases of 75 basis points

(p=0.001), 29 basis points below the “true” estimate of 104 basis points shown in column 1. This

confirms our conjecture that measurement error in firms’ HQ locations leads to attenuation bias.

       Could the observed sensitivity to tax increases simply be random? The standard errors suggest

not, but an alternative way to answer this question is to generate “pseudo shocks” as in Bertrand,

Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). Specifically, we randomly generate 1,000 sets of 43 “pseudo tax

increases” and 78 “pseudo tax cuts” (to match the observed number of actual tax shocks). Since the

pseudo shocks are random, we know that the null of no tax sensitivity is true. Indeed, the mean of

the 1,000 estimates of the effect of the pseudo tax increases or pseudo tax cuts on leverage is zero.

More interestingly, we never see coefficients as large as those estimated using the actual tax

increases. Thus, based on these simulations, there is a zero in 1,000 chance of randomly observing

the Table 3 coefficients when the null of no tax sensitivity is in fact true. This suggests that the

clustered standard errors in Table 3 are, if anything, slightly conservative.

       So far, we have lumped all tax changes – large and small – together by focusing on binary tax-

change indicators. The reason we do so is that two tax increases (CA 2002 and NJ 2002) and one

tax cut (TX 2008) cannot be quantified in terms of changes in marginal tax rates, though their

directional effects on tax shields are unambiguous (see Appendix A and B). Columns 3 and 4

exclude treated firms affected by these three tax changes to explore whether firms respond more

strongly to larger tax changes. Column 3 includes separate indicators for tax changes in the bottom,

middle, and top terciles. 21 The coefficients line up as expected: not surprisingly, we see the largest

leverage increase, averaging 131 basis points (p=0.001), following the largest tax increases. The

sensitivity to medium-sized tax increases is smaller, at 91 basis points (p=0.083), and the sensitivity

to the smallest tax increases is lower still, at an insignificant 71 basis points (p=0.179). Column 4, in


20
     Conditioning on the state’s political conditions, as in Table 1, changes the tax sensitivity by a single basis point.
21
     The cut-offs are 50 and 125 basis points for tax increases and –50 and –37.5 basis points for tax cuts, respectively.

                                                                                                                             18
turn, regresses changes in long-term leverage on the actual change in tax rates. This confirms the

results of column 3: leverage increases by more, the more tax rates go up (p=0.025).

    As noted in Section 2, firms are taxed where they operate. To the extent that sample firms have

operations outside their headquarter state, our leverage regressions will underestimate the sensitivity

of debt to taxes. This is because the tax sensitivity we estimate is the weighted average response to

tax changes given the geographic distribution of a firm’s operations. The response will be lower if a

firm also operates in states that experience no tax changes.

    A useful proxy for the extent to which a firm’s profits are exposed to changes in its home-state

tax rate is the location of its sales. Due to the way states apportion taxable profits, all else equal,

firms selling predominantly at home should respond more strongly to tax changes than firms selling

predominantly in other states. Firm-level data on the location of sales are not available, so instead

we follow Agrawal and Matsa (2012) and partition firms based on whether sales in their NAICS3

industry are predominantly inter-state or intra-state. The results in column 5 confirm our prior.

Compared to the average Compustat firm in column 4, firms in industries that tend to sell mostly

within-state increase their leverage by somewhat more when their home state increases taxes.

5.2 Sensitivity to Tax Cuts

    In contrast to their sensitivity to tax rises, we find no evidence that firms cut leverage following

a tax cut. The point estimate for tax cuts in column 1 has the expected negative sign but it is tiny: a

single basis point (p=0.943). It is true that over our sample period, tax cuts are smaller, on average,

than tax increases. This could potentially account for the lack of response to tax cuts: given positive

fixed adjustment costs, firms have no reason to react to small tax cuts. However, the specification in

column 3 shows that firm do not even react to the very largest tax cuts: the point estimate for the

‘large tax cut’ indicator is only 0.009 – less than one basis point (p=0.970). The tax cuts in this bin

average 89 basis points, with a range from 50 to 350 basis points. Using Compustat’s backfilled

location data (column 2), conditioning continuously on the size of the tax cut (in column 4), or

restricting the sample to those selling predominantly in their home state (column 5) does not alter

this finding.

                                                                                                          19
   Some states announce a sequence of annual tax cuts spread over a few years. (For example, NY

cut the top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 7.5% in three annual half-point increments starting

in 1999.) Column 6 restricts the tax-cut treatment to the first in such a sequence to investigate

whether firms respond more strongly to the first cut (in anticipation of future cuts) than to later cuts.

This increases the magnitude of the leverage response, from –1 basis point to –15.3 basis points, but

the effect remains economically small and statistically insignificant (p=0.248).

   Overall, these patterns mirror the unconditional diff-in-diff results shown in Figure 3b. They

suggest that the tax sensitivity of debt could be asymmetric: firms increase leverage when taxes rise

but apparently do not reduce leverage when taxes are cut. However, it is theoretically possible that

firms suffering a tax increase are in some unobserved way different from firms experiencing a tax

cut and that it is this unobserved difference that accounts for the apparent asymmetry. Column 7

adds firm fixed effects to the first-difference specification (alongside the industry-year effects

already included). It thereby removes unobserved firm-specific trends in leverage levels (or

equivalently, unobserved time-invariant firm characteristics in first differences). Even when we

look within-firm, we find an asymmetric tax sensitivity: while the coefficient for tax increases

becomes marginally larger, the effect of tax cuts remains economically small, at –10 basis points,

and statistically insignificant (p=0.629).

   Including firm fixed effects helps rule out spurious asymmetry, but our data permit an even

stronger test. We can restrict the treatment sample to 765 firms experiencing treatment reversals,

meaning they first face a tax increase and then, some time later, a tax cut (possibly in another state,

if they have moved in the meantime). Using this treatment group and again including firm fixed

effects to ensure we capture within-firm reversals, column 8 shows evidence of an interesting form

of dynamic asymmetry: when hit with a tax rise, firms increase their leverage strongly and

significantly but when later experiencing a tax cut, the same firms fail to reduce leverage again.

   The apparent irreversibility of tax-induced leverage increases is a novel form of hysteresis that

has not previously been documented. It implies that tax rises – but not tax cuts – leave permanent

marks on firms’ capital structures. To test this, we estimate a cross-sectional leverage regression in

                                                                                                      20
levels, using only the last panel year  for each firm. 22 The variables of interest count how many

tax rises and tax cuts a firm has experienced since the start of our panel in 1989 (or since going

public, if later). The results, including standard controls and industry-year fixed effects with

standard errors clustered at the state level, are as follows:

     leveragei  0.010 number _ tax _ increasesi 1  0.001 number _ tax _ cutsi 1
                      ( 0.006 )                                     ( 0.002 )

                     0.050 ROAi 1  0.155 tangibilityi 1  0.011 sizei 1  0.004 market _ to _ book i 1
                       ( 0.012 )          ( 0.022 )                     ( 0.002 )        ( 0.002 )

                     0.002 default _ spread i 1  0.233 GSPgrowths 1  0.007 unemployment s 1  v jt
                       ( 0.022 )                        ( 0.178 )                    ( 0.002 )

              R  43.4%
                2
                                                       No. obs.  6,780

     The estimates confirm that the echoes of past tax increases (but not of past tax cuts) can still be

felt in today’s capital structures: all else equal, a firm’s leverage is one percentage point higher for

every tax increase it has experienced since 1989 or since going public (p=0.088). Interestingly, this

point estimate is nearly identical to the treatment effects estimated in Table 3.

5.3 Discussion

5.3.1 Asymmetry and Hysteresis

     Static trade-off models predict neither asymmetry nor hysteresis. The reason is that they assume

a smooth marginal cost curve (see Figure 1a). But asymmetry implies a kink in the marginal cost

curve. Figure 4a illustrates how the standard textbook treatment would have to be modified to

accommodate such a kink: the total net cost of debt is upward sloping and convex above the current

debt level, as in static trade-off theory, but would need to be flat below it. Further, to square trade-

off theory with hysteresis, the kink would need to ratchet up with tax increases but not come down

in response to a tax cut. 23 Figure 4b illustrates these dynamics. A firm hit with an increase in its

marginal tax benefit increases its debt from D to D', but a subsequent cut in its marginal tax benefit

leaves debt unchanged at D'. This implies that the flat segment of the net cost curve moves up from

C to C' so that the kink moves up and to the right with each tax increase, leaving the firm at the

22
   To ensure firms were able to react to tax increases during their time in our panel, we restrict the sample to firms that
are neither in financial distress nor have a junk credit rating.
23
   Of course, firms do cut leverage in practice − though apparently not in response to tax cuts. This suggests that
reductions in leverage, when they occur, reflect not changes in the marginal tax benefit of debt but changes in the
marginal cost of debt (e.g., because debt capacity has changed).

                                                                                                                          21
kink. Leverage is thus downward sticky and tax increases ratchet it up permanently.

   Dynamic models of capital structure often impose asymmetry exogenously, by assuming that

firms find it costlier to reduce leverage than to increase it. This is consistent with an asymmetric

response to tax changes. The key insight is that once leverage is in place, shareholders may not

benefit from reducing it voluntarily even when doing so would increase overall firm value. Fischer,

Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), for example, note informally that when shareholders are unable to

commit to a future capital structure policy, they will have no incentive to reduce debt. Leland

(1994) similarly observes that “although the total value of the firm would be increased by the [debt]

restructuring, equity holders cannot benefit from [a debt] repurchase,” as leverage gives

shareholders an option to default. Reducing leverage reduces the value of this put option. Taking

this logic to the extreme, Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001) and Chen (2010) go as far as ruling out

leverage reductions by assumption. Our findings lend some justification to this assumption.

   The literature also suggests some institutional reasons why firms may find it more difficult to

reduce leverage than to increase it. One is co-ordination failures: debt-holders may engage in free-

riding if the debt is widely dispersed (Bolton and Scharfstein (1996)). Lowering leverage reduces

default risk and so increases the value of the remaining debt. Anticipating the incentive of others not

to tender their debt in the repurchase, each debt-holder’s optimal strategy is to hold out as well.

Another reason involves legal transactions costs. The 1939 Trust Indenture Act requires unanimous

consent from all bondholders in case of a material change to any feature of a public bond, such as

principal, interest, or maturity (Denis and Mihov (2003)). Finally, lowering leverage requires the

firm to reduce its cash balance, sell assets, cut its dividend, or issue equity. Each of these funding

options likely involves significant costs: reducing cash balances may reduce the firm’s ability to

withstand future shocks or to pursue investment opportunities (Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach

(2004)); asset sales may involve discounts to fundamental value, due to adverse selection or asset

specificity (Shleifer and Vishny (1992)); cutting the dividend risks sending a negative signal to

investors (John and Williams (1985)); and issuing equity can involve a lemons discount (Myers and

Majluf (1984)). None of these problems arises when a firm increases leverage.

                                                                                                         22
     We are not aware of prior work predicting hysteresis. In contemporaneous work, Admati et al.

(2013) construct a model to rationalize the ratchet effect we document. The model builds on the

conflict of interest between shareholders and dispersed debt-holders familiar from dynamic capital

structure theories: to reduce debt, a firm must buy it back at the prevailing market price, but

shareholders resist a debt buy-back because it reduces the value of their put option. Moreover,

shareholders have an incentive to issue more debt as they do not internalize the increase in

bankruptcy costs faced by the existing creditors. Admati et al. show how shareholders’ preferences

for leverage increases create dynamics matching those we document empirically.

5.3.2 Economic Magnitudes

     A handy way to measure the economic magnitude of the observed tax sensitivity in Table 3 is as

an elasticity, i.e., (L /  c ) /( L /  c ) where L denotes leverage. The numerator is the relevant

coefficient estimate from column 4 (i.e., 0.39 for increases and 0.054 for cuts). For the denominator,

we set c and L equal to their respective sample means. 24 This gives an elasticity of 0.53 for tax

increases and 0.07 for tax cuts.

     These calculations make two assumptions: 1) that a firm’s overall tax rate changes by the full

amount of the change in its state tax rate; and 2) that all of the average treated firm’s profits is

exposed to the tax change (i.e., that the average firm operates – and is taxed – only in its home

state). The first assumption reflects the fact that the federal Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax

limits firms’ ability to deduct state taxes from federal taxes. The specification shown in column 5

shows that the second assumption is not unreasonable. The tax sensitivity of firms that sell

predominantly in their home state, and so come close to having 100% exposure to home-state tax

changes, is moderately larger than for the average Compustat firm in column 4. This implies that

the average firm in our baseline sample has less than 100% exposure to home-state taxes, as a result

of having nexus with other states. Our baseline elasticity of 0.53 with respect to tax increases, which


24
  A firm’s effective tax rate c equals its total income expense (Compustat variable txt) divided by its pre-tax income
(Compustat variable pi). In our sample, effective tax rates for treated firms average  and 23.7% in the year before a
tax rise and tax cut, respectively. See Table 2 for the relevant pre-treatment sample means of L.

                                                                                                                      23
assumes a 100% exposure, is thus downward biased, but not by much. Using the restricted sample

of firms that predominantly sell at home to get closer to 100% exposure, we estimate an elasticity of

0.63.

     Another measure of the economic magnitude is the average dollar increase in a treated firm’s

debt holdings. To estimate this, column 9 of Table 3 models log debt rather than leverage. The

estimated coefficient of 0.057 implies that the average treated firm increases its debt holdings by

5.7% following a tax rise (p=0.03). Given average pre-treatment debt of $570.2 million (see Table

2), this amounts to an additional $32.5 million in debt on average (=$570.2m*0.057). 25

     Prior studies of U.S. firms report no estimates to compare our elasticities to, but we note that

they are similar to Faccio and Xu’s (2013) who estimate a (symmetric) elasticity of 0.4 across

OECD countries. Imposing symmetry, the estimated elasticity in our setting would be 0.33. Our

estimated elasticities are thus similar to international estimates.

     An elasticity of 0.53 for tax increases suggests that the average firm’s marginal cost curve is

fairly flat. This seems plausible, in light of the relatively low average levels of leverage in our

sample. (In Section 5.7, we will show that firms with below-investment-grade credit ratings face

steeper marginal cost curves and as a result do not increase leverage in response to a tax rise.) Our

empirical design allows us to estimate the slope of the average firm’s marginal cost curve. The

average firm adds $32.5 million of debt in response to an increase in the marginal tax benefit

averaging 131 basis points. The slope thus averages 1.31%/$32.5 million, i.e., marginal costs

increase by $403 for every $1 million in new debt (=0.0131/32.5*$1m). Prior literature contains no

estimates of the slope of the marginal cost curve but a comparison to prior estimates of marginal

adjustment costs suggests we are in the right ballpark. 26

25
   The fact that both leverage and debt increase by around 5.7% from their respective pre-treatment means implies that
total assets remain approximately unchanged. In other words, firms respond to a tax rise by swapping debt for equity,
leaving the size of their balance sheet largely unchanged. Tax increases thus trigger a pure capital structure change. This
echoes the results of Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2013), who find that stock market-listed firms in the U.S. do
not vary their investment spending in response to exogenous changes in state taxes.
26
   Altinkilic and Hansen (2000) report a slope of the marginal adjustment cost curve of $22 for every $1 million in new
debt. Since the slope of the marginal cost curve equals the sum of the slopes of the marginal bankruptcy and adjustment
cost curves, this implies that the marginal cost of bankruptcy increases by $381 (=$403–$22) for every $1 million in
new debt. A large share coming from bankruptcy costs is consistent with Almeida and Philippon (2007).

                                                                                                                        24
    We can also place an upper bound on the fixed adjustment costs involved in raising debt. Fixed

costs cause firms to leave capital structure unchanged in response to small shocks, consistent with

the patterns shown in column 3 of Table 3. They are not directly observable, but we can argue by

revealed preference: how large would the fixed costs have to be to cause inaction?

    Firms will only respond to a tax rise if the net benefit of more debt (the additional tax shield less

the increase in bankruptcy and variable adjustment costs) exceeds fixed adjustment costs. In Figure

1c, the net benefit is the area of the triangle above the marginal cost curve MCi, below the marginal

benefit curve MBj, and to the right of the vertical line through Di. It amounts to $212,875 (=$32.5m

*1.31%/2). The average firm’s debt increase is therefore plausible as long as fixed adjustment costs

do not exceed this number on average. Altinkilic and Hansen (2000) report fixed adjustment costs

of $227,000. This number comes from large bond issues involving syndicates of banks. The fixed

costs of such bond issues are likely to be higher than average. Hence, the observed increase in debt

in response to tax increases seems plausible given typical fixed costs of raising debt.

    In sum, our findings seem economically plausible. The implied leverage-to-tax elasticity and

slope of the marginal cost curve are consistent with the literature. Moreover, our tax shocks are

large enough on average to overcome typical fixed adjustment costs of raising debt.

5.4 Reversals, Delayed Reactions, and Pre-trends

    Table 4 includes additional lags to test for possible post-shock reversals (for tax increases) or

delayed reactions (for tax cuts). As in our baseline regression in Table 3, we find that only the first

lag of tax increases is statistically significant, with a point estimate in column 1 of 117 basis points

(p<0.001). Over the next three years, leverage decreases a little, though this decrease is relatively

modest (a cumulative 29 basis points) and not statistically significant (p=0.561). Four years after a

tax increase, leverage is thus 88 basis points higher than before the tax increase relative to control

firms (=117−29), and this is statistically significant (p=0.03). This indicates that the increase in

leverage that follows a tax increase is persistent. (We already know that not even a subsequent tax

cut will reverse it.)

    The tax sensitivity in column 1 is somewhat greater, at 117 basis points, than in our baseline

                                                                                                         25
model in Table 3. The reason is that including leads and lags results in the loss of early treatments

(those occurring in a firm’s first few panel years) and late treatments (those occurring at the end of

the panel). To see if this might be driving our results, column 2 drops the lead and column 3 drops

the fourth lag. This changes the point estimates a little but leaves our inferences unchanged.

   As for tax cuts, the apparent asymmetry could reflect simple delays, perhaps caused by

adjustment costs incurred in reducing leverage. Delays would imply that the tax-cut coefficient in

our earlier regressions understates the full effect of tax cuts on leverage. This does not appear to be

the case: the coefficients for the various lags of the tax cut indicator are tiny in all three columns,

for cumulative changes of –21, +6, and –7 basis points (none of which is statistically significant).

Thus, we find no evidence that firms react to tax cuts with any kind of reasonable lag.

   Table 4 also investigates pre-trends. The coefficients in the year before a tax increase or tax cut

in column 1 are fairly small (at –12 and +14 basis points, respectively) and not statistically

significant. This means that pre-trends do not differ significantly between treated and control firms,

confirming the graphical evidence in Figure 3. This finding has three implications. First, it is

important for identification, since diff-in-diff estimators attribute any differences in trends between

treated and control firms that coincide with the tax change to that tax change. So if treated and

control firms started off on different trends, our estimates could be biased. Second, the absence of

significant lead effects means that treated firms do not anticipate future tax changes. One reading of

this is that even if firms know about tax increases in advance, they do not increase leverage before

they can actually reap the benefits of the extra tax shield. Third, the fact that leverage increases only

after tax rises suggests that this relation is not the result of state lawmakers simply responding to

deteriorating economic conditions (an omitted variable) or increases in leverage (reverse causality).

Instead, we see firms reacting only once they can take advantage of the increased tax shields.

5.5 Robustness

   Table 5 reports key robustness tests. First, to identify structural breaks and potentially influential

outliers, columns 1 and 2 partition the sample by decade. This reveals a small (and insignificant)

fall in the sensitivity of debt to tax rises over time, from 107 basis points in 1990-2000 (p=0.002) to

                                                                                                          26
103 basis points after 2000 (p<0.001). Leverage is insensitive to tax cuts in both subsamples, so the

tax sensitivity is asymmetric throughout our sample period. Because we obtain nearly identical

results in both periods, our results cannot be driven by any single tax-change event.

   Might our results be due to unobserved time-invariant differences between states? If firms

choose where to locate based on unobserved state attributes that correlate with their debt policies,

we should not compare, say, Michigan firms suffering a tax shock to control firms in, say, Utah.

The solution is to add state fixed effects to our baseline specification. Column 3 shows that doing so

yields point estimates that are nearly identical to the baseline estimates shown in Table 3.

   Column 4 includes short-term debt in the dependent variable and so models changes in total

leverage. Consistent with our conjecture that firms respond to tax changes primarily on the long-

term debt margin, we find attenuation in the estimated tax sensitivity: on average, firms raise total

leverage by 83 basis points after a tax rise (p=0.001). Even this smaller effect is economically

meaningful: relative to the mean pre-treatment ratio of 23.6% (Table 2), it represents an increase of

3.5%. Column 5 excludes short-term debt but includes the current portion of long-term debt (due

within a year). This increases the tax sensitivity somewhat: on average, firms raise leverage by 112

basis points (p<0.001), compared to the baseline estimate of 104 basis points. As before, we see no

sensitivity to tax cuts. Column 6 models long-term market leverage; the point estimate for tax

increases is 66 basis points (p=0.059) and we continue to find no reaction to tax cuts.

   Finally, columns 7 and 8 explore the extensive margin. Column 7 shows that firms are

significantly more likely to issue long-term debt after a tax increase (p=0.001), whereas tax cuts

have no effect on debt issuance decisions (p=0.594). Column 8 shows that tax cuts do not induce

firms to repurchase long-term debt: following a tax cut, the probability of a repurchase is only one

basis point higher than normal (p=0.907). These findings are consistent with the asymmetric effect

of tax changes on leverage seen in our baseline specifications.

5.6 Causality

   A causal interpretation of the observed sensitivity of leverage to tax increases (and of the failure

to cut leverage in response to tax cuts) depends on the plausibility of the parallel-trends assumption.

                                                                                                        27
Figure 3 and Table 4 confirm that treated and control firms start off on parallel trends. The question

then is if they would have continued on parallel trends had it not been for the tax changes. Because

our leverage regressions include industry-year effects, we know that our results are not driven by

time-varying industry shocks to leverage trends. They condition on changes in firm-level correlates

of leverage, such as changes in profitability, and so remove the influence of observed firm-level

trend shifters. We can even remove unobserved firm-level trend shifters, by including firm fixed

effects in our first-differenced specification, without affecting the results.

   The two main remaining challenges to a causal interpretation are that the state tax changes occur

because of some omitted factor which simultaneously drives state-level changes in taxes and firm-

level changes in leverage; or that they coincide with some other state-level policy change that is in

fact responsible for the leverage adjustment.

5.6.1 Potential Confound: Local Economic Conditions

   States may change taxes because of changes in local economic conditions. To the extent that

local shocks independently affect firms’ debt policies (say, because firms borrow more when cash

flows fall in recessions), part or all of the observed leverage increase among treated firms may

reflect the effects of the local economic shock rather than the tax change. Fortunately, our setting

allows us to disentangle the two.

   Our specifications already control for observed state-level economic conditions, in the form of

state growth and unemployment rates. Any remaining confound must thus be orthogonal to these

state-level controls. To isolate such a potential confound, we first consider a simple falsification

test. Its logic is as follows. Suppose tax changes are driven by unobserved changes in local

conditions (orthogonal to our state-level controls) and it is these changes – rather than the tax

changes – that firms in reality respond to. Then both firms in treated states and their neighbors in

untreated states just across the state border will spuriously appear to “react” to the tax change, as

long as economic conditions, unlike state tax law, have a tendency to spill across state borders. Our

baseline tests would obscure this by including as controls firms from far-away states that are not

subject to the local economic shock and so do not adjust their leverage.

                                                                                                        28
     To examine this possibility, column 1 in Table 6 includes both home-state tax-change indicators

and indicators for tax changes that occur in a neighboring state. As before, firms borrow more

following home-state tax rises and fail to cut leverage following home-state tax cuts. Importantly,

firms located in a state that does not change its own tax rate but borders one that does do not mirror

this behavior. This supports a causal interpretation of the home-state tax treatment effect.

     But there is more. When a neighboring state raises taxes, control firms actually reduce their

leverage significantly, by 42 basis points on average (p=0.005), relative to their industry peers in

far-away states. Assuming firms in neighboring states share similar economic conditions, this

behavior is hard to reconcile with the conjectured confound: it goes in the wrong direction.

     To investigate this further, columns 2 and 3 drop all far-away controls, restricting the set of

controls to firms located in a state neighboring either a tax-rise state (column 2) or a tax-cut state

(column 3). Narrowing the sample of control firms to those sharing arguably similar local economic

conditions increases the economic magnitude of the sensitivity of leverage to tax rises by 45 basis

points from the baseline, to 149 basis points in column 2 (p<0.001). (We continue to find that firms

do not respond to tax cuts: the point estimate in column 3 measures only –6 basis points (p=0.762).)

     Of course, firms in adjacent states may not necessarily share the same economic conditions; for

example, they may be located at opposite ends of two large states. We can construct a cleaner test

by focusing on border regions, i.e., on firms headquartered in contiguous counties on either side of a

state border. Such county pairs share plausibly similar (unobserved) local economic conditions

while being subject to different tax treatments. The identifying assumption of this test is that firms

in a narrow interval around the state border (here, those located in contiguous counties) are only

randomly different from each other and so would experience parallel trends absent the tax shock.

     We identify a firm’s county based on its zip code, using a bridge obtained from the Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention. 27,28 Our sample contains 401 county-pair/year clusters involving




27
  Available at http://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/sci_data/codes/fips/type_txt/cntyxref.asp. In rare cases, a zip code spans
two counties, in which case we identify the correct county from a firm’s SEC filings or a google search.

                                                                                                                     29
firms in contiguous county pairs such that in year t, one or more firms in one county experience a

tax shock while one or more firms in the contiguous county do not. The total number of treated and

control firms is 2,278 and because the same firm can be hit with multiple tax shocks over time,

there are 12,822 firm-years. Of these, 868 involve tax rises in 19 states and 2,195 involve tax cuts in

20 states. Thus, there is a large number of firms per county-pair/year cluster and there is substantial

variation in treatment status within each cluster involving a large number of separate tax shocks.

     Column 4 includes two sets of fixed effects: a set of county-pair/year fixed effects, to remove

unobserved variation in economic conditions affecting firms operating in a pair of contiguous

counties, and the set of industry-year fixed effects we used previously to remove unobserved

variation in industry conditions that may affect leverage. We find that relative to control firms just

the other side of the state border, treated firms increase their (industry-adjusted) leverage by an

average of 131 basis points when their home state raises corporate tax rates (p=0.05).

     As in column 2, which uses as controls firms from anywhere in the neighboring state, the point

estimate in the contiguous-border-counties test in column 4 is larger than in our baseline model. But

this is not quite a fair comparison: unlike all our previous specifications, column 4 does not estimate

the treatment effect within-industry; instead, it includes two independent sets of fixed effects,

thereby comparing the change in industry-adjusted leverage of, say, a treated food retailer to the

contemporaneous change in industry-adjusted leverage of an untreated shoe manufacturer (requiring

only that both be located in the same county-pair).

     To take out industry variation in leverage, column 5 requires controls not only to be located in a

contiguous county but also to operate in the same SIC4 industry. This is achieved by including

county-pair/industry/year fixed effects, thus holding constant local industry conditions in year t.

Requiring neighboring firms to operate in the same industry reduces the sample size by nearly 90%,

to 1,520 firm-years in 479 county-pair/industry/year triplets. And yet the point estimate is virtually

28
   We hand-collect historical zip codes from SEC filings for the 1,541 firms that our data checks indicate moved across
state lines over our sample period. For the remaining 8,571 sample firms, we use Compustat’s current zip codes. This
will introduce noise to the extent that these firms moved counties within a state during our sample period. Given the
large number of firm-years involved (82,219), hand-collecting historic zip codes for these firms is impracticable.
However, our coefficients are quite precisely estimated, so noise does not appear to be a major concern.

                                                                                                                     30
unchanged: relative to firms in the same industry located just the other side of a state border, treated

firms increase their leverage by 128 basis points on average following a tax rise (p=0.004).

   Why is the estimated tax sensitivity roughly 30% greater than in our baseline specification,

which does not condition on the location of control firms? Column 1 suggests that the increase is

driven by a change in the behavior of the control firms: when taxes rise across the border, controls

reduce their leverage (relative to their industry peers located elsewhere in the U.S.). This finding

points to a local component of firms’ debt policies. A plausible interpretation is that treated firms’

leverage responses to tax rises “spill across borders,” in the sense that their neighbors react (by

cutting leverage) to the fact that leverage has increased among firms in their industry on the other

side of the state border. Such behavior is consistent with product-market competition affecting debt

policy and vice versa, as emphasized by Brander and Lewis (1985).

5.6.2 Potential Confounds: Union Power, Unemployment Risk, and Other Tax Changes

   The tests reported in Table 6 can difference away any variable that satisfies two conditions: it

correlates with tax changes and so could confound our tests; and its influence does not stop at the

state border. Local economic shocks are one concrete example of a confound these tests can rule

out, but the inference is more general: the fact that we continue to find a positive sensitivity to tax

increases in Table 6 implies that our results are not driven by any source of unobserved variation

that coincides with the tax increases and diffuses across state borders.

   This leaves confounds whose influence stops at the state border and which therefore coincide

exactly with the tax variation. Since the treatment varies within state across time, we cannot include

state-year fixed effects to remove such confounds directly. This is a general feature of diff-in-diff

tests using policy variation. The only way to address confounds of this kind is to be explicit about

what they are and investigate them one by one.

   In this section, we consider three potential confounds suggested by prior literature, starting with

labor market conditions. Matsa (2010) finds that leverage increases in union power, which he

interprets as evidence that firms use debt strategically to counter their unions’ bargaining power. If

labor market forces are a first-order determinant of debt policy, what looks like a tax-induced

                                                                                                          31
change in leverage may in fact be driven by unobserved variation in union power simultaneously

causing tax rises and leverage increases.

   To test this, we exploit variation in unionization rates across states and time. Columns 1 and 2 of

Table 7 partition the sample into firms headquartered in states with either high or low union power.

(See Appendix C for details.) Both sets of firms increase leverage significantly when taxes rise.

Interestingly, the increase is considerably larger among firms located in low-union states, at 147

versus 83 basis points. This, together with the results in Table 1 showing that tax-increasing states

are no more unionized than other states, casts doubt on the idea that firms borrow more not because

of a tax rise but to counter union power.

   Titman (1984) argues that firms choose their debt to insure workers against unemployment risk.

To confound our results, unemployment risk would have to fall at the same time as states raise

corporate taxes. In columns 3 and 4 of Table 7, we use state-level data on mass layoffs to measure

unemployment risk, partitioning the sample into firms headquartered in states that suffer either

unusually large or unusually small employment shocks at the time of a tax rise. (See Appendix C

for definitions.) We observe a positive and significant tax sensitivity of nearly identical magnitude

in both groups, averaging 102 and 104 basis points, respectively. Thus, firms increase their leverage

in response to tax rises regardless of whether their state has suffered a large employment shock.

   Finally, Table 1 shows a tendency for state-level corporate income tax changes to coincide with

state-level changes in personal income or capital gains taxes. In columns 5 and 6 of Table 7, we

omit as shocks any state corporate income tax change that coincides with a change in either state

personal income taxes (column 5) or state capital gains taxes (column 6). We find that firms react to

these corporate-only tax shocks just as strongly as to the full set of tax shocks used in Table 3, and

the tax sensitivity of leverage remains asymmetric. This implies that leverage is sensitive to changes

in corporate taxes but not to changes in personal taxes on income or capital gains.

   We obtain similar results (not reported) if we remove the small number of corporate tax changes

that coincide with changes in state credits for investment, R&D, or job creation (as listed in Table 1,

Panel B), if we remove instances where a state changes both corporate and bank taxes, and if we

                                                                                                     32
control for the political conditions in the state at the time of the tax change (see Table 1, Panel A).

5.7 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

    Interest tax shields depend on the interplay between personal taxes on income from interest (i)

and equity (e) on the one hand and corporate taxes on profits (c) on the other. The standard

textbook tax benefit of debt can be written as 1   i   1   c 1   e D , where D denotes the level

of debt. Let the (net) cost of debt be represented by a generic quadratic function a  bD  cD 2 . The

first-order condition for the optimal debt level D* then is dD * / d c  (1   e ) / 2c . Thus, higher

personal taxes on equity income dampen the impact of a corporate tax change on debt. Because e

likely varies in the cross-section, treatment effects should be heterogeneous.

    e cannot be measured directly. Not only does it depend on whether a firm’s marginal investor is

a tax-exempt institution or a wealthy individual subject to the top income tax rate; it also varies

across firms as a function of the relative importance of dividend income and capital gains (the latter

being taxed at a lower effective rate since they can be deferred and/or offset against capital losses).

    This discussion suggests a useful validation test. If the observed tax sensitivity of debt is causal,

we expect stronger effects among firms with small e. To test this comparative static, Table 8 uses

dividends to proxy for e. Non-dividend payers have lower e than dividend-payers because their

investors derive their equity income solely in the form of (lower-taxed) capital gains. When we split

the samples accordingly, we find results consistent with heterogeneous treatment effects. While

non-dividend payers increase leverage by 143 basis points after a tax rise (p<0.001), dividend

payers increase leverage by only 4 basis points (p=0.876); the difference between these point

estimates is statistically significant (p=0.001).

    A corollary of a causal interpretation is that the tax sensitivity of debt should vary with profits,

as interest-bearing debt offers valuable tax shields only to profitable firms. Columns 3 and 4

partition sample firms according to whether or not they are profitable in the year of the tax rise.

Consistent with firms borrowing to take advantage of tax shields, we find that only profitable firms

borrow more: when faced with higher taxes in their home state, profitable firms increase leverage

                                                                                                             33
by 109 basis points (p<0.001), nearly four times more than the estimated diff-in-diff increase of 29

basis points for loss-making firms (p=0.618); the difference is marginally significant (p=0.106). 29

     Another way to measure the potential tax benefit of increasing debt is to condition on firms’

marginal tax rates. All else equal, firms with higher marginal tax rates have a greater incentive to

take on more debt in response to a tax rise. To capture this, we use simulated firm-level marginal

tax rates obtained from John Graham. (See Appendix C for details.) Preliminary inspection suggests

that the relation is highly nonlinear. As a result, we use Graham’s marginal tax rates to partition the

sample as follows. Column 5 of Table 8 focuses on the 6,570 firm-years with a zero marginal tax

rate. These firms experience a meaningful number of tax shocks (239 tax rises and 727 tax cuts) but

do not respond to them significantly. Column 6 focuses on firms with positive marginal tax rates.

Such firms are quite sensitive to tax rises, increasing their leverage by 107 basis points on average

(p<0.001). Column 7 focuses on firms in the top decile of marginal tax rates (those paying at least

35% of their earnings in tax). The estimated sensitivity of firms with such high marginal tax rates is

more than twice the average, at 252 basis points (p=0.021).

     Trade-off theory suggests that the extent to which a firm can increase its leverage in response to

a tax rise depends on its debt capacity and its likely costs of distress (as captured by c above).

Effectively, its default risk acts as a constraint on its ability to take advantage of further tax shields

of debt. To test this prediction, we partition firms into those rated investment-grade (column 8) and

those rated junk by S&P, Moody’s, or Fitch (column 9). Firms without a credit rating are omitted.

We find that investment-grade firms increase their leverage by 89 basis points following a tax rise

(p=0.041), whereas riskier borrowers do not increase their leverage at all (p=0.751).

     Overall, these patterns support a causal interpretation of the observed tax sensitivity of debt.

6. Conclusions

     The U.S. tax system subsidizes firms’ use of debt: interest payments are tax deductible while

dividends are not. Despite decades of scholarship, it is an open question whether taxes are a first-


29
  Though not reported, we find statistically stronger results if we partition firms based on whether they were profitable
or loss-making in every year between t = –2 and t = 0 (p=0.024), which may be a better predictor of future profitability.

                                                                                                                       34
order determinant of capital structure. We overcome the identification challenges that have

hampered previous work by using a natural experiment in the form of 121 staggered changes in

corporate income tax rates across U.S. states. Our results show that firms react strongly to tax

increases (implying relatively flat marginal cost curves and small adjustment costs on the margin)

but are insensitive to tax cuts. These findings are robust to various potential confounds. We also

find evidence of geographic clustering in corporate debt policies.

   The asymmetry in tax sensitivity we observe in the data runs counter to static trade-off theory. It

suggests that leverage is sticky on the downside, in the sense that tax increases ratchet up leverage

permanently while tax cuts do not subsequently reduce it. This in turn is consistent with firms

facing higher adjustment costs when seeking to cut leverage, an assumption commonly made in

dynamic capital structure models.

   We end with an important caveat about the external validity of our results. Our estimates of

firms’ leverage responses to tax changes are based on a relatively narrow range of variation in tax

rates (up or down by no more than a few percentage points). As a result, we cannot predict how

firms would react to tax changes that are much larger than those seen over our sample period. In

particular, whether firms would respond to the drastic cuts in federal corporate income tax rates that

some policy makers are currently debating is an open question.




                                                                                                      35
References

Admati, Anat R., Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer, 2013, The leverage
  ratchet effect, Working Paper, Stanford University.
Agrawal, Ashwini K., and David A. Matsa, 2012, Labor unemployment risk and corporate
   financing decisions, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity of
   cash, Journal of Finance 59, 1777-1804.
Almeida, Heitor, and Thomas Philippon, 2007, The risk-adjusted cost of financial distress, Journal
   of Finance 62, 2557-2586.
Altinkilic, Oya, and Robert S. Hansen, 2000, Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees?
    Evidence of rising external financing costs, Review of Financial Studies 13, 191-218.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2013, Corporate investment and stock
   market listing: A puzzle?, Working Paper, New York University.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How much should we trust
   differences-in-differences estimates?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-275.
van Binsbergen, Jules, John R. Graham, and Jie Yang, 2010, The cost of debt, Journal of Finance
   65, 2089-2136.
Bolton, Patrick, and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal debt structure and the number of creditors,
   Journal of Political Economy 104, 1-25.
Booth, Laurence, Varouj A. Aivazian, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 2001,
   Capital structures in developing countries, Journal of Finance 56, 87-130.
Brander, James A., and Tracy R. Lewis, 1985, Oligopoly and financial structure: The limited
   liability effect, American Economic Review 76, 956-970.
Brealey, Richard, Stewart Myers, and Franklin Allen, 2011, Principles of Corporate Finance (10th
   ed.), McGraw-Hill.
Chen, Hui, 2010, Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital structure,
   Journal of Finance 65, 2171-2212.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson, 2008, State investment tax incentives: A zero-sum
   game?, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Denis, David J., and Vassil T. Mihov, 2003, The choice among bank debt, non-bank private debt,
   and public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings, Journal of Financial Economics 70,
   3-28.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich, 2010, Minimum wage effects across state
   borders: Estimates using contiguous counties, Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 945-964.
Faccio, Mara, and Jin Xu, 2013, Taxes and capital structure, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
   Analysis, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F., 2011, My life in finance, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 1-15.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1998, Taxes, financing decisions, and firm value, Journal


                                                                                                   36
   of Finance 53, 819-843.
Farre-Mensa, Joan, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2013, Do measures of financial constraints measure
    financial constraints?, Working Paper, New York University.
Fischer, Edwin O., Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner, 1989, Dynamic capital structure choice:
    Theory and tests, Journal of Finance 44, 19-40.
Foley, C. Fritz, Jay Hartzell, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite, 2007, Why do firms hold so much
   cash? A tax-based explanation, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 579-607.
Frank, Murray Z., and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2009, Capital structure decisions: Which factors are
   reliably important?, Financial Management 38, 1-37.
Givoly, Dan, Carla Hahn, Aharon R. Ofer, and Oded H. Sarig, 1992, Taxes and capital structure:
   Evidence from firms’ responses to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, Review of Financial Studies 5,
   331-355.
Goldstein, Robert, Nengjiu Ju, and Hayne Leland, 2001, An EBIT-based model of dynamic capital
   structure, Journal of Business 74, 483-512.
Gordon, Roger H., and Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason, 1991, Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on
   corporate financial policy and organizational form, NBER Working Paper No. 3222.
Gormley, Todd A., and David A. Matsa, 2012, Common errors: How to (and not to) control for
   unobserved heterogeneity, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Graham, John R., 1996a, Debt and the marginal tax rate, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 41-73.
Graham, John R., 1996b, Proxies for the corporate marginal tax rate, Journal of Financial
   Economics 42, 187-221.
Graham, John R., 2008, Taxes and corporate finance, in Espen Eckbo (ed.), Handbook of Empirical
   Corporate Finance (vol. 2), Elsevier.
Graham, John R., and Mark Leary, 2011, A review of empirical capital structure research and
   directions for the future, Annual Reviews of Financial Economics 3, 309-345.
Graham, John R., Michael Lemmon, and James Schallheim, 1998, Debt, leases, taxes, and the
   endogeneity of corporate tax status, Journal of Finance 53, 131-162.
Graham, John R., and Lillian Mills, 2008, Simulating marginal tax rates using tax return data,
   Journal of Accounting and Economics 46, 366-388.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson, 2003, Union membership and coverage database from
   the Current Population Survey: Note, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56, 349-54.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate financing, and takeovers,
   American Economic Review 76, 323-329.
John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signaling equilibrium,
   Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions
   and financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75-109.
Kraus, Alan, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1973, A state-preference model of optimal financial
   leverage, Journal of Finance 28, 911-922.

                                                                                                  37
Leland, Hayne, 1994, Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure, Journal
   of Finance 49, 1213-1252.
Lin, Leming, and Mark Flannery, 2013, Do personal taxes affect capital structure? Evidence from
   the 2003 tax cut, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 549-565.
MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey K., 1990, Do taxes affect capital structure decisions?, Journal of Finance
  45, 1471-1493.
Matsa, David A., 2010, Capital structure as a strategic variable: Evidence from collective
   bargaining, Journal of Finance 65, 1197-1232.
Miller, Merton H., 1977, Debt and taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller, 1963, Corporate income taxes and the cost of capital: A
  correction, American Economic Review 53, 433-443.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5,
  147-175.
Myers, Stewart C., 1984, The capital structure puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions
  when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
  187-221.
Neumark, David, and Diego Grijalva, 2013, The employment effects of state hiring credits during
   and after the great recession, NBER Working Paper 18928.
Panier, Frederic, Francisco Perez-Gonzales, and Pablo Villanueva, 2013, Capital structure and
   taxes: What happens when you (also) subsidize equity?, Working Paper, Stanford University.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure? Some
   evidence from international data, Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
   equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Titman, Sheridan, 1984, The effect of capital structure on a firm’s liquidation decision, Journal of
   Financial Economics 13, 137-151.
Wilson, Daniel J., 2007, Beggar thy neighbor? The in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate effects of
   R&D tax credits, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.




                                                                                                       38
Appendix A. List of State Corporate Income Tax Increases.
This table lists all state corporate income tax increases over the tax years 1989-2012. In states with more than one
tax bracket, we report the change to the top bracket. To identify these changes, we use data obtained from the Tax
Foundation (an abbreviated version of which is available at http://www.taxfoundation.org), the Book of the States, a
search of the “Current Corporate Income Tax Developments” feature published periodically in the Journal of State
Taxation, and state codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

                                                                                                                          No. of
                                                                                                                        affected
                                                                                                                         sample
 State   Year   Description                                                                                                firms
 IL      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4% to 4.8%                                                   163
 KY      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7.25% to 8%                                                    9
 NJ      1989   Introduction of 0.375% tax surcharge                                                                        232
 RI      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 9%                                                      12
 CT      1990   Introduction of 20% tax surcharge, increasing top marginal tax rate from 11.5% to 13.8%                     106
 MO      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.5%                                                    54
 MT      1990   Introduction of 5% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                             3
 NE      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6.65% to 7.24%                                                10
 OK      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6%                                                      45
 AR      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6% to 6.5%                                                    17
 ME      1991   Introduction of 10% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                            4
 NC      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 7.75% and introduction of 4% tax surcharge              60
                on tax liability
 NE      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7.24% to 7.81% and introduction of 15% tax                    10
                surcharge on tax liability
 PA      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 12.25%                                               171
 RI      1991   Introduction of 11% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                           12
 DC      1992   Introduction of 2.5% surcharge on tax liability                                                               7
 KS      1992   Increase in top corporate income tax rate (including surcharge) from 6.75% to 7.35%                          21
 KY      1992   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 8.25%                                                   14
 MT      1992   Re-introduction of tax surcharge on tax liability at 2.3% rate                                                2
 MO      1993   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.25% and reduction in federal income tax               71
                deductibility from 100% to 50%
 MT      1993   Increase in tax surcharge on tax liability from 2.3% to 4.7%                                                  4
 DC      1994   Introduction of additional 2.5% surcharge on tax liability                                                    0
 VT      1997   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 9.75%                                                 9
 NH      1999   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8%                                                      21
 AL      2001   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.5%                                                    21
 NH      2001   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 8.5%                                                    18
 CA      2002   Suspension of state net operating loss (NOL) deduction, affecting profitable firms that have tax loss       140
                carryovers for California state income tax purposes
 KS      2002   Increase in tax surcharge on taxable income from 3.35% to 4.5%                                               19
 NJ      2002   Introduction of Alternative Minimum Assessment tax, under which firms pay the greater of a gross            173
                receipts tax and the corporate franchise (net income) tax; suspension of NOL deduction
 TN      2002   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6% to 6.5%                                                    51
 AR      2003   Introduction of 3% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                            15
 CT      2003   Introduction of 20% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                           86
 IN      2003   Repeal of gross income tax (based on revenue rather than profits) and of supplemental income tax;            35
                effective adjusted gross income tax rate (on profits) increased from 7.75% to 8.5%
 CT      2004   Increase in tax surcharge on tax liability to 25%                                                            86
 NJ      2006   Introduction of 4% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                           153
 MD      2008   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8.25%                                                   59
 MI      2008   Introduction of corporate income tax with a top rate of 4.95%; replaces a gross-receipts tax without         53
                interest deductibility
 CT      2009   Introduction of 10% tax surcharge on tax liability for companies with revenues > $100m                       47
 NC      2009   Introduction of 3% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                            59
 OR      2009   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6.6% to 7.9%                                                  23
 IL      2011   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4.8% to 7%                                                   111
 CT      2012   Unscheduled two-year extension of tax surcharge on tax liability and increase to 20%                          1
 MI      2012   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4.95% to 6%                                                    5

                                                                                                                              39
Appendix B. List of State Corporate Income Tax Cuts.
This table lists all state corporate income tax cuts over the tax years 1989-2012. In states with more than one tax
bracket, we report the change to the top bracket. To identify these changes, we use data obtained from the Tax
Foundation (an abbreviated version of which is available at http://www.taxfoundation.org), the Book of the States, a
search of the “Current Corporate Income Tax Developments” feature published periodically in the Journal of State
Taxation, and state codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

                                                                                                                 No. of
                                                                                                               affected
                                                                                                                sample
 State   Year   Description                                                                                       firms
 CO      1988   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6% to 5.5%                                         121
 WV      1988   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.75% to 9.6%                                        8
 CO      1989   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.5% to 5.4%                                       121
 WV      1989   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.6% to 9.45%                                        7
 AZ      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 9.3%                                       44
 CO      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.4% to 5.3%                                       108
 WV      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.45% to 9.3%                                        6
 CO      1991   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.3% to 5.2%                                       116
 MN      1991   Reduction in the legislated tax increase of 0.4%                                                   146
 MT      1991   Repeal of 5% tax surcharge                                                                           2
 WV      1991   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 9.15%                                        6
 CO      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.2% to 5.1%                                       124
 CT      1992   Reduction in tax surcharge from 20% to 10%                                                         112
 MO      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6.5% to 5%                                          61
 NC      1992   Reduction in tax surcharge from 4% to 3%                                                            68
 WV      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.15% to 9%                                          6
 CO      1993   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.1% to 5.0%                                       138
 CT      1993   Repeal of 10% tax surcharge                                                                        118
 ME      1993   Repeal of 10% tax surcharge                                                                          5
 NC      1993   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3% to 2%                                                            74
 NE      1993   Repeal of 15% tax surcharge                                                                         12
 NH      1993   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.5%                                          20
 AZ      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 9%                                          56
 MT      1994   Repeal of 4.7% tax surcharge                                                                         3
 NC      1994   Reduction in tax surcharge from 2% to 1%                                                            77
 NH      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7%                                          23
 NJ      1994   Repeal of 0.375% tax surcharge                                                                     220
 PA      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 12.25% to 11.99%                                   200
 RI      1994   Repeal of 11% tax surcharge                                                                         20
 CT      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.5% to 11.25%                                    124
 DC      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10% to 9.5% (+2 tax surcharges at 2.5% each)         9
 NC      1995   Repeal of 1% tax surcharge                                                                          76
 PA      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.99% to 9.99%                                    208
 CT      1996   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.25% to 10.75%                                   134
 CA      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 8.84%                                      939
 CT      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.75% to 10.5%                                    137
 NC      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.75% to 7.5%                                       82
 AZ      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8%                                            70
 CT      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 9.5%                                      122
 NC      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7.25%                                       83
 CO      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 4.75%                                        133
 CT      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.5% to 8.5%                                       110
 NC      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.25% to 7%                                         76
 NY      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8.5%                                         383
 OH      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.9% to 8.5%                                       146




                                                                                                                     40
AZ   2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.968%                                          65
CO   2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 4.75% to 4.63%                                       119
CT   2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 7.5%                                         102
NC   2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6.9%                                            72
NY   2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 8%                                           330
AZ   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.968% to 6.968%                                      55
ID   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.6%                                             8
NY   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.5%                                           294
KS   2003   Reduction in tax surcharge from 4.5% to 3.35%                                                         20
ND   2004   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 7%                                            1
AR   2005   Repeal of 3% tax surcharge                                                                            14
KY   2005   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 7%                                           19
OH   2005   Tax reform phasing out corp. income tax while phasing in gross receipts tax over period of 5 years   102
CT   2006   Reduction in tax surcharge from 25% to 20%                                                            74
VT   2006   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.75% to 8.9%                                          2
ND   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6.5%                                             0
NY   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7.1%                                         252
VT   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.9% to 8.5%                                           2
WV   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8.75%                                            6
CT   2008   Repeal of 20% tax surcharge                                                                           69
KS   2008   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.35% to 3.1%                                                         17
KY   2008   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6%                                              17
TX   2008   Abolition of income tax, replaced with gross receipts tax without interest deductibility             300
KS   2009   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.1% to 3.05%                                                         16
ND   2009   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6.5% to 6.4%                                           1
WV   2009   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.75% to 8.5%                                          5
MA   2010   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.5% to 8.75%                                        160
NJ   2010   Repeal of 4% tax surcharge                                                                            98
KS   2011   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.05% to 3%                                                           11
MA   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.75% to 8.25%                                       132
NC   2011   Repeal of 3% tax surcharge                                                                            47
ND   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6.4% to 5.4%                                           1
OR   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.9% to 7.6%                                          18




                                                                                                                  41
Appendix C. Variable Definitions.
State-level variables (Table 1)

Democratic governor is an indicator set equal to one if the state is governed by a Democratic governor, and zero
otherwise. Data come from the Congressional Quarterly (through 2008) and state election websites (after 2008).

State budget balance equals the difference between a state’s general revenues and its general expenditures scaled
by its general expenditures. The data come from the U.S. Census Bureau’s State & Local Finances database,
available at http://www.census.gov/govs/local.

State budget deficit equals state budget balance if the state runs a budget deficit, and zero otherwise.

State budget surplus equals state budget balance if the state runs a budget surplus, and zero otherwise.

State bond rating downgrade is an indicator set equal to one if the state’s credit rating is downgraded by either S&P
or Moody’s.

GSP growth rate is the real annual growth rate in gross state product (GSP) using data obtained from the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis.

State unemployment rate is the state unemployment rate, obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

State union penetration is the fraction of private-sector employees in a state who belong to a labor union in year t.
The data come from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003) as updated on their website, http://www.unionstats.com.

Tax competition is measured as the difference between a state’s corporate income tax rate and the highest corporate
income tax rate levied by any of the neighboring states.

State personal income taxes is the maximum state tax rate on wage income, estimated for an additional $1,000 of
income on an initial $1,500,000 of wage income (split evenly between husband and wife). The taxpayer is assumed
to be married and filing jointly. The data come from Daniel Feenberg, available at
http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/state-rates.

State capital gains tax rates is the maximum state tax rate on long-term capital gains. The data come from Daniel
Feenberg, available at http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/state-rates.

State tax on banks captures changes in the rate at which a state taxes financial institutions with nexus to the state.
(Both a physical presence in the state and out-of-state lending to borrowers located in the state constitute nexus.)
The data come from the Book of the States and state codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

State investment tax credit rate is the rate at which a firm can deduct capital expenditures directly from its state
corporate income tax liability (in addition to the usual depreciation deductions against taxable income). Data
through 2006 come from Chirinko and Wilson (2008). Data for subsequent years come from tax forms available on
state Department of Revenue websites.

State R&D credit rate is the percentage of a firm’s R&D expenditures that it can deduct directly from its state
corporate income tax liability (in addition to the usual deduction against taxable income). Data through 2006 come
from Wilson (2007). Data for subsequent years come from tax forms available on state Department of Revenue
websites.

State job creation credit is set equal to one if the state offers a tax credit in return for hiring new workers meeting
certain requirements, and zero otherwise. The data come from Appendix A1 in Neumark and Grijalva (2013).

State job creation grants is set equal to one if the state offers grant payments in return for hiring new workers
meeting certain requirements, and zero otherwise. The data come from Appendix A1 in Neumark and Grijalva
(2013).

                                                                                                                          42
Firm-level dependent variables (Tables 2-9)

Long-term book leverage is defined as long-term debt (Compustat item dltt) over the book value of assets
(Compustat item at).

Log real long-term debt is defined as the natural logarithm of one plus long-term debt (Compustat item dltt),
deflated to 2005 dollars using the GDP deflator available at http://www.bea.gov/national/xls/gdplev.xls.

Total book leverage is defined as the sum of long-term debt (Compustat item dltt) and short-term debt (Compustat
item dlc), over the book value of assets (Compustat item at).

Long-term book leverage (including current portion of long-term debt) is defined as the sum of long-term debt
(Compustat item dltt) and long-term debt due in one year (Compustat item dd1), over the book value of assets
(Compustat item at).

Long-term market leverage is defined as long-term debt (Compustat item dltt) over the sum of long-term debt and
the fiscal-year-end share price (Compustat item prcc_f) times the number of common shares outstanding (Compustat
item csho).

Prob(issue long-term debt) is an indicator set equal to one if the firm issues long-term debt (i.e., if the within-firm
year-on-year change in Compustat item dltt is positive), and zero otherwise.

Prob(repurchase debt) is an indicator set equal to one if the firm repurchases long-term debt (i.e., if the within-firm
year-on-year change in Compustat item dltt is negative), and zero otherwise.

Independent variables: Firm-level characteristics (Tables 2-9)

ROA (return on assets) is defined as operating income before depreciation (Compustat item oibdp) over the book
value of assets (Compustat item at).

Firm size is defined as the natural logarithm of total assets (Compustat item at) in year 2005 real dollars (deflated
using the GDP deflator available at http://www.bea.gov/national/xls/gdplev.xls).

Tangibility is defined as net property, plant, and equipment (Compustat item ppent), over the book value of assets
(Compustat item at).

Market/book is constructed as in Frank and Goyal (2009). It is defined as (fiscal year-end closing price [prcc_f]
times common shares used to calculate earnings per share [cshpri] + the liquidation value of preferred stock [pstkl] +
long-term debt [dltt] + short-term debt [dlc] – deferred taxes and investment tax credits [txditc]) / total assets [at].

Independent variables: Credit market conditions (Tables 2-9)

Default spread is the difference between the yield on Baa and Aaa rated corporate bonds, measured as of the firm’s
fiscal-year month end. The data are obtained from the Federal Reserve’s H15 Report, accessed through WRDS.

Independent variables: State-level characteristics (Tables 2-9)

GSP growth rate is the real annual growth rate in gross state product (GSP) using data obtained from the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis.

State unemployment rate is the state unemployment rate, obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Conditioning variables (Tables 3 and 7-8)

Low inter-state sales is constructed using data from Agrawal and Matsa (2012). Agrawal and Matsa use data from
the 2007 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) to calculate, for each three-digit NAICS industry covered by the CFS, the

                                                                                                                        43
fraction of shipments that stay within-state (“intra-state sales”) rather than leave the state (“inter-state sales”). Using
these data, we construct an indicator set equal to 1 for industries whose inter-state sales are below the 33rd percentile,
and zero otherwise.

States with high (low) union power is an indicator set equal to one if the firm is headquartered in a state that ranks
in the top (bottom) third of states according to the fraction of private-sector employees who belong to a labor union
in year t, and zero otherwise. The data come from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003) as updated on their website,
http://www.unionstats.com.

States with high (low) mass layoffs is an indicator set equal to one if the firm is headquartered in a state that ranks
in the top (bottom) third of states according to the fraction of private-sector employees (measured as of year t-1)
who lose their jobs in a mass layoff event in year t, and zero otherwise. The data come the Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ Mass Layoff Statistics (http://www.bls.gov/mls/#tables) and are available only for the period from 1996.

Non-dividend payers are firms with zero dividends on common stock in year t (Compustat item dvc).

Dividend payers are firms with non-zero dividends on common stock in year t (Compustat item dvc).

Profitable is an indicator set equal to 1 if ROA is strictly positive in year t, and zero otherwise.

Loss-making is an indicator set equal to 1 if ROA is weakly negative in year t, and zero otherwise.

Marginal tax rates (MTR) come from John Graham (http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~jgraham/taxform.html); see
Graham (1996a, 1996b). Following Graham, Lemmon, and Schallheim (1998), we use after-interest marginal tax
rates (variable mtrafter). Missing values are filled in as recommended in Graham and Mills (2008).

Investment grade is an indicator set equal to 1 if in year t, the firm has an investment-grade rating from S&P,
Moody’s, or Fitch, using data obtained from Compustat (variable splticrm) and Mergent FISD, and zero otherwise.
It is missing for firms without a credit rating.

Below-investment grade is an indicator set equal to 1 if investment grade equals 0, and vice versa.




                                                                                                                       44
Figure 1. Ideal Experiment and Identification Challenges.
Figure 1a illustrates the standard argument of static trade-off theory: firms choose the level of debt that maximizes
the difference between the tax benefit of debt and the net cost of debt. At the optimal debt level D*, the marginal tax
benefit equals the marginal net cost. The tax benefit of debt depends on the corporate tax rate (c), the personal tax
rate on income from debt (i), and the personal tax rate on income from equity (e). Figure 1b illustrates the ideal
experiment. Different tax rates (MB1, MB2, MB3,…, MBn) are randomly assigned to firms and the resulting debt
choices (D1, D2, D3,…, Dn) are recorded. The random assignment ensures that differences in debt levels cannot be
the result of unobserved heterogeneity across firms. It is as if there was a single firm whose marginal cost curve
(MC) is traced out by exogenous shifts in the marginal tax benefit. Figure 1c illustrates the identifying assumption
for observational data. When comparing two (groups of) firms i and j that differ in their effective tax rates,
identification requires that both (groups of) firms share the same marginal cost, MCi = MCj. Figure 1d illustrates the
identification challenge. Two firms i and j can have different levels of debt even if taxes provide no marginal benefit
(the null hypothesis), as long as they differ in their marginal costs (a violation of the identifying assumption).

            Figure 1a: Trade-off theory                                  Figure 1b: The ideal experiment




          Tax benefit = [(1–i) – (1–c)(1–e)]D
                Net cost = a + bD + cD2




       Figure 1c: Identifying assumption for                            Figure 1d: Identification challenge
                observational data




                                                                                                                   45
Figure 2. Geography of State Corporate Income Tax Changes, 1989-2012.
          Tax increases, 1989-1993                        Tax cuts, 1989-1993




          Tax increases, 1994-1998                        Tax cuts, 1994-1998




          Tax increases, 1999-2003                        Tax cuts, 1999-2003




          Tax increases, 2004-2008                        Tax cuts, 2004-2008




          Tax increases, 2009-2012                        Tax cuts, 2009-2012




                                                                                46
Figure 3. Annual Changes in Leverage Around State Tax Increases and State Tax Cuts.
The figures plot the average annual within-firm change in long-term leverage net of the contemporaneous leverage
change in the firm’s SIC4 industry (to remove the influence of time-varying changes in industry conditions or
nation-wide variation in business conditions that affect all industries simultaneously). Leverage changes are plotted
for each year in a five-year window centered on the year a state increases or cuts its corporate income tax (year 0)
for treated firms (striped bars) and controls (dotted bars). The difference between the two bars in a given year is the
difference-in-difference estimate. The significance of t-tests (using standard errors clustered at the state level) of the
null that the diff-in-diff is zero is indicated using asterisks. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                 Figure 3a. Tax Increases
                    0.015



                    0.010
                                     Tax increase
                                     No tax change
                    0.005



                    0.000


                                                                            diff-in-diff =
                   -0.005                                                    +109bp
                                                                                       ***




                   -0.010



                   -0.015
                                -2                   -1          0                1          2



                                                      Figure 3b. Tax Cuts
                    0.015



                    0.010
                                 Tax cut
                                 No tax change

                    0.005



                    0.000



                   -0.005                                                   diff-in-diff =
                                                                                +1bp


                   -0.010



                   -0.015
                                -2                   -1          0               1           2




                                                                                                                      47
Figure 4. Asymmetric Tax Sensitivity, Leverage Hysteresis, and the Cost of Debt.
Figure 4a illustrates the implications of asymmetry in tax sensitivity for the static trade-off theory of capital structure
shown in Figure 1a. The total net cost of debt is upward sloping and convex above the optimal level of debt D* but
flat below it, exhibiting a kink at the firm’s optimal level of debt. Figure 4b illustrates the implications of hysteresis
based on the treatment-reversal estimates in Table 3, column 8. Before a tax increase, the firm’s debt is at D, the
point that gives the largest difference between the dashed tax benefit 1 line and the dashed net cost curve (whose flat
segment intersects the y-axis at C). After the tax increase, the firm’s debt increases to D', the point at which the
difference between the solid tax benefit 2 line and the solid net cost curve is largest. A subsequent tax cut returns the
firm’s tax benefit to the dashed tax benefit 1 line, but the firm’s debt remains at D'. This implies that the flat segment
of the total net cost curve has shifted up from C to C'. (Note that D' gives the largest difference between tax benefit 1
and the solid net cost curve.) Leverage is downward sticky and tax shocks ratchet it up irreversibly. As a result,
leverage is path-dependent.

               Figure 4a: Asymmetry                                               Figure 4b: Hysteresis




                                                                                                                       48
Table 1, Panel A. Determinants of State Corporate Income Tax Changes, 1990-2011.
The table models the determinants of the probability that a state changes its top marginal corporate income tax rate and the magnitude of any such change. Columns
1 to 3 report summary statistics of the explanatory variables, showing fractions or means (with standard deviations shown in italics underneath the means). Column 4
compares conditions in states that increase taxes to those in states that cut taxes. Columns 5 and 6 model the probability that a state raises or cuts corporate income
taxes, using linear probability models. Columns 7 to 9 model the magnitude of the tax changes (measured in percentage points). For variable definitions and details
of their construction, see Appendix C. All specifications are estimated using least squares with state and year fixed effects (not shown for brevity). The sample
covers 50 states plus DC in 1990-2011, for a total of 1,122 observations. In columns 5-9, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are
shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
                                                           Summary statistics           Difference         Probability of …                    Magnitude of …
                                                                 tax                     (tax inc.          tax                         tax          tax
                                                    all obs.  increases tax cuts        – tax cut)       increase     tax cut         change      increase    tax cut
                                                      (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)        (9)
Political conditions
 =1 if Democratic governor in year t-1               0.472       0.622       0.392       0.230**          0.007       -0.037**        0.067**      0.034      -0.033**
                                                                                                          0.014        0.017          0.026        0.021       0.014
  =1 if 1 year to next gubernatorial election                                                             0.013        0.060**        0.024        0.028       0.005
                                                                                                          0.018        0.030          0.036        0.017       0.032
  =1 if 2 years to next gubernatorial election                                                            -0.003       0.026          0.029        0.027      -0.005
                                                                                                          0.016        0.025          0.040        0.021       0.035
  =1 if 3 years to next gubernatorial election                                                            0.053**      0.044          0.040        0.044**     0.006
                                                                                                          0.024        0.029          0.035        0.020       0.028
Economic conditions (in year t-1)
 state budget balance                                0.020       0.008       0.034       -0.027**                                     -0.408**
                                                     0.069       0.061       0.062                                                    0.190
  state budget deficit                              -0.014      -0.020                                    -0.665**                                -1.023**
                                                     0.026       0.033                                    0.339                                    0.461
  state budget surplus                               0.034                   0.043                                     0.296*                                  0.093
                                                     0.056                   0.051                                     0.161                                   0.119
  =1 if state bond rating downgraded                 0.044       0.135       0.000       0.135***         0.058       -0.059**        0.176        0.129      -0.042*
                                                                                                          0.044        0.026          0.114        0.112       0.022
  GSP growth rate                                    0.027       0.018       0.030       -0.012**         0.248        0.336          -0.052       0.333       0.317
                                                     0.028       0.023       0.027                        0.231        0.336          0.473        0.299       0.353
  state unemployment rate                            0.055       0.053       0.056       -0.002           -0.251       1.000          -1.082      -0.249       0.752
                                                     0.018       0.017       0.019                        0.601        1.106          1.080        0.849       0.568
  state union penetration                            0.085       0.092       0.083       0.009           -0.368       -0.453          -0.349      -0.715      -0.229
                                                     0.043       0.032       0.044                        0.473        0.703          0.879        0.741       0.489
Tax competition (in year t-1)
 state’s tax rate relative to highest tax rate      -0.019      -0.020      -0.005       -0.015***       -0.021***     0.036***      -0.059***    -0.023**     0.036***
 among its neighboring states                        0.037       0.028       0.020                        0.007        0.010          0.016        0.012       0.010

Diagnostics
R2                                                                                                       12.4%       21.7%           10.7%        11.0%       11.9%

                                                                                                                                                                       49
Table 1, Panel B: Coincident State-level Changes.
This table reports state-level changes in economic quantities that coincide with either increases or cuts in state
corporate income taxes and that have a plausible basis in theory to potentially affect corporate leverage decisions.
We focus on changes in state personal income tax rates, state capital gains tax rates, or state taxes on banks and
changes in state investment incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation, as well as
job creation grant programs). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C.

                                                                                           Tax
                                                                                        increases      Tax cuts

   Number of tax changes                                                                   43             78

   … of which coincide with      increase in state personal income tax rate                22             13
                                 cut in state personal income tax rate                      2             15

                                 increase in state capital gains tax rate                  21             12
                                 cut in state capital gains tax rate                        2             16

                                 increase in state tax on banks                            28              0
                                 cut in state tax on banks                                  0             56

                                 increase in state investment tax credit rate               1              6
                                 cut in state investment tax credit rate                    0              0

                                 increase in state R&D credit rate                          2              9
                                 cut in state R&D credit rate                               1              2

                                 increase in state job creation credit                      0              3
                                 cut in state job creation credit                           0              1

                                 increase in state job creation grants                      0              1
                                 cut in state job creation grants                           0              0




                                                                                                                  50
Table 2. Firm-level Summary Statistics.
The sample consists of 91,487 firm-years for all non-financial and non-utility U.S. companies that are traded on the NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq in fiscal years 1989
through 2011, as per the merged CRSP-Compustat Fundamentals Annual database. The table reports summary statistics for our dependent variables and the controls.
For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C. Return on assets, tangibility, firm size, and market/book are winsorized 0.5% in each tail.

                                                                                                                        One year before a         One year before a
                                                                  All firm-years (N = 91,487)                             tax increase                 tax cut
                                                                                  percentile              first           (N = 1,735)               (N = 6,627)
                                                 mean          s.d.       25th      50th      75th        diff.         mean        s.d.          mean         s.d.

Firm leverage
 long-term book leverage                          0.172       0.264      0.002      0.100     0.275      0.003          0.183        0.217         0.172       0.211
 long-term book lev. (incl. current portion)      0.198       0.295      0.006      0.133     0.310      0.006          0.208        0.228         0.194       0.222
 total book leverage                              0.226       0.311      0.019      0.174     0.348      0.009          0.236        0.237         0.221       0.231
 long-term market leverage                        0.176       0.222      0.001      0.079     0.281      0.008          0.199        0.230         0.173       0.219

Real long-term debt ($m)                          385.0     2,502.9         0.1       6.9     117.1        27.5         570.2      3,262.1         368.5     1,848.7

Firm characteristics
 ROA                                              0.034        0.273     0.009      0.104     0.166     -0.011          0.046       0.254          0.046       0.253
 firm size (total assets, $m)                   1,683.0      9,546.0      34.2      134.9     628.1      121.3        2,297.0    10,308.2        1,652.6     9,258.0
 Tangibility                                      0.264        0.224     0.087      0.196     0.379      0.001          0.260       0.205          0.260       0.219
 market/book                                      1.840        1.939     0.813      1.210     2.054     -0.076          1.796       1.977          1.856       1.982

Credit market conditions
 default spread (in %)                            0.956       0.465      0.680      0.870     1.080      0.013          1.235        0.576         0.855       0.269

State characteristics
 GSP growth rate                                  0.029       0.026      0.012      0.029     0.046     -0.001          0.013        0.019         0.035       0.025
 state unemployment rate                          0.058       0.017      0.046      0.054     0.066      0.001          0.054        0.018         0.057       0.016




                                                                                                                                                                   51
Table 3. Effect of Tax Changes on Leverage.
We estimate standard leverage regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their leverage in response to changes in state corporate income taxes in
their headquarter state. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C. Except in columns 4 and 5, we capture tax changes using indicator
variables for tax increases and tax cuts. In columns 4 and 5, we use changes in a state’s top marginal corporate income tax rate. Note that two corporate income tax
increases (CA 2002 and NJ 2002) and one tax cut (TX 2008) cannot be summarized in terms of changes in marginal tax rates; see Appendix A and B. In column 3,
large, medium, and small tax changes are those in the top, middle, and bottom tercile. Column 5 restricts sample to firms those with low inter-state sales, based on
whether sales in their three-digit NAICS industry are predominantly inter-state or intra-state. Column 6 restricts the tax-cut treatment to the first in a pre-announced
sequence of annual tax cuts. (For example, NY cut the top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 7.5% in three annual half-percentage-point increments starting in
1999.) Column 8 restricts the sample of treated firms to those that suffer first a tax increase and then a subsequent tax cut (“reversals”). Column 9 models log real
debt rather than a leverage ratio. The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm
fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The specifications shown in columns 7 and 8 additionally
include firm fixed effects in the first-difference equation and are estimated using Stata’s reg2hdfe command for linear regressions with two high-dimensional fixed
effects. The fixed effects are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the
coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                           Dep. var.: Change in long-term book leverage                                       Dep. var.:
                                                           Baseline                    Baseline                  Baseline
                                                             w/                          w/        Baseline,     w/o late-                                    Change in
                                                          backfilled     Large vs. changes in       firms w/        in-         Baseline     Reversals         log real
                                                          Compustat      small tax     marginal    low inter-   sequence        w/ firm       w/ firm         long-term
                                              Baseline     HQ data        changes       rates      state sales   tax cuts         FE            FE               debt
                                                (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)               (9)
Tax increase indicators (in %, exc. col. 8)
 =1 if tax rise at t = –1                      1.042***      0.746***                                              1.039***      1.161***      1.064***         0.057**
                                               0.196         0.204                                                  0.194        0.215         0.307            0.025
 =1 if large tax rise at t = –1                                           1.310***
                                                                          0.406
 =1 if medium tax rise at t = –1                                          0.907*
                                                                          0.522
 =1 if small tax rise at t = –1                                           0.705
                                                                          0.525
Tax cut indicators (in %, except col. 8)
 =1 if tax cut at t = –1                      -0.010        -0.045                                                 -0.153       -0.097        -0.071           -0.003
                                               0.136         0.167                                                  0.131        0.200         0.487            0.867
 =1 if large tax cut at t = –1                                            0.009
                                                                          0.239
 =1 if medium tax cut at t = –1                                           0.160
                                                                          0.347
 =1 if small tax cut at t = –1                                           -0.112
                                                                          0.246



                                                                                                                                                                    52
Table 3. Continued.
                                                                   Dep. var.: Change in long-term book leverage                              Dep. var.:
                                                     Baseline                  Baseline                  Baseline
                                                       w/                        w/                      w/o late-                           Change in
                                                    backfilled   Large vs. changes in Firms w/              in-      Baseline    Reversals    log real
                                                    Compustat    small tax     marginal    low inter-   sequence     w/ firm      w/ firm    long-term
                                        Baseline     HQ data      changes       rates      state sales   tax cuts      FE           FE          debt
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
Continued:

Continuous tax changes
 size of corporate tax rise at t = –1                                          0.387**       0.488**
                                                                               0.168         0.237
 size of corporate tax cut at t = –1                                           0.048         0.094
                                                                               0.128         0.246
Lagged change in …
 ROA                                    -0.005       -0.005      -0.005        -0.004        0.004       -0.005      -0.001       0.001       -0.015
                                         0.004        0.004       0.004        0.004         0.006        0.004       0.004       0.006        0.021
 firm size                               0.007***     0.007***    0.007***     0.007***      0.008***     0.007***    0.003       0.002       0.149***
                                         0.002        0.002       0.002        0.002         0.003        0.002       0.002       0.004        0.014
 tangibility                             0.037***     0.037***    0.037***     0.037***      0.027        0.037***    0.026**     0.025       0.389***
                                         0.011        0.011       0.009        0.011         0.028        0.011       0.011       0.018        0.071
 market/book                             0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000         0.000        0.000      -0.001      -0.001        0.012***
                                         0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000         0.001        0.000       0.000       0.001        0.003
 default spread                         -0.512***    -0.512***   -0.513***     -0.536***    -0.582       -0.514***   -0.507***   -0.503**     -0.057***
                                         0.123        0.124       0.168        0.127         0.355        0.123       0.123       0.216        0.012
 GSP growth rate                         0.025        0.025       0.025        0.025         0.036        0.024       0.020      -0.010       0.189
                                         0.019        0.019       0.023        0.019         0.046        0.019       0.020       0.042        0.190
 state unemployment rate                 0.171**      0.176**     0.173*       0.168*       -0.342        0.162*      0.087       0.039       1.308**
                                         0.084        0.086       0.096        0.084         0.234        0.085       0.104       0.157        0.603
Diagnostics
R2                                      11.2%       11.2%        11.2%        11.2%        12.1%        11.2%        21.4%       31.8%       11.4%
Wald test: all coeff. = 0               13.4***      9.6***      14.8***      11.6***       5.3***      13.4***       n.a.        n.a.       28.7***
No. of firms                             8,867       8,867        8,867        8,864        2,204        8,867        8,867       5,456       8,867
No. of observations                     73,832      73,832       73,832       73,228       19,143       73,832       73,832      36,687      73,832




                                                                                                                                                   53
Table 4. Testing for Reversals and Pre-trends.
To investigate possible reversals and pre-trends, we include four lags and up to one lead in the baseline regression
shown in Table 3, column 1. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C. The unit of
analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in
the levels equations and include industry-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The fixed effects are not
reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.

                                                               Dep. var.: Change in long-term
                                                                       book leverage
                                                                (1)          (2)          (3)

                     Tax increase       at t = +1 (in %)      -0.121
                                                               0.302
                                        at t = 0 (in %)       -0.234        -0.261       -0.369
                                                               0.214         0.232        0.241
                                        at t = –1 (in %)       1.172***     1.229***      0.962***
                                                               0.266         0.209        0.195
                                        at t = –2 (in %)      -0.328        -0.335       -0.392
                                                               0.282         0.285        0.263
                                        at t = –3 (in %)      -0.126        0.000         0.088
                                                               0.233         0.232        0.221
                                        at t = –4 (in %)       0.159        0.433
                                                               0.362         0.315
                     Tax cut            at t = +1 (in %)       0.137
                                                               0.171
                                        at t = 0 (in %)        0.142        -0.003        0.053
                                                               0.172         0.174        0.175
                                        at t = –1 (in %)      -0.170        -0.019       -0.094
                                                               0.188         0.186        0.197
                                        at t = –2 (in %)      -0.195        -0.028        0.003
                                                               0.210         0.170        0.165
                                        at t = –3 (in %)      -0.032        -0.008        0.024
                                                               0.146         0.162        0.187
                                        at t = –4 (in %)       0.184        0.116
                                                               0.125         0.149
                     Lagged change in …
                      ROA                                     -0.003        -0.002       -0.004
                                                               0.006         0.004        0.005
                       firm size                               0.008***     0.006***      0.007***
                                                               0.002         0.002        0.002
                       tangibility                             0.035***     0.036***      0.034***
                                                               0.013         0.013        0.011
                       market/book                             0.001*       0.001         0.000
                                                               0.0005        0.0005       0.0005
                       default spread                         -0.430***     -0.468***    -0.483***
                                                               0.122         0.107        0.104
                       GSP growth rate                         0.005        0.003         0.015
                                                               0.025         0.023        0.020
                       state unemployment rate                 0.142        0.110         0.133
                                                               0.118         0.104        0.107
                     Diagnostics
                     R2                                      14.2%         13.2%        12.0%
                     Wald test: all coeff. = 0                7.3***        8.1***       9.3***
                     No. of firms                             6,582         7,375        8,192
                     No. of observations                     54,318        61,374       69,203


                                                                                                                    54
Table 5. Robustness.
To investigate robustness, columns 1 and 2 split the sample in 2000; column 3 adds state fixed effects; column 4 models total leverage; column 5 models long-
term leverage including debt due within one year; column 6 models market leverage; and columns 7 and 8 model the probability that the firm issues or
repurchases long-term debt, respectively. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C. The unit of analysis is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-year fixed effects to remove
industry shocks. (The specification shown in column 3 additionally includes state fixed effects and is estimated using Stata’s reg2hdfe command for linear
regressions with two high-dimensional fixed effects.) The fixed effects are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

                                                                    Dep. var.: Change in book leverage                       Dep. var.:
                                                       long-term    long-term                   total       long-term        Change in    Dep. var.:    Dep. var.:
                                                         debt,        debt,     long-term      (short-         (incl.        long-term    Prob(issue    Prob(debt
                                                         1990-        2001-      debt (w/    and long-        current          market     long-term       repur-
                                                         2000         2011       state FE) term) debt        portion)         leverage      debt)        chase)
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)         (7)            (8)

 =1 if tax rise at t = –1 (in %, except cols. 7 & 8)     1.070***     1.025***      1.038***     0.830***     1.118***         0.660*       0.038***     -0.017*
                                                         0.322        0.236         0.225        0.225        0.191            0.342         0.010        0.010
 =1 if tax cut at t = –1 (in %, except cols. 7 & 8)     -0.103        0.158        -0.007       -0.032        -0.013           0.069        0.004         0.001
                                                         0.188        0.171         0.190        0.194        0.131            0.174         0.785        1.187
 Lagged change in …
  ROA                                                   -0.001       -0.009**      -0.004       -0.010***    -0.012***        -0.017***     -0.031***     0.046***
                                                         0.006        0.003         0.004        0.004        0.004            0.003         0.009        0.010
   firm size                                             0.006**      0.007***      0.007***     0.011***     0.012***         0.027***     0.112***     -0.069***
                                                         0.002        0.003         0.002        0.002        0.002            0.003         0.008        0.007
   tangibility                                           0.038***     0.034**       0.037***     0.063***     0.057***         0.060***     0.258***     -0.164***
                                                         0.013        0.016         0.011        0.013        0.013            0.010         0.033        0.040
   market/book                                           0.000       -0.001***      0.000       -0.001**     -0.001            0.001***     0.007***     -0.005***
                                                         0.001        0.0004        0.000        0.0004       0.000            0.0004        0.002        0.001
   default spread                                       -0.188       -0.579***     -0.512***    -0.671***    -0.551***        -1.345***     -0.029***     0.038***
                                                         0.502        0.129         0.123        0.148        0.126            0.168         0.007        0.007
   GSP growth rate                                       0.039        0.014         0.024        0.033*       0.036**          0.017        0.032        -0.049
                                                         0.027        0.027         0.019        0.017        0.016            0.023         0.089        0.088
   state unemployment rate                               0.170        0.186         0.138*       0.113        0.175**          0.166        -0.113       -0.022
                                                         0.111        0.128         0.084        0.090        0.085            0.107         0.334        0.606
 Diagnostics
 R2                                                    10.7%         12.0%        11.2%         11.3%        11.1%            20.3%        16.4%        14.0%
 Wald test: all coeff. = 0                              6.7***       13.2***       n.a.         52.0***      24.2***          49.1***      45.9***      38.6***
 No. of firms                                           7,237         5,085        8,867         8,840        8,851            8,862        8,867        8,867
 No. of observations                                   40,923        32,909       73,832        73,544       73,673           73,777       73,832       73,832


                                                                                                                                                                   55
Table 6. Potential Confound: Local Business Cycle Effects.
States may change corporate tax rates, and firms may change leverage, in response to unobserved changes in local
business conditions. To examine this potential confound, column 1 estimates a falsification test, asking if firms
respond to tax changes that occur in a neighboring state when not themselves experiencing a tax change in their own
home state. Columns 2 and 3 restrict the set of control firms to those located in a neighboring state, thus excluding
far-away states. Column 2 focuses on firms in a tax-increase state and their untreated neighbors, while column 3
focuses on firms in a tax-cut state and their untreated neighbors; firms in states that neither experience a tax change
nor border a state that does are excluded. Column 4 uses a restricted sample consisting of firms in contiguous
counties either side of a state border, such that in year t, one or more firms in one county experience a tax shock
while one or more firms in the contiguous county do not. The effect of common local economic shocks are then
removed by including county-pair/year fixed effects. Column 5 additionally requires that firms in contiguous county
pairs operate in the same SIC4 industry in year t. The unit of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications except
column 5 are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-year fixed effects (not shown for brevity).
Column 5 instead includes county-pair/industry/year fixed effects. For variable definitions and details of their
construction, see Appendix C. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in
italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                     Dep. var.: Change in long-term book leverage
                                                                                           Firms in contiguous
                                                            Firms located in                 border counties
                                                                                         county-
                                                      tax-increase      tax-cut        group/year        county-
                                                       states and     states and          FE &            group/
                                                          their          their          industry/       industry/
                                       Full sample     neighbors      neighbors          year FE         year FE
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)
 =1 if tax rise at t = –1 (in %)        0.931***         1.490***                          1.305**         1.280***
                                        0.201             0.321                             0.666          0.382
 =1 if tax cut at t = –1 (in %)         0.011                           -0.056             0.045          -0.109
                                        0.124                            0.185              0.582          0.597
 =1 if tax rise in a bordering state    -0.417***
     at t = –1 (in %)                   0.142
 =1 if tax cut in a bordering state     0.067
     at t = –1 (in %)                   0.081

 Lagged change in …
  ROA                                   -0.004           -0.019*        -0.005             0.003           0.008
                                        0.004             0.010          0.005              0.012          0.022
   firm size                            0.007***         0.010**         0.006             0.008          -0.004
                                        0.002             0.004          0.004              0.006          0.009
   tangibility                          0.037***         -0.001          0.054***          0.056          -0.071
                                        0.011             0.030          0.015              0.035          0.043
   market/book                          0.000            -0.002*        -0.001*            0.001           0.002
                                        0.000             0.001          0.0006             0.001          0.001
   default spread                       -0.524***        -0.755**       -0.780**           -1.419**       -0.447
                                        0.124             0.293          0.312              0.673          1.102
   GSP growth rate                      0.025            0.184**         0.021             0.127          -0.051
                                        0.019             0.079          0.038              0.182          0.085
   state unemployment rate              0.198**          0.408**         0.367             -0.007         -0.014***
                                        0.077             0.167          0.245              0.009          0.005
 Diagnostics
 R2                                    11.2%            31.9%          22.9%              44.8%           31.2%
 Wald test: all coeff. = 0             11.4***           8.2***         6.4***             n.a.            n.a.
 No. of firms                           8,867            4,750          6,440              2,278             532
 No. of observations                   73,832           10,180         25,071             12,822           1,520

                                                                                                                      56
Table 7. Potential Confounds: Union Power, Unemployment Risk, and Other Tax Changes.
This table investigates if our results are confounded by state-level variation in union power, unemployment risk, or non-corporate taxes. To address the first two
confounds, we partition the sample into firms headquartered in states with high or low union power (columns 1 and 2) and those in states suffering large or no
large employment shocks (columns 3 and 4). For the third confound, we omit as shocks any state corporate income tax change that coincides with a change in
state personal income taxes (column 5) or state capital gains taxes (column 6). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix C. The unit
of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-year fixed effects (not shown for brevity).
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. (Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for equal tax sensitivity is one-
sided.)

                                                                               Dep. var.: Change in long-term book leverage
                                                                                                                           Excluding coincident
                                                               States with …                   States with …                changes in state …
                                                         high union     low union         high mass      low mass         personal       capital
                                                           power          power            layoffs        layoffs        inc. taxes    gains taxes
                                                             (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)           (6)
               =1 if tax increase at t = –1               0.827***            1.467***      1.022***           1.042**      1.178***           1.139***
                                                           0.227              0.529         0.379              0.418        0.327              0.331
               =1 if tax cut at t = –1                    0.044               0.189         0.210              0.357        0.014              0.018
                                                           0.223              0.316         0.255              0.253        0.172              0.172
               Lagged change in …
                ROA                                       -0.016***           0.003        -0.003              0.000       -0.004             -0.004
                                                           0.004              0.009         0.004              0.007        0.004              0.004
                 firm size                                 0.006***           0.007         0.007***           0.010***     0.007***           0.007***
                                                           0.002              0.004         0.001              0.003        0.002              0.002
                 tangibility                               0.020              0.037*        0.053***           0.037        0.036***           0.036***
                                                           0.013              0.021         0.011              0.024        0.011              0.011
                 market/book                               0.000             -0.001         0.000             -0.001        0.000              0.000
                                                           0.001              0.001         0.000              0.001        0.000              0.000
                 default spread                           -0.353*            -0.087        -0.381**           -0.589***    -0.456***          -0.455***
                                                           0.196              0.476         0.161              0.184        0.116              0.116
                 GSP growth rate                           0.040              0.034        -0.057              0.014        0.022              0.021
                                                           0.030              0.048         0.041              0.029        0.019              0.019
                 state unemployment rate                   0.025              0.227        -0.153              0.185        0.157*             0.158*
                                                           0.119              0.188         0.194              0.143        0.086              0.086
               Diagnostics
               R2                                        18.8%               28.4%        16.9%               20.3%        11.5%              11.5%
               Wald test: all coeff. = 0                  8.2***              8.7***       7.3***              7.2***      10.1***            10.1***
               Equal tax sensitivity?                                 0.86                             0.01                            n.m.
               No. of firms                                5,424              2,859        5,215               3,852        8,841              8,840
               No. of observations                        37,507             19,039       28,560              20,488       71,578             71,570

                                                                                                                                                                 57
Table 8. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.
Higher taxes on equity income (e) dampen the impact of corporate tax changes on leverage. To test this, columns 1 and 2 split the sample according to a proxy for e:
non-dividend payers have lower e than dividend-payers because their investors derive their equity income solely in the form of (lower-taxed) capital gains. A corollary
of a causal interpretation of the observed tax sensitivity of debt is that it should vary with profits. Columns 3 and 4 partition sample firms according to whether they are
profitable or loss-making in year 0. Columns 5-7 use John Graham’s simulated marginal tax rates to partition sample firms into those with marginal tax rates that are
zero, positive, or in the top decile, respectively. The extent to which a firm can borrow more when faced with a tax rise depends on its debt capacity. Columns 8 and 9
partition firms into those rated investment-grade or below-investment-grade by a credit rating agency. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see
Appendix C. The unit of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-year fixed effects (not shown for brevity).
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. (Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for equal tax sensitivity is one-sided.)
                                                                               Dep. var.: Change in long-term book leverage
                                                                                                   firms w/    firms w/    top decile                              below
                                          non-                                                        zero     positive        of               invest-           invest-
                                        dividend      dividend                      loss-         marginal     marginal     marginal             ment              ment
                                         payers        payers        profitable    making          tax rates   tax rates    tax rates            grade             grade
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)               (5)        (6)          (7)                (8)               (9)
     =1 if tax rise at t = –1 (in %)     1.433***      0.044           1.093***         0.288        0.688            1.067***    2.517**        0.887**           0.477
                                         0.276          0.282          0.200            0.573        1.071            0.174       1.056          0.434             1.501
     =1 if tax cut at t = –1 (in %)     -0.028         0.102          -0.016           -0.124       -0.010            0.106      -0.226          0.101            -0.004
                                         0.180          0.188          0.165            0.440        0.413            0.131       0.512          0.304             0.715
     Lagged change in …
      ROA                               -0.007*        0.011          -0.008*           0.004        0.005           -0.006*     -0.073***      -0.018             0.019
                                         0.004          0.012          0.004            0.006        0.013            0.004       0.022          0.026             0.046
       firm size                         0.008***      -0.003          0.008***         0.009**      0.008*           0.007***    0.012*        -0.002             0.020**
                                         0.002          0.004          0.002            0.003        0.004            0.002       0.007          0.007             0.009
       tangibility                       0.036***      0.057**         0.025*           0.067***     0.044*           0.030***    0.094***       0.038*            0.063
                                         0.012          0.024          0.013            0.018        0.024            0.011       0.031          0.023             0.045
       market/book                       0.000         -0.004**       -0.001            0.000        0.001           -0.001**     0.002         -0.004**          -0.003
                                         0.000          0.001          0.001            0.000        0.001            0.0004      0.001          0.002             0.004
       default spread                   -0.494**       -0.658***      -0.625***        -0.312       -1.059           -0.496***   -1.654*        -0.080            -1.579**
                                         0.219          0.245          0.094            0.401        2.488            0.117       0.897          0.309             0.745
       GSP growth rate                   0.039         0.026           0.025            0.018       -0.045           -0.023       0.052         -0.005             0.025
                                         0.025          0.037          0.021            0.048        0.118            0.018       0.084          0.039             0.096
       state unemployment rate           0.286**       -0.070          0.221***        -0.042        0.198            0.037       0.112         -0.062             0.179
                                         0.111          0.169          0.081            0.207        0.406            0.100       0.495          0.206             0.469
     Diagnostics
     R2                                 14.6%         32.3%           14.4%            26.8%        30.5%            12.2%       51.0%         11.3%              42.7%
     Wald test: all coeff. = 0 (F)      14.1***         5.6***        15.2***           3.2***       3.0***          14.3***      6.4***        8.8***             1.7*
                                                     ***
     Equal tax sensitivity? (F)                10.45                            1.60                          0.08                 n.a.                    0.21
     No. of firms                        7,841         2,392           7,230        4,588            3,391        8,295           2,482            672             1,792
     No. of observations                52,490        21,021          58,017       15,815            6,570       64,995           6,968          6,634            10,728

                                                                                                                                                                             58
      INTERNET APPENDIX



(NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION)




                                 59
                Background on Tax Changes Affecting More Than 100 firms
                     (in reverse order by the number of treated firms)


1. Tax cuts

California 1997: tax cut from 9.3% to 8.84% (939 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The theme of the 1997 budget was schools, law enforcement, and tax relief
for businesses. The budget had all-party support from Republican Governor Wilson and the
Democratic held legislature. Claiming it endangered school funding, Democrats blocked
Governor Wilson’s original, more ambitious $10 billion tax-reduction plan which included 5%
cuts in personal, income and banking tax rates. The final budget did not change personal tax rates
but included a $230 million cut in taxes on corporations and banks. The tax cut was seen as
overdue; commentators pointed out that it moved California’s corporate taxes from the 9th
highest in the nation to the 15th highest.

Other notable changes: The budget’s main focus was on $1,508 million in funding to school
districts, primarily to reduce class sizes. It also provided an 8.4% increase in funding for prisons,
a $100 million grant to local police forces, and a $50 million grant for local juvenile-justice
programs; and a $287 million increase in the rainy-day fund. Separately, the state raised the
R&D tax credit from 8% to 11%.


New York 1999: tax cut from 9% to 8.5% (383 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: R

Political background: In 1999, the New York legislature approved a $72 billion election-year
budget that increased spending by 8.5%. Unusually, the budget process was largely out of
Republican Governor Pataki’s hands as the State Assembly held public, bi-partisan committee
meetings to negotiate the budget. While the Democrats won generous spending increases, the
Republicans won $740 million in tax cuts (mostly in the form of the acceleration of a previously
scheduled property tax cut), to be rolled out over three years. Governor Pataki had not sought a
corporate tax cut. The budget was hailed by politicians as good for “families and kids”.
Commentators called the budget fiscally irresponsible in the long-run. The state had experienced
a fiscal surplus thanks to a booming Wall Street economy. It was felt that permanent tax cuts
could lead to a budget crisis once the Wall Street boom ended.

Other notable changes: The budget included an additional $950 million in aid to schools, $500
million for school construction, and $200 million for child care.


New York 2000: tax cut from 8.5% to 8% (330 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: R
                                                                                                   60
Political background: See New York 1999. The 2000 tax cut was part of the deal reached in 1999
whereby the corporate income tax rate would fall from 9% to 7.5% over three years.

Other notable changes: The $77 billion budget increased spending on education (now $13
billion) and doubled funding for a program to help the low-income elderly to buy prescription
drugs. It increased the state’s reserve fund to more than $3 billion and (for the first time in a
number of years) did not cut Medicaid funding. New York also introduced borrowing limits, to
be phased in gradually. A $3.8 billion bond issue to finance infrastructure was rejected in a
referendum.


Texas 2008: tax cut (replacement of income tax with gross receipts tax, 300 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: Texas was forced to reform its tax system after the Texas Supreme Court
declared the state’s system for funding schools unconstitutional (Neeley v. West Orange-Cove
I.S.D., Nov. 22, 2005). As part of the reform, Texas broadened the coverage of its corporation
tax and expanded the taxable margin by taxing revenue rather than income. While overall a tax
increase – corporate tax receipts increased from around $2.5 billion per year to around $4 billion
– Texas’s new “business franchise tax” effectively abolished the tax advantage of debt and so is
coded as a tax cut for our purposes.

Other notable changes: Texas has a biennial budget cycle with the new budget coming into force
on September 1st of every odd numbered year. Hence, there was no major budget change in
2008.


New York 2001: tax cut from 8% to 7.5% (294 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: R

Political background: See New York 1999. The 2001 tax cut was part of the deal reached in 1999
whereby the corporate income tax rate would fall from 9% to 7.5% over three years.

Other notable changes: The budget agreement between Republican Governor Pataki, the
Republican Senate, and the Democratic Assembly provided for the largest increase in gambling
since New York legalized gambling in 1966. Gambling was seen as a much-needed source of
revenue (generating en estimated $1 billion per year) in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on
September 11th. Spending on state services such as legal advice for the poor was cut by $200
million. Spending on education (especially for teachers in urban districts) was increased by $200
million.


New York 2007: tax cut from 7.5% to 7.1% (252 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: R
                                                                                                61
Political background: Democratic Governor Spitzer, who in his election campaign had pledged
not to raise taxes, instead attempted to close tax loopholes for businesses in his first budget. In
the end, the $120 billion budget was one of the most generous in decades, owing to large
projected budget surpluses from the Wall Street boom. In return for closing four loopholes, the
corporate tax rate was cut to 7.1%.

Other notable changes: The budget extended health insurance coverage to 400,000 previously
uninsured children and included a $1 billion cut in Medicaid, a $1.3 billion rebate on property
taxes, a $600 million fund for stem-cell research, a doubling of the number of charter schools,
and a $1.8 billion increase in spending on education.


New Jersey 1994: tax cut (repeal of 0.375% tax surcharge, 220 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The 1989 tax surcharge was originally scheduled to end in mid-1994 but
was repealed 6 months early as one of newly elected Republican Governor Whitman’s first acts
in office.

Other notable changes: The tax cut was funded by changing the actuarial assumptions
underpinning the state’s pension fund and thereby reducing the state’s contribution to the fund by
$1 billion a year. Separately, the state introduced a 2% investment tax credit to encourage
investment in new fixed capital, an employment credit of $1,000 per new employee to encourage
job creation, and a 10% R&D tax credit to encourage innovation.


Pennsylvania 1995: tax cut from 11.99% to 9.99% (208 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: In his first budget, Republican Governor Ridge, fulfilled his campaign
pledge to cut business taxes in a bid to improve the state’s business unfriendly image.

Other notable changes: The budget increased funding to education by $134 million, set aside an
unprecedented $109 million for a rainy day fund, eliminated 15 state agencies, and abolished the
unpopular “widow’s tax”.


Pennsylvania 1994: tax cut from 12.25% to 11.99% (200 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: Ever since the 1991 tax increase, Pennsylvania had been seen as a bad state
to do business in. According to some estimates, the overall tax burden on business was the
highest in the nation. The 1994 budget (Democratic Governor Casey’s last due to term limits) cut
corporate income taxes from 12.25% to 9.99% over a three-year period. The tax cut was
                                                                                              62
prompted by (and financed out of) a windfall (an unrelated favorable Supreme Court ruling) and
a reduction in the Pennsylvania Industrial Development Authority’s borrowing cost.

Other notable changes: The budget increased funding to poor school districts by $123 million,
funding for children with disabilities by $33.9 million, Medicaid funding by $211 million, and
the state’s college scholarship grant program by 10%. New Jersey also reformed its welfare
programs.


Massachusetts 2010: tax cut from 9.5% to 8.75% (160 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: As part of a corporate-tax reform that restricted out-of-state firms’ ability
to escape taxation in Massachusetts by requiring combined reporting, the “Act Relative to Tax
Fairness and Business Competitiveness” cut Massachusetts’ corporate tax rate from 9.5% to
8.75%. The extra revenue from closing the loophole was forecast to far outweigh the lost
revenue from the rate reduction.

Other notable changes: The $27.6 billion budget was balanced with the help of $809 million in
federal stimulus aid and by drawing $100 million from the state’s reserve fund. It cut aid to cities
by $900 million, laid off 1,500 state employees, and reduced spending on education by 4% and
on higher education by 11.6%.


Minnesota 1991: tax cut (reduction in the legislated tax increase of 40 basis points, 146
treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: Newly elected Republican Governor Carlson agreed to an increase in
personal income taxes to close a projected budget deficit of $1.1 billion. Negotiations were
difficult since the Democrats dominated both the Assembly and the Senate, both of which faced
elections the following year. Corporate tax rates were originally scheduled to increase by 70
basis points in 1991, but this was cut to 30 basis points. To partly make up for the tax cut, the
budget introduced a fixed fee for the privilege of doing business in the state.

Other notable changes: The budget included $200 million in spending cuts affecting financial
assistance to cities, transportation infrastructure, and higher education, and a $600 million in tax
increases on sales, personal income, and cigarettes. The property tax, a major political
battleground, was held constant.


Ohio 1999: tax cut from 8.9% to 8.5% (146 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The 1999 tax cut was part of Republican Governor Voinovich’s biennial
                                                                                                  63
$36 billion budget covering the period from mid-1997 to mid-1999. The 1997 budget was largely
uncontroversial given higher than expected revenues and budget surpluses. The 1999 budget,
which coincided with the scheduled 1999 corporate tax cut, focused on education. The trigger
was the Ohio Supreme Court’s order to reform the state’s funding of public education.

Other notable changes: The 1999 budget also included a gradual phase-out of Ohio’s tax on
inventories held by businesses, to begin in 2002. The $17 billion education budget increased
spending on basic and higher education by around 8%. The $23 billion general budget (two
thirds of which is reserved for welfare and health) increased spending by around 6%.


Colorado 1993: tax cut from 5.1% to 5.0% (138 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The corporate tax cut was scheduled by the Tax Reform Act of 1987.

Other notable changes: The constitutional amendment of 1992 severely constrained state
finances by requiring voter approval of tax increases and limiting increases in state spending. To
maintain the same level of services in Medicaid, schools, and higher education, the state needed
an additional $500 million but the amendment allowed an increase in revenue of only
$375million.


Connecticut 1997: tax cut from 10.75% to 10.5% (137 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The 1997 tax cut was part of a 5-year step by step reduction of the
corporate income tax from 11.5% to 7.5% enacted in 1995. It was a main plank of Republican
Governor Rowland’s ambition to shrink the state’s government through lower taxes and lower
government spending (helped by booming revenue from capital gains taxes in the wake of
booming financial markets and six years of budget surpluses).

Other notable changes: The 1997 budget included nearly $400 million in tax cuts (on gasoline
and personal income) and extensive property tax credits. (Perhaps not coincidentally, Governor
Rowland announced he was to stand for re-election.) To cut government spending by $250
million, the state offered early retirement and contracted out all IT. The state ended the fiscal
year with the largest surplus in a decade, totaling $260 million. The surplus was used to pay
down debt, with the remainder transferred to the reserve fund. At the same as passing the budget,
the legislature increased consumer protections from health maintenance organizations (HMOs).


Connecticut 1996: tax cut from 11.25% to 10.75% (134 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: R

Political background: The 1996 tax cut was part of a 5-year step by step reduction of the
                                                                                                64
corporate income tax from 11.5% to 7.5% enacted in 1995. It was a main plank of Republican
Governor Rowland’s ambition to shrink the state’s government through lower taxes and lower
government spending (helped by the fact that lawmakers faced elections later in the year).

Other notable changes: The 1995 biennial budget required adjustments in 1996 and after the sale
of the state’s lottery system was rejected by the legislature. In the end, the budget was easily
balanced owing to a $250 million surplus (mostly from higher capital gains tax revenue). The
state used $90 million to pay down debt and transferred $160 million to the reserve fund (only
the second time ever it had made a contribution to the fund). Cuts to (and reform of) the state’s
welfare programs continued.


Colorado 1999: tax cut from 5% to 4.75% (133 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: A Republican controlled Assembly and Senate helped newly elected
Republican Governor Owens to fulfill his campaign promises by enacting a series of tax cuts
previously opposed by Democratic Governor Romer (in apparent violation of a 1992 amendment
to the state constitution requiring revenue growth exceeding the combined annual increases in
population and inflation to be returned to taxpayers).

Other notable changes: Both personal and corporate income taxes were cut from 5% to 4.75%.
Several items exempted from taxation (long-term health care, coins, food sold by vending
machines, etc). Taxes on telephone services were cut.


Massachusetts 2011: tax cut from 8.75% to 8.25% (132 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: As part of a corporate-tax reform that restricted out-of-state firms’ ability
to escape taxation in Massachusetts by requiring combined reporting, the “Act Relative to Tax
Fairness and Business Competitiveness” cut Massachusetts’ corporate tax rate from 8.75% to
8.25%.

Other notable changes: The budget had to close a $1.9 billion deficit (as Massachusetts lost $1.5
billion in federal funding). This was achieved through across-the-board spending cuts.
Massachusetts legalized gambling in an effort to generate extra revenue of around $400 million.


Connecticut 1995: tax cut from 11.5% to 11.25% (124 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: R

Political background: Newly elected Governor Rowland – the first Republican to govern
Connecticut in 20 years – campaigned on tax cuts, spending cuts, and being tough on crime. The
corporate tax cut from was the first in a 5-year step by step reduction from 11.5% to 7.5%.
                                                                                             65
Other notable changes: The 1995 budget cut taxes (including corporate taxes) by $200 million
and spending by $80 million to the lowest level since 1965. 2,200 state employees were to be
laid off, welfare programs were to be cut by a quarter, and the number of state agencies was to be
halved.


Colorado 1992: tax cut from 5.2% to 5.1% (124 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The corporate tax cut was scheduled by the Tax Reform Act of 1987.

Other notable changes: Colorado adopted a Taxpayer Bill of Rights (TABOR) amending the
state’s constitution to give voters a veto over increases in state and local taxes and over spending
increases. The TABOR also enshrines a flat income tax rate into the state’s constitution.


Connecticut 1998: tax cut from 10.5% to 9.5% (122 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The 1998 tax cut was part of a 5-year step by step reduction of the
corporate income tax from 11.5% to 7.5% enacted in 1995. It was a main plank of Republican
Governor Rowland’s ambition to shrink the state’s government through lower taxes and lower
government spending. Re-election concerns (and a budget surplus) united the Republican
Governor and Democratic lawmakers not to abandon the tax cuts.

Other notable changes: The highlight of the legislative session was campaign finance reform. A
budget surplus projected at $460 million allowed the state to pay tax rebates to personal income
taxpayers for the first time in its history. Gasoline tax was cut, aid to schools was increased,
residents were given the right to choose their electricity provider, and tuition at state colleges
was frozen. The budget also included an indirect cut in property taxes. Separately, the state
introduced a 3% investment tax credit to encourage investment in new fixed capital.


Colorado 1988: tax cut from 6% to 5.5% (121 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The tax cut was the first in a series of tax cuts scheduled over seven years
by the Tax Equity Act of 1987. A state commission examined Colorado’s state tax system after
the federal tax reform of 1986 and came to the conclusion that a simplification of the state’s
overall tax system was needed. The Tax Equity Act provided for a single flat tax rate on personal
and corporate income. The corporate tax rate change was phased in gradually in order to
minimize its consequences for the state’s revenue.

Other notable changes: [no info in Factiva]
                                                                                                  66
Colorado 1989: tax cut from 5.5% to 5.4% (121 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: The corporate tax cut was scheduled by the Tax Reform Act of 1987.

Other notable changes: [no info on budget decisions]


Colorado 2000: tax cut from 4.75% to 4.63% (119 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: Republican Governor Owens, supported by the Republican-held Assembly
and Senate, continued the series of tax cuts he initiated the year before, his first year in office.

Other notable changes: The main theme of the legislative session was education reform, after
Colorado voters passed Amendment 23, instructing the state to spend $4.6 billion on education
over the next 10 years. The sales tax was cut by 10 basis points and commercial vehicle
registration fees by 25% (reducing revenue by $34 million). A committee was set up to make
recommendations for reforming Colorado’s tax system. New tax incentives were created to
control pollution. Employers’ contributions to unemployment insurance were cut by 20%.
Private health insurance became tax deductible.


Connecticut 1993: tax cut (repeal of 10% tax surcharge, 118 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: Independent, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The tax cut, which took place against a challenging economic and fiscal
backdrop, was part of a two-year phase out of the surcharge introduced in 1991 when
Connecticut’s tax system underwent a complete overhaul.

Other notable changes: The budget made previous temporary welfare cuts permanent and cut
$200 million over two years from the Medicaid budget by tightening eligibility. Taxes on
cigarettes were increased together with a new tax on tires and an increase in the gasoline tax. The
number of state government agencies was reduced. To boost economic development, the budget
allocated $10 million of spending to the aerospace industry, $45 million of loan guarantees for
bank lending to small and medium enterprises, $300 million for job training, and $60 million to
regional economic development. Separately, the state introduced an R&D tax credit of between
1% and 6% and a job creation tax credit.


Colorado 1991: tax cut from 5.3% to 5.2% (116 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R
                                                                                                  67
Political background: The corporate tax cut was scheduled by the Tax Reform Act of 1987.

Other notable changes: Against the background of an improving local economy and a national
recession, the budget included funding for major infrastructure projects, including a $4 billion
new airport in Denver.


Connecticut 1992: tax cut (reduction in tax surcharge from 20% to 10%, 112 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: Independent, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The corporate tax cut was part of a root-and-branch overhaul of
Connecticut’s tax system in 1991. Newly elected Governor Weicker had left the Republican
party to run as an independent on a tax reform platform, including the introduction of a personal
income tax with the aim to create a stable source of revenue to pay for health care, education,
and prisons. Negotiations were difficult and the state government was at one point shut down. In
the end, personal income tax was introduced at a rate of 4.5% and sales taxes were cut from 8%
to 6%. The corporate tax rate cut was implemented as a two-year phase out of the 20%
surcharge.

Other notable changes: The $8.2 billion budget closed a projected $3 billion two-year deficit
through higher taxes and spending cuts. Spending cuts of $1.1 billion applied to all government
agencies except those responsible for prisons and children/education. For example, welfare
assistance was cut by $110 million, nursing-home services by $100 million, and aid to towns by
$180 million. To boost the economy, the state’s Works Jobs Funds received loan guarantees of
$50 million.


Connecticut 1999: tax cut from 9.5% to 8.5% (110 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: Republican Governor Rowland, who had overseen significant tax and
spending cuts in his first term in office, was re-elected with an overwhelming majority. It was the
first time since 1944 that a Republican governor was re-elected in traditionally Democratic
Connecticut. The 1999 tax cut was part of a 5-year step by step reduction of the corporate
income tax from 11.5% to 7.5% enacted in 1995.

Other notable changes: The biennial budget increased spending by 4.8% in the first year and by
4.7% in the second year, the largest increases ever under Governor Rowland. The budget cut
taxes by $270 million. A budget surplus of $550 million financed a $100 sales tax rebate for all
residents and a $90 million increase in government employees’ salaries. Separately, the state
increased the investment tax credit rate from 3% to 4% of the cost of new fixed capital.


Colorado 1990: tax cut from 5.4% to 5.3% (108 treated firms)

                                                                                                   68
Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: Thanks to buoyant tourism, Colorado enjoyed a more upbeat economic
outlook than the rest of the United States, which was heading into a recession. The state last
experienced a recession in the late 1980s. The corporate tax cut was scheduled by the Tax
Reform Act of 1987.

Other notable changes: [no info on budget decisions]


Connecticut 2000: tax cut from 8.5% to 7.5% (102 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The 2000 tax cut was the last leg of a 5-year step by step reduction of the
corporate income tax from 11.5% to 7.5% enacted in 1995. Facing elections and with the budget
yet again in surplus, there was no pressure to abandon the tax-cutting program.

Other notable changes: The $12.3 billion budget reduced taxes on gasoline by 7 cents a gallon,
eliminated sales tax on some items of clothing, and included tax breaks for hospitals worth $75
million. To shrink the size of the state government, spending was cut by $50 million (with $10
million coming from higher education) and hiring frozen at all state agencies. Separately, the
state increased the investment tax credit rate from 4% to 5% of the cost of new fixed capital.


Ohio 2005: tax cut (replacing corporate income tax with gross receipts tax over a period of
5 years, 102 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: R

Political background: In the first major overhaul of the state’s tax code in 70 years, Republican
Governor Taft and the Republican House and Senate agreed to replace the corporate income tax
with a gross receipts tax. The justification for the tax reform was to create a more equitable tax
base, eliminating loopholes related to the calculation of taxable income for businesses. The
reform was criticized for taxing companies regardless of whether they were profitable.

Other notable changes: The budget also phased out the tax on tangible property on machinery,
equipment, and inventory (which provided annual revenue of $1.6 billion to local schools and
government) and reduced personal income taxes by 21% over five years. It also repealed a half-
cent state sales tax. On the spending side, the budget reduced financial aid to public schools and
cut the costs of Medicaid by reducing spending on nursing homes.




                                                                                                 69
2. Tax increases

New Jersey 1989: tax increase (introduction of 0.375% tax surcharge, 232 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: R, Upper House: D

Political background: The main political battleground in New Jersey at the time of the 1989
budget was auto insurance reform: New Jersey’s insurance rates were the highest in the nation.
In response to a $400 million budget deficit resulting from lower than forecast revenues from
sales and corporate taxes, outgoing Republican Governor Kean (who was term-limited) signed
an austerity budget which included a surcharge on the corporate income tax.

Other notable changes: A $350 million bond issue was planned to finance open-space
preservation and a $150 million bond issue was planned to finance the clean-up of New Jersey’s
coast line. Budget spending increased by only 0.8%.


New Jersey 2002: tax increase (introduction of Alternative Minimum Assessment tax,
suspension of NOL deduction, 173 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: no overall control

Political background: Democratic Governor McGreevey carried out New Jersey’s largest
increase in business taxes since 1945 in the face of a budget deficit forecast at $3 billion in 2002.
The Business Tax Reform Act was estimated to generate $800 million in additional revenue. It
centered around the introduction of an alternative minimum tax and was presented as a move to
close tax loopholes. The public backed the Governor’s move to close the budget deficit by taxing
businesses rather than workers or consumers.

Other notable changes: The budget increased the tax on cigarettes, allowed the state to borrow
from the unemployment fund, and approved a $1.1 billion bond issue backed by the proceeds
from settlements with the tobacco industry. Prior to the new Governor and Legislature taking
office, the outgoing Assembly approved significant new spending ($680 million over 30 years on
building landfills and trash incinerators, $120 million on pensions for veterans and disabled, $40
million on school aid) but also extended the energy tax to bring in an additional $800 million
over four years.


Pennsylvania 1991: tax increase from 8.5% to 12.25% (171 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: R

Political background: The 1991 budget was negotiated in reaction to a severe budget crisis
against the background of a nationwide economic downturn. The overall tax increase of $3.5
billion was the largest in Pennsylvania’s history and involved increases in both personal income
taxes (from 2.1% to 3.1%) and corporate income taxes (from 8.5% to 12.25%). The fact that the
latter increased by substantially more was popular with the public; it explicitly shifted the burden
to pay for services (and especially education) away from workers or consumers and towards
                                                                                                  70
businesses.

Other notable changes: The budget expanded the sales tax to previously untaxed services such as
personnel services, credit reporting, long-distance telephone calls, and computer and data
processing services. It also allocated $280 million over four years to the Pennsylvania Industrial
Development Authority and $30 million to Industrial Resource Centers which support small and
medium sized manufacturers.


Illinois 1989: tax increase from 4% to 4.8% (163 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: R, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: The corporate tax increase was part of a surprising deal between the
Democratic House and Republican Governor Thomson. The centerpiece of the budget deal was a
20% increase in personal and corporate income taxes. For the past three years, the governor had
tried to increase income tax rates to fund increases in education and other state services but ran
into opposition from the Democratic House Speaker. As a result, “lawmakers were frustrated
with three years of belt-tightening budgets” (Chicago Tribune, 2 July 1989). The breakthrough
came when some of the extra revenue from higher personal and corporate taxes was used to
finance tax relief for homeowners.

Other notable changes: The budget also included a $96 million increase in taxes on cigarettes
and a $300 million increase in gasoline taxes. Much of the overall $1.2 billion in tax increases
was used to increase spending on education.


New Jersey 2006 tax increase (introduction of 4% tax surcharge on tax liability, 153
treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: Democratic Governor Corzine came into office pledging to fix the state’s
fiscal situation resulting from a structural deficit of $4.5 billion despite the booming economy.
The Governor’s budget proposal included across-the-board-tax increases as well as $2 billion of
spending cuts, but met with fierce resistance from lawmakers (despite Democratic control of
both the Senate and Assembly) fearful of their re-election prospects in next year’s election. The
standoff led to a one-week government shutdown, New Jersey’s first ever. The main
battleground was the proposed one percentage point increase in the sales tax, the centerpiece of
the budget. A compromise was reached when half of the sales tax increase was earmarked for a
reduction in property taxes, which are among the highest in the nation.

Other notable changes: The budget included higher taxes on cigarettes and a surtax on the
purchase of expensive cars. Much of the increase in tax revenue was applied to plugging
structural budget deficits. On the spending side, funding for higher education was cut by $200
million.


                                                                                                   71
California 2002: tax increase (suspension of net operating loss deduction, 140 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: California’s 2002 budget crisis was to a large extent caused by the bursting
of the tech bubble, which, through taxes on stock options, had for years underpinned strong
revenue growth. Tackling the budget crisis proved politically contentious. A compromise was
eventually reached after proposed tax increases on cigarettes and motoring were abandoned.
Instead of anything that could be called a tax increase, the legislature agreed to what politicians
called “revenue enhancements”, including a suspension of companies’ ability to carry forward
net operating losses for a planned two years (though some lawmakers expressed their skepticism
that the suspension would eventually be lifted as promised). The compromise ended a 60 day
standoff and led to a budget with $9 billion in spending cuts and $2.4 billion in revenue increases
(half of which coming from the NOL suspension). To pass the budget, Republicans voted with
Democrats in the State Assembly. The $99 billion budget was the latest ever in recorded
California history. It coincided with Democratic governor Gray Davis’ campaign for re-election.

Other notable changes: Other “revenue enhancements” besides the NOL suspension included a
suspension of a tax credit targeted at teachers and an increase in the withholding tax on stock
options and bonus payments from 6% to 9.3%. The spending cuts were widespread, affecting all
government operations and most spending programs, with particularly deep cuts in Medicaid.


Illinois 2011: tax increase from 4.8% to 7% (111 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: Illinois’ fiscal position had been deteriorating for many years. The state
had expanded spending during the 1990s and mid-2000s thanks to growing revenue, but did not
raise taxes or accumulate any cash reserves. It had also accumulated large amounts of unfunded
liabilities. Illinois’ budget deficit in 2011 was projected at $13 billion (half the general-fund
budget) and the state owed $3.9 billion in unpaid bills. It had long be clear that tax rates would
have to increase to address the structural imbalance in the state’s finances, but Democratic
Governor Blagojevich had resisted tax increases. It was his successor, Democratic Governor
Quinn, who eventually increased personal and corporate income taxes in the light of severely
shrinking revenue estimates, negative trickle down effects of the state not paying its bills, and the
potential for further deterioration in the state’s bond rating.

Other notable changes: The budget included cuts in funding for public schools totaling $269
million.


Connecticut 1990: tax increase from 11.5% to 13.8% (due to introduction of 20% tax
surcharge, 106 treated firms)

Party control: Governor: D, Lower House: D, Upper House: D

Political background: Connecticut’s approach to taxing its residents had for a long time been to
                                                                                                72
define a narrow tax base and then to tax it at a high rate. For example, personal income was
untaxed but corporations were taxed at the nationally high rate of 11.5%. Connecticut’s main
source of revenue was the sales tax, whose receipts were highly cyclical. Politicians had been
debating tax reform for a number of years but yet again failed to tackle the structural problems in
the 1990 budget. Instead, they temporarily increased corporate taxes by way of a tax surcharge
and deferred the tough choices to after the gubernatorial election due later in 1990.

Other notable changes: The budget was characterized by many small fixes to the underlying
budget problem including one-time revenue infusions, transfers among budget lines, and
increased borrowing. For example, contributions to the teachers’ retirement fund were reduced
by $76 million, a $140 million was taken from the Property Tax Relief Fund, funding for state
parks was reduced, and an across-the-board 2% cut in spending was imposed all government
agencies.




                                                                                                73
