                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DEFENSIVE INVESTMENTS AND THE DEMAND FOR AIR QUALITY:
     EVIDENCE FROM THE NOX BUDGET PROGRAM AND OZONE REDUCTIONS

                                        Olivier Deschenes
                                        Michael Greenstone
                                         Joseph S. Shapiro

                                        Working Paper 18267
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18267


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




Thanks to Spencer Banzhaf, Maureen Cropper, Jim Davis, Amy Finkelstein, Meredith Fowlie, Denise
Mauzerall, Chris Timmins, Mike Wechsler, and numerous seminar participants for insightful comments.
Nick Muller generously helped with CRDM, Dan Feenberg, Mohan Ramanujan, and Jean Roth gave
considerable help with MarketScan data, and Gabe Chan, Peter Evangelakis, Liz Greenwood, and
Paul Youchak provided outstanding research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge funding from
NIH Grant 1R21ES019375-01. Additionally, this research was supported in part under a research
contract from the California Energy Commission to the Energy Institute at Haas. Shapiro thanks the
EPA for a Graduate STAR Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18267.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Defensive Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program
and Ozone Reductions
Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 18267
August 2012
JEL No. D1,H4,I1,Q4,Q5

                                               ABSTRACT

Willingness to pay for air quality is a function of health and the costly defensive investments that contribute
to health, but there is little research assessing the empirical importance of defensive investments. The
setting for this paper is a large US emissions cap and trade market – the NOx Budget Trading Program
(NBP) – that has greatly reduced NOx emissions since its initiation in 2003. Using rich quasi-experimental
variation, we find that the reductions in NOx emissions decreased the number of summer days with
high ozone levels by about 25%. The NBP also led to reductions in expenditures on prescription pharmaceutical
expenditures of about 1.9%. Additionally, the summer mortality rate declined by approximately 0.5%,
indicating that there were about 2,200 fewer premature deaths per summer, mainly among individuals
75 and older. The monetized value of the reductions in pharmaceutical purchases and mortality rates
are each roughly $900 million annually, suggesting that defensive investments are a significant portion
of willingness to pay for air quality. Finally, we cautiously conclude that the reductions in ozone are
the primary channel for these reductions in defensive investments and mortality rates, which indicates
that willingness to pay for ozone reductions is larger than previously understood.


Olivier Deschenes                                      Joseph S. Shapiro
Department of Economics                                MIT Department of Economics
2127 North Hall                                        50 Memorial Drive, E52-391
University of California, Santa Barbara                Cambridge, MA 02142
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                                shapiroj@mit.edu
and NBER
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu

Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu
                                                I. Introduction

        Theoretical models make clear that willingness to pay for wellbeing in a variety of contexts is a
function of factors that enter the utility function directly (e.g., the probability of mortality, school quality,
local crime rates, etc.) and the costly investments that help to determine these factors. For example in the
canonical models of health production, individuals trade off the damages from exposure to harms with
investments or costly actions to protect themselves from these harms (Grossman 1972; Becker 1965). To
be concrete, homeowners install burglar alarms, companies hire private security guards, infants are
vaccinated, builders install thick windows in noisy areas, and people take medications to protect
themselves from respiratory problems. All of these actions are costly and displace consumption of utility-
generating goods. Indeed, it is widely believed that these actions constitute a significant portion of the
costs of harms, as the marginal utility of their purchase should be equalized with the marginal utility of
avoiding the harm itself. However, the empirical literature has largely focused on the incidence of the
harm (e.g., crime rates and health outcomes) as a measure of the full welfare consequences, leaving
unanswered the empirical importance of the compensatory behavior and the completeness of the welfare
measure (e.g., Levitt 1997; Chay and Greenstone 2003a and 2003b; Currie and Neidell 2005; Chen et al.
2012). Indeed, depending on prices and preferences, a harm may have substantial welfare consequences
but an exclusive focus on its incidence could lead to a significant understatement of willingness to pay.
        This paper develops a measure of willingness to pay for air quality improvements that accounts
for both defensive expenditures and the direct health impacts. As a measure of defensive behavior, we
investigate whether pharmaceutical or medication usage responds to changes in air quality. This is likely
to be an especially important measure of defensive expenditures, because, for example, the annual cost of
prescription medications for asthma is reported to exceed the monetized value of any other component of
asthma’s social cost, including mortality, emergency department admissions, or lost productivity (Weiss
and Sullivan 2001). The analysis also provides new evidence on how air quality affects mortality and
hospital admissions, which allows us to measure the share of health costs of air pollution due to defenses.
        The empirical exercise is based on a quasi-experiment that exploits the variation in space and
time of the introduction of an emissions market for nitrogen oxides (NOx). The NOx Budget Trading
Program (NBP) operated a cap-and-trade system for over 2,500 electricity generating units and industrial
boilers in the Eastern and Midwestern U.S. between 2003 and 2008. Because this market had the goal of
decreasing ozone pollution, which reaches high levels in summer, the market operated only between May
1 and September 30. Importantly, NOx is a primary ingredient in the complex function that produces
ozone air pollution and thus the NBP provides quasi-experimental variation in air pollution at the seasonal
level, much longer than daily and monthly shocks analyzed in prior research.



                                                       1
        Figure 1 shows the dramatic effect of this market on NOx emissions in the states participating in
the NBP. In 2002, daily NOx emissions were fairly flat throughout the calendar year, with a rise when
electricity demand peaks in July.2 In 2005, emissions were also flat between January and April. But in
May, 2005, when the market’s cap began to apply, NOx emissions dropped by 35 percent, practically
overnight. Emissions remained lower throughout the summer of 2005 and then returned to their original
level in October, when the cap stopped applying. Emissions dropped in May, 2005 because many power
plants began operating abatement technologies which substantially decreased their NOx emissions. This
market lets us isolate the causal effects of air quality on health because it allows a simple research design.
We use a triple-difference estimator which compares pollution and health outcomes in summer versus
winter, before versus after 2003, and in the NBP participating and non-participating states.3
        The empirical analysis produces several key results. First, the reductions in NOx emissions
decreased mean ozone concentrations by roughly 6% and reduced the number of summer days with high
ozone levels (i.e., more than 65 ppm) by about 23%, or a third of a standard deviation. Second, these
improvements in air quality produced substantial medium run benefits. Drug expenditures decreased by
about 1.9% or roughly $900 million annually. Notably, these savings exceed an upper bound estimate of
the market’s abatement costs. Third, the summertime mortality rate declined by approximately 0.5%,
corresponding to 2,200 fewer premature deaths per summer, mainly among individuals 75 and older. The
application of age-adjusted estimates of the value of a statistical life implies this reduced mortality at
about $900 million annually. The mortality estimates are less precise than the medication estimates, and
the results must be interpreted accordingly. Fourth, there appears to have been little systematic evidence
of an effect of the NBP on hospital admissions or charges.
        Finally and importantly, it may be appropriate to conclude the reductions in ozone concentrations
are the primary channel for these improvements in health. For example, we find no association between
the NBP and health conditions that are plausibly unrelated to air quality. Additionally, we find that the
NBP did not affect ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide, but there is mixed
evidence about whether it led to reductions in airborne particulate matter. Consequently, we cautiously
utilize the NBP as an instrumental variable for ozone concentrations and find that the elasticity of

2
  This figure partials out day-of-week fixed effects because additional electricity generation on weekdays adds
visible weekly cycles to the image, although the overall picture is unchanged in the raw data.
3
  “Winter” in this paper refers to the combined months of January-April and October-December. Much of the
decline in NOx emissions occurred because several large and dirty coal-fired electricity generating units installed
selective catalytic reduction systems—a technology which sprays ammonia or urea into flue gas and then passes the
gas through a honeycomb-like catalyst made of vanadium, tungsten, or other materials, to remove over 70% of NOx
emissions. Because these technologies have nonzero operating costs, units begin operating them around May 1 and
stop around September 30. Part of the operating cost comes from the “heat rate penalty” of selective catalytic
reduction—the fact that they require some electricity to operate. This penalty is between one-twentieth of a percent
and six-tenths of one percent (USEPA 2010, p. 5-11), so is too small to appreciably affect the total heat input or
gross electricity generation.

                                                         2
medication purchases with respect to mean summer ozone is 0.28. The elasticity of mortality with respect
to mean summer ozone is 0.22. When ozone is modeled as the number of summer days where the
concentration exceeds 65 ppb, the instrumental variables estimates suggest that an extra high ozone day
increases drug purchases by 0.23% and mortality by roughly 1 per 100,000.
        In addition to providing new evidence on the empirical importance of defensive expenditures, this
paper makes several contributions.4 First, we are unaware of other studies that demonstrate the impact of
an emissions market on ambient pollution and human health with real world data. Most evaluations of
emissions markets combine engineering models of emissions abatement, atmospheric chemistry models
of pollution transport, and epidemiological models of dose-response functions (e.g., Muller and
Mendelsohn 2009).5 The limitations of this approach are underlined by our failure to find consistent
evidence of an impact of the NBP market on particulates air pollution, which the models (and the EPA)
projected as the primary channel for any health benefits.
        Second, the results may be useful for contentious current academic and policy debates about
ambient ozone pollution. National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone have changed repeatedly
since the Clean Air Act—more than for any other pollutant except particulates.6 In 2010, President
Obama announced that the EPA would tighten ambient ozone standards. The EPA then missed four
deadlines to decide on a new scientifically defensible ozone standard, and in September 2011 announced
that it would wait until 2013 to implement new standards. This announcement was followed by litigation
by environmental groups and widespread public debate about the importance of additional ozone
regulation. These ozone standards are so contentious partly because there is substantial uncertainty about
how ozone affects health (NRC 2008; Bell et al. 2004; Bell, Dominici and Samet 2005; Currie and




4
  There is an emerging empirical literature that aims to measure defensive investments. Neidell (2009) and Graff-
Zivin and Neidell (2009) show that pollution alerts cause people to avoid outdoor zoos and baseball games, and that
hot and cold days decrease outdoor leisure time. Graff-Zivin, Neidell, and Schlenker (2011) document an
association between bottled water purchase and violations of water quality standards. Deschênes and Greenstone
(2011) show that people use additional electricity, presumably for air conditioning, on extremely hot days when
mortality risks are elevated. Dickie and Gerking (1991) use data on medical expenditures for 226 persons to find that
residents of Los Angeles have substantial willingness-to-pay to decrease ozone pollution.
5
  This study builds on research exploring how emissions markets affect abatement costs and pollution emissions.
Several analyses show that the Acid Rain Program – an emissions market for SO2 – decreased abatement costs
(Carlson et al. 2000, Schmalensee et al. 1998). Several papers have studied abatement costs and investment
incentives of both the California RECLAIM market for NOx and the NOx market studied here (Fowlie 2009, Fowlie
2010, Fowlie, Knittel, and Wolfram 2009). Fowlie, Holland, and Mansur (2011) also show that RECLAIM
decreased NOx emissions relative to emissions from similar facilities outside the market area.
6
  The original 1971 1-hour ozone standard of 0.08 ppm increased to 0.12 ppm in 1979. An 8-hour standard of 0.08
ppm was proposed in 1997 then litigated until the Supreme Court supported its legality in 2001. This 8-hour
standard came into force in 2004. In 2008, the Bush Administration proposed a new 8-hour standard of 0.075.

                                                         3
Neidell 2005; Ito, De Leon and Lippman 2005; Jerrett et al. 2009; Levy, Chemerynski and Sarnat 2005;
Neidell 2009; Moretti and Neidell 2011; Lleras-Muney 2010).7
         Third, the analysis relies on a new source of identification and is conducted with the most
comprehensive data file ever compiled on emissions, pollution concentrations, defensive expenditures,
and mortality rates. As we show below, the NBP provides rich quasi-experimental variation in ambient
ozone concentrations over seasonal periods of five months, which reduced ozone exposure of over 135
million individuals. As a consequence, our results are more informative about the possible impacts of
new ozone regulation than the existing literature, which has focused on short-run variation in ozone (i.e.
daily or weekly) and on specific states or groups of cities. In addition, due to medium-run variation
leveraged in the statistical models, concerns about “harvesting” or temporal displacement of the drug
expenditures and mortality are less relevant than is the case in much of the previous literature that focuses
on daily or weekly health outcomes.
         The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the main aspects of ozone
formation and provides details on the NOx Budget Trading Program. Section III presents a simple
economic model of defensive investments in response to exposure to pollutants. Section IV describes the
various data sources and the construction of the analysis sample. Section V discusses the econometric
models used in the study. Section VI reports the results and Section VII uses the results to conduct a cost-
benefit analysis of the NBP and develop a measure of willingness to pay for ozone reductions. Section
VIII concludes.


                                     II. Ozone and the Emissions Market
A. Ozone
         The Clean Air Act was designed to control ambient levels of ozone and five other pollutants that
harm health.8 Ozone differs from the other pollutants in three ways that are important for our analysis.
First, polluters do not emit ozone directly. Instead, ozone forms through a complex nonlinear function
combining two chemical precursors – nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) –
with sunlight and heat. The market we study operates only in summer because winter ozone levels in the
Eastern U.S. are low, and ozone spikes to high peaks on hot and sunny days.
         Second, the health consequences of ozone are believed to occur from short-term exposure to high
levels. Ozone regulation has targeted these peak exposures, rather than focusing on mean ozone levels.

7
  In contrast, there is more consistent evidence indicating that airborne particulate matter increases mortality rates
(Pope, Ezzati, and Dockery 2009; Chay and Greenstone 2003a and 2003b; Chen et al. 2012).
8
  Ground-level ozone should not be confused with ozone in the upper atmosphere, which improves health by
blocking ultraviolet radiation from the sun and preventing skin cancer. There is little relationship between the two
except that in rare cases high-altitude cities experience increased levels of surface ozone when an “atmospheric
inversion” occurs and stratospheric ozone drops to ground levels.

                                                          4
For example, the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone primarily reflect the highest few
readings of the year. Hence, this market is most likely to affect health if it truncates the right tail of the
ozone distribution. Research has found negative effects of ozone on cardiovascular and particularly
respiratory health (Lippman 2009).9
         Third, when this market began, national ozone levels changed relatively little since the Clean Air
Act first regulated ozone in 1970. By contrast, concentrations of all five other “criteria” pollutants
decreased by large amounts between 1973 and 2002 (USEPA 2008). During this period, the EPA imposed
numerous regulations on businesses to decrease VOC and NOx emissions. This muted effect of existing
ozone regulations set the stage for an emissions market as a new approach to decrease ozone.


B. The NOx Budget Trading Program
         The NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP) grew out of the Ozone Transport Commission (OTC),
an organization of Northeast States which formed in the 1990s. Studies commissioned under the OTC
found that ozone levels remained high in the Northeast U.S. partly because prevailing winds transported
NOx from the industrial Midwest to the Northeast, where it produced ozone in the Northeast (OTC 1998).
The OTC led to a version of the NOx Budget Program which operated in 1999-2002 and produced small
declines in summer NOx emissions.10 The OTC then created a more stringent version of the NOx Budget
Program which began in 2003 and operated until 2008.11 The market included 2,500 electricity generating
units and industrial boilers, although the 700 coal-fired electricity generating units in the market
accounted for 95 percent of all NOx emissions in the market (USEPA 2009b).
         The market was implemented partially in 2003 and fully in 2004. The 2003-2008 emissions
market originally aimed to cover the eight Northeast states plus Washington DC (which were the focus of
the OTC), plus 11 additional Eastern states. Litigation in the Midwest, however, delayed implementation




9
   In response to forecast high-ozone levels, Los Angeles and many other areas issue “smog alert days” which
encourage sensitive groups to avoid outdoor air (Graff-Zivin and Neidell 2009). Indoor ozone levels are typically
lower than outdoor ozone levels.
10
    This market also goes under the name NOx SIP Call. This smaller market also operated in May-September,
although as Figure 1 illustrates, it did not produce large differences in summer and winter NOx emissions.
11
    2007 is the last year of the MarketScan dataset available for this analysis, so that is the last year of data for the
analysis. In 2009, the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) replaced this market. CAIR included both a summer “ozone
season” emissions market, and a separate market for winter NOx emissions. Designers of the winter market intended
it to decrease ambient concentrations of particulates. In 2010, the EPA proposed a Transport Rule which would
combine this NOx market with a market for SO2 emissions. In July 2011, the EPA replaced this proposal with the
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, which regulates power plant emissions in 27 states with the goal of decreasing
ambient ozone and particulate levels.

                                                           5
in the 8 additional states until May 31, 2004.12 Appendix Figure 1 shows the division of states by NBP
participation status in the subsequent analysis.
         Accordingly, the EPA allocated about 150,000 tons of NOx allowances in 2003, 650,000 tons in
2004, and about 550,000 tons in each of the years 2005-2008. Many firms banked allowances: In each
year of the market, about 250,000 tons of allowances were saved unused for subsequent years (USEPA
2009a).13 Before the NBP began, about half of NOx emissions in the Eastern US came from electricity
generation and industry—the rest were from mobile and other sources. About a fourth of NOx emissions
in the East came from these stationary sources following the establishment of the NBP (USEPA 2005).
         Each state received a set of permits and chose how to distribute those permits to affected sources.
Once permits were distributed, affected sources could buy and sell them through open markets. A single
emissions cap affected the entire market region, though firms could bank allowances for any future year.14
At the end of each market season, each source had to give the EPA one allowance for each ton of NOx
emitted.15 Seventy percent of units complied by using emissions controls (e.g., low NOx burners or
selective catalytic reduction), and the remainder complied exclusively by holding emissions permits
(USEPA 2009b).16
         The mean resulting permit price in the emissions market was $2,080 per ton of NOx. This reflects
the marginal abatement cost of the last unit of NOx abated. In the results below, we use it to develop an
upper bound on the aggregate abatement cost associated with the NBP market.




12
   In 2003, the emissions cap applied to Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Washington DC. In 2004, it also began applying to Alabama, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, Michigan, North Carolina, Ohio, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. Missouri
entered the market in 2007. Georgia was initially slated to enter the market in 2007 but the EPA eventually chose to
exclude Georgia.
13
   In 2002, summertime emissions from sources participating in this market totaled approximately 1 million tons,
with a significant downward pre-trend that had similar magnitude in both the East and West (Figure 2). Compared
to the level of NOx emissions in 2002, the final cap of 550,000 tons would have decreased emissions by 45%. As
discussion of our results later in the paper shows, however, accounting for the pre-trend and the fact that emitters
banked allowances across years shows that the causal impact of the market was to decrease emissions by only 35-39
percent.
14
   Unused allowances from the NBP could be transferred to the CAIR ozone season program. Research is exploring
the potential gains from allowing the value of permits to vary across sources (Fowlie and Muller 2012).
15
   Relatively dirty units in this market have NOx emissions rates of around 5 lbs NOx / MWh electricity generated.
At mean NOx permit prices of $2,080/ton NOx, this implies the units pay a cost of about $5/MWh, or about 10
percent of their typical electricity prices. In most years, fewer than 5 units of the 2,500 in the market (i.e., less than
two-tenths of a percent) had insufficient allowances to cover their emissions. For each uncovered ton of emitted
NOx, these units had to provide three times as many allowances in the following year (i.e., if a unit emitted 50 tons
without allowances in one year, it had to provide 150 additional allowances in the following year).
16
   This paper compares emissions and outcomes in summer versus, so its research design depends on the idea that
firms operate NOx abatement technologies in summer but not winter. Although we show empirically that emissions
decreases happened in summer but not winter, it is worth noting that many abatement technologies have substantial
operating costs (Fowlie 2010) which lead firms to use these technologies only in summer.

                                                            6
                                       III. Model of Willingness-to-Pay
         We build upon the canonical Becker-Grossman health production function to highlight the role of
defensive investments in the measurement of willingness-to-pay for clean air (Becker 1965; Grossman
1972). This model shows that accurate measurement of willingness-to-pay requires knowledge of both
how pollution affects health outcomes such as mortality and how it affects defensive investments that
maintain health but otherwise generate no utility, such as medications.
         Assume the sick days s(d) which a person suffers depends on the dose d of pollution she is
exposed to. The ingested dose d(c,a) depends on the ambient concentration c of the pollutant and on the
defensive behavior a. Substituting provides the following health production function:
(1)      s = s(c,a)
         People gain utility from consumption of a general good X (whose price is normalized to 1),
leisure f, and health. Budgets are constrained by non-labor income I, the wage rate pw, available time T,
and the price pa of defensive investments:
         maxX,f,au(X,f,s) s.t. I + pw(T – f – s) ≥ X + paa.
The implicit function theorem lets us derive the demand function a*(I,pw,pa,c) for defensive investments.
This problem has three first-order conditions for an interior optimum which plays an important role in the
final result:17
(2)        u / X  
(3)        u / f  pw
             pa      u / s
(4)                          pw
           s / a     
In these first-order conditions, the Lagrange multiplier λ lets us monetize the benefits of time and health.
Condition (2) shows that λ equals the marginal utility of money. Condition (3) shows that the monetized
marginal utility of leisure equals the wage rate. Condition (4) shows that defenses are purchased at the
market price pa until their cost equals the additional monetized value of the health and work time they
provide.
         Rearranging the total derivative of the health production function (1) gives the following
expression for the partial effect of ambient pollution on sick days:


17
   If all patients were at corner solutions – if some patients purchased no medications and others would purchase the
maximum available dosage even with moderate changes in air quality – then this emissions market might not induce
changes in medication purchases. But for asthma medications at least, stronger dosages generally have higher costs,
and more powerful medications also typically have higher costs. The most costly drug (omalizumab, also known as
xoliar), for example, which is used to treat rare cases of unusually severe asthma, costs over $10,000 for a year’s
treatment, and appears rarely in the data. Hence changes in air quality could induce changes in medication purchases
for many people.

                                                         7
         s ds  s a * 
(5)                   
         c dc  a c 
This expression is useful because it underscores that the partial derivative of sick days with respect to
pollution is equal to the sum of the total derivative and the product of the partial derivative of sick days
with respect to defensive behavior (assumed to have a negative sign) and the partial derivative of
defensive behavior with respect to pollution (assumed to have a positive sign). In general, complete data
on defensive behavior is unavailable, so most empirical investigations of pollution on health (see, e.g.,
                                                    ds               s
Chay and Greenstone 2003a and 2003b) reveal            , rather than    . As equation (5) demonstrates, the
                                                    dc               a
total derivative is an underestimate of the desired partial derivative. Indeed, it is possible that virtually all
of the response to a change in pollution comes through changes in defensive behavior and that there is
little impact on health outcomes; in this case, an exclusive focus on the total derivative would lead to a
substantial understatement of the health effect of pollution. The full impact therefore requires either
                s                                            ds     a *
estimation of      , which is almost always infeasible, or of    and      .
                a                                            dc      c
        To express the marginal willingness to pay for clean air wc in dollars, we manipulate the previous
expressions to obtain the following decomposition:

                  ds   a *   u / s ds 
         wc   p w    p a             
                               c    dc 
(6)
                  dc  
Expression (6) shows that the marginal willingness to pay for clean air includes three terms. The first is
the effect of pollution on productive work time, valued at the wage rage. The third is the disutility of
sickness, valued in dollars. This third component includes mortality. The second is the cost of defensive
investments, valued at their market price. This second component is the aspect of willingness-to-pay that
existing research has not measured. It is important to note that medications are not a complete measure of
defensive investments against air pollution. However, given that medications cost more than mortality,
emergency visits, or any other components of asthma’s social costs (Weiss and Sullivan 2001), they
represent an important component of defensive investments. The paper’s primary empirical goal is to
                                                                       ds     a *
develop a measure of marginal willingness to pay that is based on         and      .
                                                                       dc      c
        This neoclassical model assumes that markets are competitive, but the setting analyzed here has
two important deviations from this benchmark: markups and moral hazard. Branded medications
generally have low marginal cost and high markups that reflect intellectual property rights. Hence, it
might seem that part of the price of medications is a transfer from consumers to drug firms, and not a
social cost. One interpretation of our use of market prices for medications is that pharmaceutical firms

                                                       8
must invest socially valuable resources to develop medications that treat conditions exacerbated by air
pollution. With lower levels of air pollution, fewer resources would be spent to develop these
medications—a similar induced innovation process as in Finkelstein (2004).
        The second important deviation from the neoclassical benchmark is that consumers with
insurance generally pay a copayment or deductible for medications. Hence the price exceeds the marginal
cost to the consumer, generally by 80-90 percent in these data. Although we use data on the transacted
price for medications (which is more accurate than the published or wholesale price), it remains likely
that private willingness-to-pay for medications is smaller than the medication prices we analyze.18


                                                     IV. Data
        This analysis has compiled an unprecedented set of data files to assess the impacts of the NOx
Budget Program. Although market-based instruments are viewed as among the most important
contributions of economics to environmental policy, to the best of our knowledge this study represents the
first time any analysis has linked ex post health measurements directly to emissions and air quality
measures in order to evaluate an emissions market. We compile high frequency data on medications,
hospitalizations, mortality, pollution emissions, ambient pollution, and weather for the period 1997-2007.
The analysis excludes Alaska, Hawaii, and states adjacent to the NBP participating states, which have
ambiguous treatment status given the potential of pollution to cross state borders.19
        The U.S. has no national census of local medication purchases, and so we use the best available
alternative: confidential data on medication and hospital admissions from the Thompson Reuters
MarketScan Research Database. MarketScan contracts with large employers to obtain all insurance-
related records for their employees, plus their insured spouses and dependents. The data report the county
of the purchaser’s home, the purchase date, the National Drug Code (NDC) of the medication, and the
money paid from the consumer and insurer to the provider of each medication. An NDC is a unique
identifier for a chemical compound, manufacturer, and package type, which helps us to identify the
medical condition associated with each medication. Data on the transacted payment for medications,
rather than the market price, provides useful information because few patients or insurers pay listed prices
for medications.

18
   Even with health insurance and moral hazard, it remains the case that the market price of medications taken in
response to air pollution measures the defensive component of the social willingness-to-pay for clean air. Suppose in
the extreme that consumers have infinitesimally small private value for medications and purchase them in response
to air pollution primarily because copayments are zero. If markups are zero and so the marginal cost of medications
equals the purchase price, then each medication purchase caused by air pollution represents a case where pollution
has used up socially valuable resources, with value equal to the medication’s price.
19
   The excluded states from the main analysis sample are: Alaska, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Mississippi,
Missouri, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Wisconsin. In the Appendix, we show that the estimates are similar with
other sample selection rules.

                                                         9
        We use data from all persons in the 16 covered firms which appear in all seven years, 2001-2007,
of MarketScan, which is the largest panel the data allow us to obtain with these firms. This extract
includes over 22 million person-season year observations, and over 100 million separate medication
purchases.20 The MarketScan extract has persons in almost all U.S. counties. Because the distribution of
persons across counties is skewed, we report all values as rates per 1,000 people, and use generalized least
squares (GLS) weights equal to the square root of the relevant MarketScan population.21 Because the
other datasets become available in 1997 but medication data become available in 2001, for non-
medication results we report parameter estimates both with data for the period 1997-2007 and for the
period 2001-2007.
        Medications, unlike hospital visits or death counts, are not linked to a single International
Classification of Disease (ICD) code. In the subsequent analysis, we follow the convention in the
pollution-health literature and treat respiratory and cardiovascular related episodes as most likely to be
affected by air pollution. We define an NDC as respiratory if it satisfies any of three criteria: (1) if it is
listed in the Third Treatment Guidelines for Asthma (NHLBI 2007); (2) in a recent New England Journal
of Medicine guide to asthma treatment (Fanta 2009); or (3) in the standard industry publication for
medication characteristics (PDR 2003 and 2006) as indicated for asthma, emphysema, bronchitis, or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder. We identify cardiovascular and gastrointestinal medications by
their corresponding therapeutic groups in Red Book (PDR 2003 and 2006).22 The latter category is
unlikely to be affected by air pollution and is used as a placebo test for the validity of the respiratory-
cardiovascular results.
        This broad approach to identifying respiratory and cardiovascular drugs is the most appropriate
we can discern. Nonetheless, because doctors regularly prescribe medications to treat conditions for
which the medications are not indicated, it remains likely that some of these medications were prescribed
for non-respiratory and non-cardiovascular conditions.           Moreover, it is also likely that medications
prescribed for respiratory and cardiovascular conditions are not in this list.

20
   The appendix reports estimates from a balanced panel of about 600,000 persons in these firms who appear in all
years. For confidentiality reasons MarketScan does not identify the 16 firms, but the firms do cover most sectors of
the U.S. economy.
21
   MarketScan is not a random sample. On one hand, it represents people employed in large firms, who might have
better health than the average American and so respond less to changes in air pollution. On the other hand, persons
in MarketScan can buy costly respiratory medications at low copayment rates, so the response of their medication
purchase rates to air pollution might exceed that of the average American. Additionally, emergency department
visits may be more likely among uninsured and elderly Americans, and MarketScan has no data on either group. The
exclusion of the elderly may be particularly important since we find the largest mortality impacts for the elderly.
22
   Red Book has no category for respiratory medications. The therapeutic groups we extract are Antineoplastic
Agents; Cardiovascular Agents; and Gastrointestinal Drugs. Medication purchase rates are skewed and relatively
few county-season values equal zero, so the main tables report medication regressions in logs, with values of zero
excluded from the regressions. Appendix Tables 1-3 show alternative specifications for medications and other
response variables.

                                                        10
        We count hospital admissions as including all inpatient episodes plus all emergency outpatient
episodes. We follow procedures in the MarketScan guide (Thompson Healthcare 2007, p. 59) to extract
emergency department admissions from outpatient claims files. We define a hospital visit as respiratory
or cardiovascular or external if the ICD9 diagnosis code applies to these categories.23 When a hospital
visit has several associated procedures each with its own ICD9 code, we take the mode procedure. Our
measure of hospital costs includes all charges from the hospital to the insurer and patient.
        To measure mortality, we use restricted-access data on the universe of deaths in the 1997-2007
period. These Multiple Cause of Death files (MCOD) come from the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) and were accessed through an agreement between NCHS and the Census Research Data Centers.
These files contain information on the county, cause of death, demographics, and date of each fatality.24
        To measure pollution emissions, we extract daily totals of unit-level NOx, SO2, and CO2
emissions for all states from the EPA’s Clean Air Markets Division.25 The NOx emissions are the
quantities for which firms must hold emissions permits in this cap-and-trade market, so they are the most
accurate measure available. In 2008, ninety-seven percent of emissions came from units with continuous
emissions monitoring systems. The EPA audits all of these data to verify their accuracy and internal
consistency, and we believe the emissions data have little measurement error. Units which are part of the
Acid Rain Program must report NOx emissions throughout the year, while units in the NBP must report
NOx emissions only in the May 1 – September 30 period. Because we compare summer versus winter,
estimates in the paper use only data from Acid Rain Units. However, in the examined period, units in the
NBP and not in the Acid Rain Program represent a tiny share of NOx emissions.
        We use a few criteria to select ambient pollution monitoring data from the EPA’s detailed Air
Quality System. Many pollution monitors operate for only part of a year and for part of the 1997-2007
period. Many ozone monitors operate only in the May-September months. Moreover, monitors operate
more when ozone levels increase (Henderson 1996). Many monitors for fine particulates (PM2.5) record
pollution only 1-2 times per week. To address the incompleteness of these measures, for each pollutant,
the main analysis uses monitors which have valid readings for at least 47 weeks in all years 1997-2007.
This fairly strenuous selection rule restricts our data to include only the most reliable monitors—it


23
   In all the MarketScan data and the 1997-1998 years of mortality which use ICD9 codes, we define respiratory +
cardiovascular conditions as ICD between 390 and 519; neoplasm as ICD9 between 140 and 239; and external as
ICD9 between 800 and 999. In the 1999-2007 years of mortality data which use ICD10 codes, we define respiratory
+ cardiovascular conditions as ICD10 beginning with I or J; neoplasm as ICD10 between C00 and D48; and external
as ICD10 beginning with V, W, X, or Y.
24
    Since 1968, the MCOD files provide information on all deaths occurring in the United States. However,
information on exact date of death is only available in the public-use data for 1972-1988.
25
   Electricity generating units did not report high-frequency measurement of mercury, particulate matter, toxics, or
other emissions in this time period. Other data sources for emissions of these other pollutants have inadequate data
to use in this research design.

                                                        11
excludes monitors which operate only during summer, or which operate depending on weekly ozone and
weather levels, or which have frequent technical problems. Appendix Table 1 shows that we obtain
similar results with a weaker monitor selection rule. For ozone, we focus on a concentration measure the
EPA regulates: For each day, we calculate an “8-hour value” as the maximum rolling 8-hour mean within
the day.26
        We also compiled weather data from records of the National Climate Data Center Summary of
the Day files (File TD-3200). The key control variables for our analysis are the daily maximum and
minimum temperature, total daily precipitation, and dew point temperature. To ensure the accuracy of the
weather readings, we construct our weather variables for a given year from the readings of all weather
stations that report valid readings for every day in that year. The acceptable station-level data is then
aggregated at the county level by taking an inverse-distance weighted average of all the valid
measurements from stations that are located within a 200 km radius of each county’s centroid, where the
weights are the inverse of their squared distance to the centroid so that more distant stations are given less
weight. This results in complete weather by county-day files that we can link with the other files in our
analysis.
        Table 1 shows that emissions, weather, and mortality data are available for all 2,539 counties in
our sample. Medication and hospitalization data are available for 95 percent of these counties, which had
a population of 261 million in 2004. Ambient ozone data are only available for 168 counties, but these
counties are heavily populated and their 2004 population was 97 million. Data on particulates less than
2.5 micrometers (PM2.5) are available in 298 counties (population 144 million) and data on particulates
less than 10 micrometers (PM10) are available for 39 counties (population of 26 million).
        Summary statistics in Table 1 also provide a benchmark to measure the economic importance of
medications and the emissions market. In summer, ozone averages 48 ppb. The 2010 proposed EPA air
quality standard stipulated that a county could have no more than 3 days over a total of three years which
exceed 60-70 ppb. Table 1 shows that during the sample period, 24 days every summer exceed 65 ppb in
the typical county. On average during this time, the average person spent $339 per summer on
medications, and about $500 on hospital admissions.
        The summary statistics also show why the observational associations between ozone and health
may reflect unobserved variables. Columns (4) through (10) of Table 1 divide all counties with ozone
data into two sets—one set of counties with mean summer ozone above the national median (“high
ozone”), and a second with mean summer ozone below the national median (“low ozone”). Row 1 shows

26
  Mean ozone is calculated between midnight and 8 am, 1 am and 9 am, etc. The maximum of these values in a
given day is defined as the “8-hour value” for that day. For each pollutant, we calculate ambient levels in each
monitor-day, then the unweighted average across monitors in each county-day, and finally aggregate up to county-
season. All regressions are GLS based on the square root of the total number of underlying pollution readings.

                                                      12
that counties with high NOx emissions are slightly underrepresented in the high-ozone counties, which
reflects the reality that NOx primarily creates ozone in counties other than where it is emitted. All
pollutants except carbon monoxide have significantly higher levels in the high-ozone counties.
Temperature, precipitation, and dew point temperature have lower levels in high-ozone counties.27 The
finding that so many of these observed county characteristics covary with ozone suggests that an
observational association of ozone with health is likely to reflect the contributions of other unobserved
variables and may explain the instability of the estimated health-ozone relationship that has plagued the
previous literature. This implication of Table 1 underscores the need to distinguish the effect of ozone on
health from the effects of the other possible confounders.


                                              V. Econometric Model
        We use a differences-in-differences-in-differences (DDD) estimator to isolate the causal effects
of the emissions market on pollution and health, and use an instrumental variables approach to measure
the “structural” effect of ozone on health. The DDD estimator exploits three sources of temporal and
geographical variation in the emission and health data. First, we compare the years before and after the
NBP’s operation. Eight states plus Washington DC initiated this market in 2003, while 11 other states
joined in 2004. This market did not operate before 2003. Second, twenty states participated in the NBP
while twenty-two other states did not participate and were not adjacent to a NBP state (see Appendix
Figure 1). Third, the NBP market only operated during the summer, so we compare summer versus
winter.28
        Specifically, we estimate the following model:

(7)      Ycst   11( NBP Operating ) cst  Wcst'    ct   st   cs   cst .

Here, c references county, s indicates season, and year is denoted by t. The year is divided into two
seasons, summer and winter: Summer matches the NBP’s operation period of May 1-September 30. The
outcome variables, Ycst , are pollution emissions, ambient pollution concentrations, medication costs,

hospitalization costs, and mortality rates. Because the NBP market started partway in 2003, we define
Post=0.5 in 2003 and Post=1.0 in 2004 through 2007. All regressions limit the sample to a balanced panel
of county-season-years.

27
   The cross-sectional comparison of temperatures between high- and low-ozone counties partly reflects the high
ozone levels in the relatively cold Northeast.
28
   The abrupt beginning and end of the market on May 1 and October 1makes a daily regression discontinuity
estimator seem appealing. However, because ozone in the Eastern U.S. mainly reaches high levels in July and
August, the market is likely to have small effects on April 30 or October 1, and we detect no change in mean daily
pollution in small windows around these dates. Auffhammer and Kellogg (forthcoming) analyze daily ozone effects
of gasoline regulation in California

                                                          13
         Ozone formation is a complex function of ambient NOx, ambient volatile organic compounds and
temperature. Since there is a nonlinear relationship between health and temperature, it is important to
adjust for weather flexibly. The matrix of weather controls, Wcst, includes measures of precipitation,
temperature, and dew point temperature (a measure of humidity). For temperature and humidity, we
calculate 20 quantiles of the overall daily distribution.29 For each county-season-year observation in the
data, we then calculate the share of days that fall into each of the 20 quantiles.
         To operationalize the DDD estimator, the specification includes all three sets of two-way fixed
effects. The vector μct is a complete set of county by year fixed effects, which account for all factors
common to a county within a year (e.g., local economic activity and the quality of local health care
providers). The season-by-year fixed effects, ηst, control for all factors common to a season and year: For
example, it would adjust for the development of a new drug to treat asthma that was sold in NBP and non-
NBP states. Finally, the county-by-season fixed effects, νcs, allow for permanent differences in outcomes
across county-by seasons.

         The parameter of interest is γ1 associated with the variable 1( NBP Operating ) cst . This variable

is assigned a value of 0.5 in 2003 for all NBP states when the market was operating in 9 of the 20 states
and a value of 1 in 2004 and all subsequent years in these states. The 2003 value was assigned to all NBP
states, rather than just the implementing states, because NOx and ozone travel great distances and
emissions reductions in one NBP state affected ozone concentrations in many other NBP states. After
adjustment for the fixed effects, γ1 captures the variation in outcomes specific to NBP states, relative to
non-NBP states, in years when the NBP operated, relative to before its initiation, and in the summer,
relative to the winter. Importantly, this only leaves variation in the outcomes at the level at which the
market operated. We also report variants on equation (7) that change the level of county, year, and season
controls, and the detail of weather controls.
         Given the potential for temporal and spatial autocorrelation, we use a few approaches for
inference. Pollution and health data are available for each county. States decided whether to enter the
market, but the market only affected pollution in summer. As a result, we report standard errors that allow
clustering at the state*season level in the main tables. The appendix reports standard errors that allow for
arbitrary autocorrelation within counties, states, state-years, and county-seasons; but in general the
conclusions are unaffected by these alternative assumptions about the variance-covariance matrix.




29
  The lower quantiles of the precipitation distribution all equal zero, so for simplicity we specify the precipitation
control as the mean level of precipitation in each county-year-summer.

                                                         14
        Although the tables focus on the triple-difference parameter γ1 from equation (7), separate
measures of the market’s effect in each year provide additional useful information. Hence, for most
outcomes, we also graph the parameters α1997… α2007 from the following model:
                  2007
(8)     Ycst       1( NBP
                 t 1997
                           t     State ) cs  Wcst'    ct   st  v cs   cst ,


where 1( NBP Operating ) cs = 1 for all summer observations from NBP states, regardless of the year.

These graphs permit a visual and statistical test for pre-trends effects that would raise concern about the
validity of the research design. Further, the graphs are also informative about the year-specific effects of
the NBP market on the outcomes considered. In all these graphs, the value α2001 represents a reference
category set to zero.30
        We also exploit the NBP-based DDD design to obtain instrumental variables estimates of the

impacts of ozone on medication purchases and mortality rates. Specifically, 1( NBP Operating ) cst

serves as an instrumental variable for ozone concentrations. In this framework, the version of equation
(7) where ozone is the dependent variable is the first-stage, and the versions with medication purchases or
mortality rates as the outcomes are the reduced-form relationships between the instrument and the
outcomes of interest. We explore the validity of the required exclusion restriction below.


                                                    VI. Results
        This section reports estimates of the effects of the NBP on pollution emissions, ambient
concentrations of pollution, medication purchases, mortality rates and hospital admissions. Additionally,
it implements the instrumental variables strategy outlined above to obtain estimates of the effect of ozone
concentrations on medication purchases and mortality rates. The results are organized into separate
subsections.


A. Emissions
        The NOx Budget Trading Program legally required affected units to reduce NOx emissions, so it
is unsurprising that the market decreased NOx emissions. At the same time, many analyses of pollution
regulations compare emissions levels in a recent year against levels that would be present without the
1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (e.g., USEPA 2009b). Such comparisons make it difficult to identify
the contribution of a specific recent policy to total emissions.

30
  The data on medication purchases and hospitalization begins in 2001, so for these outcomes, the event-study
graphs are for the period 2001-2007.

                                                          15
        Figure 2 illustrates the tremendous impact of the NBP on NOx emissions. The figure shows the
unadjusted summer-equivalent NOx emissions, by year (before and after NBP operation) by season
(winter and summer) and by NBP status (NBP participating states and non-participating states).31 The first
key point shown in Figure 2 (B) is that summer and winter NOx emissions in the states excluded from
NBP evolve very smoothly over time, with similar downward trends and with no evidence of any
discernible change in 2003 and 2004 when NBP was implemented. In contrast, Figure 2 (A) shows that
the NBP led to a sharp and discontinuous reduction in summer emissions, starting in 2003 when the
emissions market began in 8 Northeastern states and Washington DC.                  As a result, summer NOx
emissions declined by nearly 20 percent in the summer of 2003, and another 15-20% starting in May
2004, when the market added 11 more Eastern states.32 Additionally, winter emissions continued their
gradual downward pre-2003 trend, with perhaps a modest slowing of that trend post-2003. In short, NOx
emissions declined in exactly the areas, months, and years that the market design would predict.33
        Regression analogues of these graphs in Table 2 similarly show that the NBP market decreased
NOx emissions by 34-38%. Like most subsequent tables, Table 2 presents four specifications of each
regression, so we explain them here. Column (1) includes no weather controls and includes three sets of
two-way fixed effects—it uses state-by-year rather than county-by-year controls. Column (1) implies that
the market decreased NOx emissions in the average county by 362 tons per summer, or 34% relative to
baseline. Column (2) adds the full set of binned weather controls. The weather controls increase the point
estimates slightly, although the estimates remain precise. Column (3) replaces state-by-year fixed effects
with county-by-year fixed effects, which is the most precise control the data allow. The point estimates
remain unchanged. Finally, column (4) drops the years 1997-2000 and forces the sample to begin in 2001,
since the medication and hospitalization data are only available for the period 2001-2007. The resulting
estimated impact of the NBP on NOx emissions is 32 tons per county smaller than that in column (3),
although the difference is not statistically significant. These results for NOx emissions are unchanged in
alternative specifications (see Appendix Table 1). In this and most other tables, we focus on the results
from the richest specifications in columns (3) and (4).
        We also measure whether the NBP market affected emissions of pollutants other than NOx. Two
economic reasons explain why the market might have affected emissions of such co-pollutants. If permits
for NOx emissions cost enough that the market caused relatively clean natural gas units to displace
electricity generation from relatively dirty coal-fired units, then the market could have decreased

31
   We express the data as summer-equivalent since the summer period has 5 months while the winter period has 7
months. Specifically, the summer equivalent of winter emissions is actual winter emissions multiplied by 5/7.
32
   In 2004, the new states entered the market on May 31, 2004 while the original states began the market on May 1.
In subsequent years, the market began in all states on May 1, 2004.
33
   There was a smaller summer NOx emissions market in New England from 1997-2000. We were unable to detect
an appreciable impact of this market on ozone concentrations during its operation.

                                                       16
emissions of pollutants other than NOx. Second, complementarity or substitutability of NOx with other
pollutants in electricity generation could lead units to change emissions of other pollutants. Any effect of
the market on ambient levels of co-pollutants, however, would imply that the market could have affected
health through channels other than ozone. Such a finding would violate the exclusion restriction required
for the NBP market to serve as a valid instrumental variable for ambient ozone levels.
         The data do not provide strong evidence that the market affected emissions of co-pollutants.
Columns (1) through (3) of Table 2 show that NBP had no impact on emissions of SO2 or CO2.34 Further,
the estimated size effects (point estimate over the mean of the dependent variable) for the co-pollutants
are all close to zero: In the preferred specification of column (3), they imply a statistically insignificant
decrease in SO2 or CO2 emissions of about 2%. The estimates become more precise when the sample is
limited to begin in 2001, as shown in column (4). This specification suggests that the market led to small,
but significant decreases in SO2 or CO2. To assess the relevance of these parameter estimates for the
exclusion restriction, subsequent tables measure how the market affected ambient pollution.
B. Ambient Pollution
         The panels of Figure 3 show how this emissions market affected ambient pollution levels. Panel
A shows an event study for average daily ozone concentrations (as measured by the maximum 8-hour
value) for the 1997-2007 period. This event study graph is derived from a regression that adjusts for
weather and plots the difference between ozone levels in the NBP and non-NBP states, with the year 2001
normalized to zero. The figure shows that before 2003, the NBP and non-NBP states had roughly similar
trends, suggesting that this research design provides a credible counterfactual for measuring the impact of
the market on ozone. The vertical line in 2003 marks when the market began. The results for the 2003-
2007 period indicate that NBP decreased average ozone concentrations by roughly 3 ppb. In fact, as we
show below, the NBP market led to a non-uniform shift in the distribution of summer ozone
concentrations.
         We also analyze the market’s impact on the density function for daily ozone concentrations to
explore where in the daily ozone distribution the NBP affected concentrations.35 Figure 3B shows the pre-
NBP market (i.e., 2001-2002 average) distribution of summer ozone daily concentration in the NBP


34
   CO2 emissions have no local effect on health, and they are only monitored to measure their contribution to climate
change. But an impact of the market on CO2 emissions could indicate that units changed emissions of mercury, toxic
chemicals, or other pollutants.
35
   The market’s impact on the right tail of ozone is difficult to predict ex ante. On one hand, because the market
price of NOx emission permits is roughly constant throughout the summer and the wholesale price of electricity
spikes on high-pollution days, one could have expected the market to have the least effect on the right tail of ozone.
At the same time, the nonlinearity of ozone formation in its precursors, the differing abatement strategies used by
various electricity generating units, and the ability of NOx to be deposited several days after it is emitted make it
possible that the market could have mainly affected the upper tail of the ozone distribution. This ex ante ambiguity
provides an additional motivation to examine the market’s impact on the ozone distribution.

                                                         17
states. It divides the support of the daily 8-hour ozone distribution into 11 bins. The first bin, for
example, counts the number of summer days with ozone between 0 and 10 ppb and the second counts the
number of summer days with ozone between 10 and 20 ppb. The remaining bins are defined similarly.
For the typical county in the NBP states, about 90 summer days (out of a possible 153) have daily ozone
concentrations between 30 and 60 ppb, and about 25 summer days have concentrations in excess of 70
ppb (i.e., the last 4 bins).
         Figure 3 (C) shows the estimated effect of the NBP market on the number of summer days in
each of the 11 bins (thick line with markers), along with the 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines). The
market reduced the number of summer days with ozone concentrations greater than 60 ppb and increased
the number of days with ozone concentrations less than 60 ppb.36 It is noteworthy that the EPA has
experimented with daily ozone standards of 65, 75, and 85 ppb in recent years and that the identifying
variation in ozone concentrations comes from the part of the distribution where there is great scientific
and policy uncertainty.
         Table 3 statistically summarizes the impact of the NBP on ambient concentrations of ozone and
the other pollutants that are most heavily regulated under the Clean Air Act. Electricity generation emits
all of these pollutants except CO, and NOx can undergo reactions to form all of these pollutants except
CO and SO2. If ozone is the only pollutant affected by the NBP, then it may be appropriate to use the
NBP as an instrumental variable to identify the impact of ozone concentrations on defensive expenditures
and health.
         Columns (1) through (4) repeat the specifications from Table 2 and, for efficiency reasons, weight
the equation by the square root of the number of monitor observations. The impact of the NBP on
ambient pollution concentrations is interesting in its own right. However, the remainder of the paper is
focused on explaining per capita defensive expenditures and hospitalization costs and the mortality rate;
these equations will naturally be weighted by the relevant population to obtain estimated impacts on the
average person. For this reason, column (5) repeats the column (4) specification but uses the population
as the weight, instead of the number of monitor observations.
         Rows 1 and 2 of Table 3 reveal large and precisely estimated effects of the emissions market on
ground-level ozone concentrations. The richest specifications in columns (3) - (5) indicate that the NBP
decreased mean summer ozone by 6-7 percent. Importantly, the NBP market also decreased the number
of days with ozone above 65 ppb by 7.5 to 8.6 per summer (or 23%-28%).37


36
   These bins are response variables, and each bin estimate results from a separate regression. Although the sum of
bin-specific effects must add up to zero, we do not need to normalize the coefficient on any bin to zero. This differs
from the use of bins as explanatory variables (e.g., Deschênes and Greenstone 2011).
37
   We explored whether the NOx reductions produced any counterproductive outcomes. When an area has low
concentrations of volatile organic compounds relative to NOx, then decreasing NOx can increase ozone levels. Such

                                                         18
         Rows 3-5 test for impacts on carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and nitrogen dioxide
(NO2). CO emissions come primarily from transportation, so it is not surprising that the regressions fail
to find evidence that the NBP affected CO concentrations. Further, there is little evidence of an impact on
SO2.38 Thus, it appears that any impacts of ozone will not be confounded with changes in CO or SO2.
         NOx is a standard term used to describe a mix of two compounds—nitric oxide (NO) and NO2,
but NO2 is a pollutant subject to its own regulations. Row 5 shows that the market decreased ambient
NO2 levels by 6-7 percent. Because NO2 has limited or possibly no effect on health, this is not a clear
problem for the exclusion restriction necessary to identify the impact of ozone.39
         Air quality models show that atmospheric NOx can undergo reactions which transform it into a
component of particulates. The impact of the NBP on particulates concentrations is of especial interest
because particulates are widely believed to be the most dangerous air pollutant for human health (Pope,
Ezzati, and Dockery 2009; Chay and Greenstone 2003a and 2003b; Chen et al 2012). Further, before its
implementation, the EPA projected that 48-53 percent of the projected health benefits from the NBP
would come through the channel of reduced particulates concentrations (USEPA 1998). On the other
hand, the appendix describes air quality model simulations in more detail and provides an explanation for
why the NBP might not affect the particulates concentrations. We examine the impact of the NBP on the
concentrations of particles smaller than 10 micrometers (PM10) and 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5), both of
which are small enough to be respirable, in rows 6 and 7 of Table 3.
         The results about particulates concentrations are mixed. In column (4), where the equation is
weighted by the number of monitor observations, there is little evidence that the NBP affected airborne
particulate matter concentrations. Alternatively, when the equation is weighted by population, as is the
case in the preferred defensive expenditures and health outcomes equations, the entries indicate that the
NBP is associated with a 6% reduction in PM2.5. However in the smaller sample of counties with PM10



NOx “disbenefits” may exist in Southern California, where weekend ozone levels exceed weekday ozone levels.
There is less consensus on whether they could occur in the Eastern U.S., where most of the NBP-participating states
are located. We use two approaches to identify counties where the emissions market might have increased ozone
levels. First, we identify a list of such “VOC-constrained” cities from Blanchard (2001). Second, we define a county
as VOC-constrained if its mean ratio of weekend/weekday ozone exceeds 1.05. The former approach finds that the
change in ozone concentrations is similar in VOC-constrained and -unconstrained regions. The latter indicates a
different conclusion: Specifically, it suggests that in VOC-constrained regions of the NBP, the decline in ozone was
smaller than in the unconstrained areas. See rows 5 and 6 of Appendix Table 1.
38
   Because the Acid Rain Program operated a separate cap-and-trade market for SO2 during this period, any decrease
in summer SO2 emissions due to the NOx market would have been offset by a corresponding increase in wintertime
SO2 levels, and such an offset would produce bias in our triple-difference estimator. It supports the research design
to detect no significant change in ambient SO2 concentrations.
39
   Lippman (2009, p. 830), in the third edition of his widely-cited reference text on the health effects of pollution,
summarizes the evidence as follows: “[G]iven the available epidemiological evidence, it is not possible to provide
an unequivocal conclusion regarding adverse health effects of NO2. There have been both positive and negative
findings at various levels of NO2 exposure.”

                                                         19
monitors, there continues to be no evidence of a meaningful change in PM10.40 Overall, these results are
inconclusive about whether the NBP affected particulates concentrations. These mixed results mean that
the subsequent two-stage least squares results of the effects of ozone on defensive expenditures and health
outcomes should be interpreted cautiously, because they may reflect the impact of ozone or particulates,
or a combination of the two pollutants.41


C. Defensive Investments
        This section explores the relationship between the NBP market and the resources people devote to
defending themselves against air pollution. This relationship is important in its own right as a partial
measure of the NBP’s social benefits, and in the instrumental variables framework where it may also be
valid to interpret it as the reduced-form relationship between the instrument and each outcome. Figure 4
provides a graphical answer: It plots the difference in log medication purchases per person-season in the
NBP and non-NBP states during the summer versus winter, after adjustment for the detailed weather
controls, county-by-year, season-by-year and county-by-season fixed effects (as in column (5) of Table
3). The 2001 difference is normalized to zero. The graphs show little change in 2002, before the market
began. After the market began to operate in 2003, the estimate on the difference in expenditures on
medications ranges between 0% and 4% in each of the subsequent years; notably, the annual declines for
2005-7 are all statically significant at the 7% level or better.
        Table 4 reports regression analogues of this graph: It shows the reduced-form effect of the market
on log medication costs. The richest specification in column (3) indicates that the NBP reduced total
medication costs by 1.9 percent. This estimate is precise with the full set of controls, and has similar
magnitude but less precision with less detailed controls. Column (4) reports the results from fitting the
column (3) specification on the smaller sample of counties with ozone monitors that have a 2004
population of 97 million; the results are similar to those in column (3). The theoretical model discussed
earlier implies that this reduction in defensive expenditures is a key component of total willingness-to-pay
for air quality, but it is one that previous research had not measured.42



40
   Current EPA regulations focus on PM2.5. As a result, PM10 monitors only satisfy the monitor selection criteria in
39 counties in this period (Table 1).
41
   All of the ambient pollution results are further evaluated and probed in Appendix Table 1, which considers a wide
range of specifications, including changes in the method used to compute the standard errors and alternative sample
selection rules.
42
   We separately estimated these regressions for children and obtained results with similar magnitude though less
precision. Based on National Drug Codes, we also attempted to distinguish “maintenance” respiratory medications,
which are taken every day or week to treat chronic respiratory conditions, from “rescue” respiratory medications,
which are taken once acute respiratory symptoms appear. We again obtained similar negative parameter estimates
for both categories, though with less precision.

                                                        20
        We also measure medication purchases separately by cause. As discussed earlier, the allocation of
medications to causes is inexact—doctors can prescribe a medication for many purposes, and the
MarketScan data do not identify the cause for which a specific medication was prescribed. The goal of
this exercise is to test whether the decline in medication purchases was especially evident among
respiratory and cardiovascular medications (although the imprecision of the assignment of causes to
medications means that there are good reasons to expect an impact in other categories). The estimates in
row 2 indicate that the NBP decreased expenditures on respiratory and cardiovascular medications by 2.3
percent in column (3). This estimate would be judged statistically significant at conventional levels.
        We also use medication costs for gastrointestinal conditions as a placebo test, because we are
unaware of evidence linking air pollution exposure to these conditions. Although the column (3) estimate
is marginally significant, these results together suggest that the NBP had little impact on medications for
gastrointestinal problems.
        Appendix Table 2 reports the results from a series of robustness checks, none of which alter the
qualitative conclusions. All the results are from Table 4’s column (3) specification and sample. Four
specifications change the level of clustering; statistical precision is similar with most alternatives, though
generally lower with state clusters. Using data on the number of medications, rather than on medication
costs, produces similar patterns. The MarketScan balanced panel of people implies slightly smaller effects
on medication purchases. Using medication levels or dollars per person, rather than logs, produces results
that are generally similar, although the distribution of medication purchases is skewed, making the log
specification more appropriate. The rest of the paper uses the average paid-cost by National Drug Code,
to aggregate over measurement error from individual reports. Using purchase-specific costs obtains
similar results, although it also produces a large estimate for gastrointestinal drugs.


D. Hospital Visits and Mortality
        Hospital Visits. Because we seek to compare defensive costs against direct health costs, we also
measure how the market affected hospital visits and mortality. Due to the large number of county-year-
season observations with ‘zeros’ for hospitalization costs, we focus on the level rather than the log of per
capita hospitalization costs.    Figure 5 repeats the exercise from Figure 4, but per person-season
hospitalization costs is the dependent variable. The line is estimated imprecisely but it is nearly flat,
indicating that there is little evidence that the NBP affected hospitalization costs.
        The corresponding regression estimates confirm the visual impression. Column (3) of Table 5
reports that the market decreased hospitalization costs by about $6.00 per person-year or roughly 1%, and
that this estimate is not statistically significant. We find a similar result when the log of hospitalization
costs is used as the dependent variable (see Appendix Table 3). The sign of the parameter estimates

                                                      21
suggest that the market decreased cardiovascular and respiratory hospitalizations, but this result also is
imprecise. A different story is evident in column (4), which restricts the sample to the 168 counties with
ozone monitors that account for 37% of the population in the column (3) sample; these entries indicate
large and statistically significant declines in hospitalizations costs. Overall, our judgment is that the
balance of evidence suggests that the NBP did not have a detectable impact on hospitalization costs, and
we do not pursue this outcome further.
        Mortality. Finally, we assess the NBP’s impact on mortality. In most analyses of air pollution,
mortality accounts for the largest share of the regulatory benefits. Figure 6 repeats the event-study graph
from Figures 4 and 5 for the mortality rate (deaths per 100,000 population) for people aged 75 and over;
this section will demonstrate that the effect on the overall mortality effect is concentrated in this
population. Although the estimates are noisy, it is evident that summer mortality rates are lower after the
market began operating in the NBP states.
        The statistical results are reported in Tables 6 and 7. In the full sample, the emissions market
decreased the all-cause, all-age summertime mortality rate by about 1.6 to 3.0 deaths per 100,000
population, depending on the sample, and would generally be judged to be statistically significant. The
effect in the subsample of counties with ozone monitors is larger, indicating a reduction of 5.4 deaths per
100,000 population.
        Across the columns, an analysis of cause-specific mortality rates reveals that 35% to 56% of the
decline in overall mortality is concentrated among cardiovascular/respiratory deaths. We find that the
market had no effect on external (primarily accidents) deaths, which is a reassuring placebo test. Further,
the impacts on neoplasms are small and statistically insignificant. This result was unknown ex ante since
the relationship between ozone and cancer remains uncertain (NRC 2008). We also consider all causes of
mortality other than respiratory, cardiovascular, and neoplasm. There is evidence that deaths from all
other causes significantly declined also. Appendix Table 4 reports on a series of specification checks that
leave the qualitative findings unchanged, although the statistical significance of the mortality effect is
more sensitive to assumptions about the variance-covariance matrix.
        Table 7 breaks the entire population into four age groups and separately estimates the effect of the
NBP on each group’s mortality rate using the full sample and the preferred specification (i.e., column (3)
in Table 6). We detect no meaningful effect on the mortality of persons aged 74 and below, although
taken literally, the point estimates imply that the market prevented about 375 deaths within this group.
The largest impact on mortality occurs among people aged 75 and older. These results suggest that the
NBP prevented about 1,800 deaths each summer among people 75 and older. As with the entire
population, respiratory and cardiovascular deaths explain much of the effects on elderly mortality
(column (2)).

                                                    22
        The age-group decomposition implies that the NBP prevented 2,175 summer deaths annually.
About 80 percent of these were among people aged over 75. By contrast, the overall share of all summer
deaths which occur among people aged over 75 is 55%. These comparisons suggest that the market had
larger effects on the mortality rates of the elderly than of the non-elderly. Moreover, because baseline
mortality rates are relatively high for the elderly, the absolute number of deaths prevented by this market
is especially concentrated among the elderly.
        These results suggest that the NBP market prevented deaths which would have occurred during
the summer. But the people who die from ozone pollution may have pre-existing respiratory,
cardiovascular, or other medical conditions which cause them to have limited life expectancies, even for
people in this age category. In the extreme, the market could merely have moved the date of these deaths
to the winter months immediately following the market. Because the regressions reflect a triple-difference
estimator which compares summer and winter deaths within a year, any deaths displaced from summer to
October-December of the same year would cause the triple-difference estimator to overstate the impact by
a factor of two.43
        We explored two approaches to investigate the empirical relevance of this possibility of short-
term ‘seasonal’ displacement hypothesis. First, we experimented with redefining each “year” to begin on
May 1 of one calendar year and conclude on April 30 of the following calendar year. This redefined
“year” compares each summertime season against the seven following months. Second, we estimated
differences-in-differences regressions where each observation represents a calendar year (as opposed to a
calendar-season-year), and where we measure the change in mortality rates by NBP status pre vs. post.
We also combined these two approaches to estimate differences-in-differences models with the
restructured year.
        These approaches did not provide strong support for the short-term displacement hypothesis. In
most cases, the estimated effect of the market on mortality was negative and had similar magnitude to the
models reported in the paper. Nonetheless, these estimates were imprecise and could not reject the null
hypothesis that the market had no long-run impact on mortality.
        The focus of this paper on the summertime mortality rate is an advance from the previous
literature which has primarily estimated how ozone affects same-day or same-week mortality rates.44
Because the approaches described above obtained imprecise estimates of the market’s long-run effect on
mortality, however, we conclude that this research design lacks power to measure the effect of ozone on
life expectancy beyond the five month length of the NBP’s summer season.

43
   For example, if the market displaced one death per 100,000 from July to December of the same year, then the
triple-difference regression would imply a regression coefficient of two since the market would have both raised
winter deaths and decreased summertime deaths.
44
   Currie and Neidell (2005) estimate monthly and quarterly mortality regressions.

                                                      23
E. Instrumental Variables (IV)
        The preceding sections measure the reduced- form effects of the NBP market on pollution,
defenses, and health. We now turn to an IV approach to measure the “structural” effect of ozone on
health. This parameter – the social cost of marginal reductions in ozone – is widely used in economic and
policy analysis (e.g., Fowlie, Knittel, and Wolfram 2009). However, we want to underscore that these
results should be interpreted cautiously due to the mixed evidence of an impact of the NBP on particulates
concentrations. Definitive evidence of an impact of NBP on particulates concentrations would violate the
IV approach’s exclusion restriction.
        Panel A of Table 8 first reports a simple association of ozone with medication purchases and with
mortality rates for the elderly. The OLS and IV regressions use the same data, so each observation
represents a county-year-season. These results are from regressions of the indicated outcome on
alternative measures of ozone concentrations and are adjusted for county fixed effects, year fixed effects,
and detailed weather controls.    The OLS medication regressions have varying signs, and the only
statistically significant associations suggest ozone concentrations purchases of gastrointestinal
medications, which are expected to have no relationship to pollution. Although such OLS associations are
commonplace in the previous literature, we interpret this as evidence against the reliability of OLS to
infer the ozone-health relationship. These unstable estimates may reflect the feature highlighted in Table
1 that counties with high ozone differ substantially from counties with low ozone. OLS estimates do
detect some effects of ozone on overall mortality.
        The OLS mortality regressions are more consistent across the two measures of ozone and suggest
that there is a positive association between ozone concentrations and mortality rates. However, they also
detect effects of ozone on external causes of death, which raises concerns about whether these OLS
regressions are biased by omitted variables.
        Two-stage least squares estimates use the same sample as OLS and detect significant effects of
ozone on medication purchases, with a semi-elasticity of 0.007 for average 8-hour ozone and .002 for the
number of days when the ozone concentration exceeds 65 ppb. These estimates imply that a 10%
increase in mean ozone leads to a 2.2% increase in medication purchases. There is also a significant
effect for respiratory/cardiovascular related medication purchases but no effect on gastrointestinal
medications.
        The mortality estimates also imply large direct effects of ozone. The 2SLS point estimates
suggest that a 1 ppb increase in ozone pollution leads to 2.6 additional summertime deaths per 100,000




                                                     24
people. This implies an elasticity of mortality with respect to ozone of 0.22.45 These elasticities may
seem large: However, recall that the reduced form relationship between the NBP and mortality rates is
substantially larger in the counties with ozone monitors than in the full sample of counties with mortality
data, which could reflect smaller reductions in ozone in the non-monitored counties. Further, it is worth
underscoring that the counties with ozone monitors account for an important share of the country as they
have a population of 97 million, which is 37% of the 262 million people in the counties covered by the
mortality data.46
        If it were appropriate to interpret these estimates causally, they would lead to a substantial change
in understanding about the welfare consequence of exposure to ozone. For example, the most prominent
ozone-mortality study (Bell et al. 2004) finds an elasticity of weekly ozone with respect to daily mortality
rates that is smaller than what we obtain.47 Further, we are unaware of any evidence on the relationship
between ozone and defensive expenditures measured by medication purchases.


                                VII. A Cost-Benefit Analysis of the NBP and
                     Cautious Estimates of Willingness to Pay for Ozone Reductions
        The results of this paper let us report a simple cost-benefit analysis for the entire NOx Budget
Trading Program, with the caveat that we only calculate some of the health benefits of this market.
Nevertheless, as we emphasized before, our analysis includes a larger set of health outcomes than most of
the previous literature. The estimates in Table 2 imply that the NBP market decreased NOx emissions by
365,750 tons per summer.48 The average cost of a NOx permit during the market was $2,080/ton. Because
firms should only use abatement technologies which cost less than the permit price, the permit price
represents an upper bound on the abatement cost. Specifically, this approach implies that the market
required firms to spend some amount less than $759 million per year to abate NOx. Defining 2003 to have
half a year of typical abatement costs, we obtain an upper bound on 2003-2007 total abatement costs of
$3.4 billion (759 * 4.5). These costs are reported in Panel A of Table 9.49


45
   Multiplying the 2SLS coefficient by weighted mean ozone divided by weighted mean mortality rate in the 2SLS
sample gives 1.682 * (40.73 / 309.73) = 0.22.
46
   We explored estimates with two-sample instrumental variables (TSIV), which use the 168 counties with ozone
monitors for the first-stage and the 2,539 counties with mortality data for the reduced-form, then combine them in a
Wald estimator. This approach has disadvantages because it assumes that the first-stage is the same in counties with
and without ozone monitors—an assumption at odds with most atmospheric chemistry models of ozone formation.
47
   Bell et al. (2004) is not directly comparable to our study however since it uses a few-day distributed lag model.
Attempts to recover the long-run relationship between ozone and mortality generality obtain larger estimates (Jerrett
et al. 2009).
48
   This figure is calculated by applying the estimated impact of NPB on NOx emissions (-0.366) to the mean summer
2002 NOx emissions for NBP counties (841 tons) and then summing over all NBP 1,185 counties.
49
   Our measurement of abatement costs is based on permit prices. Recent research using aggregated labor data
suggests that the NBP decreased employment in regulated industries (Curtis 2012).

                                                         25
        We can now turn to estimating the social benefits of the NBP. As we discussed above, it is
tempting to assume that a change in pharmaceutical purchases are simply a transfer from consumers to
pharmaceutical firms and thus have zero social cost. However, lower levels of air pollution and the
resulting decline in medication purchases that protect individuals from air pollution will free resources
used to develop these types of drugs and allow them to be applied to more productive uses. Monetizing
the social value of these freed resources is not straightforward, so we use the value of the drug purchases
as a proxy. Table 9 shows that this emissions market let Americans decrease medication expenditures by
about $900 million per year, or $4 billion when summed over the 4.5 years during which NBP was
implemented.
        If the mortality estimates are taken literally, they imply that the market prevented about 2,200
deaths annually. The monetary value assigned to these deaths depends on the value of a statistical life
(VSL). In Table 9, we take Ashenfelter and Greenstone’s (2004) upper bound VSL of $1.93 million
($2006$) for a prime age person and use Murphy and Topel’s (2006) method to develop estimates of the
VSL for each age group in our analysis. This is especially important in this setting where the avoided
fatalities are largely coming from individuals 75 and over. The implied VSLs are as follows: $1.9 million
(infants), $1.5 million (ages 1-64), $0.6 million (ages 65-74), and $0.2 million (ages 75+). The
application of this approach implies that the value of the mortality avoided by the NBP is $900 million
per year, or $4 billion in the period 2003-2007.50
        The final column of Table 9 allows for a comparison of the costs and benefits. An upper bound
on the NBP’s aggregate abatement costs is $3.4 billion, but by themselves the value of the reduced drug
purchases of $3.9 billion exceeds these costs. This finding demonstrates that defensive investments are
economically important in this context. Once the value of the reduced rates of mortality are added in, the
benefits of the market exceeded the upper-bound of its abatement costs by 232% (7.9 / 3.4). It appears
that the NBP’s social benefits easily exceeded its abatement costs.
        Finally, estimates of willingness to pay for a reduction in ozone would be of tremendous practical
importance as the EPA is currently considering revising the ozone standard with an expected
announcement of an updated standard in 2013. Noting that they must be interpreted cautiously due to
uncertainty about the validity of the exclusion restriction, the IV ozone results suggest that each 1 ppb

50
   We thank Kevin Murphy and Bob Topel for sharing the data underlying Figure 3 of their paper. The VSL used
here is lower than the $7.4 million VSL ($2006) used by the EPA, which is not age-adjusted. Our primary goal is
not to endorse a specific VSL value, but to demonstrate the results that come from one choice of VSL and age-
adjustment. Because Murphy and Topel calculate a VSL for each 1-digit age, to obtain a VSL for the four
aggregated age categories in Table 7, we calculate the weighted average of the 1-digit age VSLs within each of the
four age categories, with weight equal to the share of deaths from each 1-digit age group. Using the $7.4 million
VSL rather than the $1.93 million VSL implies that the mortality benefits of NBP were larger: $3.3 billion per year
or $14.8 billion for the 2003-2007 total.


                                                        26
decrease in the mean summer ozone concentration in the Eastern U.S. is worth approximately $1.3 billion
in social benefits. Similarly, one fewer day per summer nationally with an ozone concentration exceeding
65 ppb would yield roughly $500 million of benefits.


                                             VIII. Conclusions
        Theoretical models make clear that willingness to pay (WTP) for well-being in a variety of
contexts is a function of factors that enter the utility function directly (e.g., the probability of mortality,
school quality, local crime rates, etc.) and the costly investments that help to determine these factors. One
approach to developing measures of WTP is to find a single market that captures individuals’ full
valuation, as can be the case with property markets under some assumptions (see, e.g., Chay and
Greenstone 2005; Greenstone and Gallagher 2008).            All too frequently though, the data and/or a
compelling research design for the key market are unavailable, making it necessary to develop measures
of WTP by summing its components.
        However, across a wide variety of applied literatures, the empirical evidence on WTP has almost
exclusively focused on the factors that enter the utility function directly. The resulting measures of
willingness to pay are thus generally underestimated and the extent of this underestimation is unknown.
This paper has demonstrated that defensive expenditures are an important part of willingness to pay for
air quality. Indeed in the context of the NOx Budget Program, the improvement in air quality generates
reductions in medication purchases that are as large as the value of the observed reduction in mortality
rates. A fruitful area for research is to explore whether individuals’ compensatory behavior and resulting
defensive investments account for such a large fraction of willingness to pay in other settings.




                                                      27
                                            Bibliography

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Michael Greenstone. 2004. “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the Value
of a Statistial Life.” Journal of Political Economy 112(S1): S226-S267.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Ryan Kellogg. Forthcoming. “Clearing the Air? The Effects of Gasoline
Content Regulation on Air Quality.” American Economic Review.

Ayres, Ian, and Steven D. Levitt. 1998. “Measuring Positive Externalities from Unobservable Victim
Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1): 43-77.

Becker, Gary S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal 75: 493-517.

Bell, Michelle L., Aidan McDermott, Scott L. Zeger, Jonathan M. Samet, and Francesca Dominici. 2004.
“Ozone and Short-Term Mortality in 95 US Urban Communities, 1987-2000.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 292(19): 2372-2378.

Bell, Michelle L., Francesca Dominici, and Jonathan M. Samet. 2005. “A Meta-Analysis of Time-Series
Studies of Ozone and Mortality with Comparison to the National Morbidity, Mortality, and Air Pollution
Study.” Epidemiology 16(4): 436-445.

Blanchard, Charles L. 2001. “Spatial Mapping of VOC and NOx Limitation of Ozone Formation in Six
Areas.” 94th Annual Conference of the Air and Waste Management Association, Orlando, FL.

Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen L. Palmer. 2000. “Sulfur Dioxide Control
by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?” Journal of Political Economy 108(6).

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003a. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence From Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(3).

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003b. “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act
of 1970.” NBER Working Paper No. 10053.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter.” Journal of Political
Economy 113(2).

Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2012. "The Long-Run Impact
of Air Pollution on Life Expectancy: Evidence from China's Huai River Policy." MIT Mimeograph.

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn From
California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1003-1030.

Curtis, Mark. 2012. “Who Loses under Power Plant Cap-and-Trade Programs? Estimating the Impact of
the NOx Budget Trading Program on Manufacturing Employment.” Georgia State Mimeograph.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the U.S.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 3(4): 152-85.



                                                 28
Dickie, Mark, and Shelby Gerking. 1991. “Willingness to Pay for Ozone Control: Inferences from the
Demand for Medical Care.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 2191): 1-16.

Fanta, Christopher H. 2009. “Asthma.” New England Journal of Medicine 360(10): 1002-1014.

Finkelstein, Amy. 2004. “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine
Industry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2): 527-564.

Fowlie, Meredith. 2009. “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and Emissions
Leakage.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2).

Fowlie, Meredith. 2010. “Emissions Trading, Electricity Industry Restructuring, and Investment in
Pollution Control.” American Economic Review 100(3).

Fowlie, Meredith, Stephen Holland, and Erin Mansur. 2011. “What do Emissions Markets Deliver and to
Whom? Evidence from Southern California’s NOx Trading Program.” UC Berkeley Mimeograph.

Fowlie, Meredith, Christopher Knittel, and Catherine Wolfram. 2009. “Sacred Cars? Optimal Regulation
of Stationary and Non-stationary Pollution Sources.” UC Berkeley Mimeograph.

Fowlie, Meredith, and Nicholas Muller. 2012. “Designing markets for pollution when damages vary
across sources: What are the gains from differentiation?” UC Berkeley Mimeograph.

Graff-Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2009. “Days of Haze: Information Disclosure and
Intertemporal Avoidance Behavior.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 58(2).

Graff-Zivin, Joshua, Matthew Neidell, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2011. “Water Quality Violations and
Avoidance Behavior: Evidence from Bottled Water Consumption.” NBER Working Paper No. 16695.

Greenstone, Michael and Justin Gallagher. 2008. “Does Hazardous Waste Matter.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.” Journal of
Political Economy 80(2): 223-255.

Henderson, J Vernon. 1996. “Effects of Air Quality Regulation.” American Economic Revuew 86(4):
789-813.

Ito, Kazuhiko, Samantha F. De Leon, and Morton Lippman. 2005. “Associations Between Ozone and
Daily Mortality: Analysis and Meta-Analysis.” Epidemiology 16(4): 446-457.

Jerrett, Michael, Richard T. Burnett, C. Arden Pope III, Kazuhike Ito, George Thurston, Daniel Krewski,
Yuanli Shi, Eugenia Calle, and Michael Thun. 2009. “Long-Term Ozone Exposure and Mortality.” New
England Journal of Medicine 360: 1085-95.

Levy, Jonathan I., Susan M. Chemerynski, and Jeremy A. Sarnat. 2005. “Ozone Exposure and Mortality:
An Empiric Bayes Metaregression Analysis.” Epidemiology 16(4): 458-468.

Lippman, Morton. 2009. Environmental Toxicants: Human Exposures and Their Health Effects. Third
Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.


                                                  29
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2010. “The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the Military to
Estimate the Effect of Air Pollutants on Children’s Health.” Journal of Human Resources 45(3): 549-590.

Moretti, Enricco, and Matthew Neidell. 2011. “Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior: Evidence
from the Ports of Los Angeles.” Journal of Human Resources, 46 (1): 154-75.

Muller, Nicholas Z, and Robert Mendelsohn. 2009. “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting the Prices
Right.” American Economic Review 99(5): 1714-1739.

Muller, Nicholas Z, and Robert Mendelsohn. 2012. “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting the Prices
Right: Comment: Reply.” The American Economic Review, 102 (1): 608-12.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.” Journal of Political
Economy 114(5): 871-904.

Neidell, Matthew. 2009. “Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of Ozone on Asthma
Hospitalizations.” Journal of Human Resources 44(2).

NHLBI. 2007. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma.
Washington, DC: NHLBI.

NRC. 2008. Estimating Risk Reduction and Economic Benefits from Controlling Ozone Air Pollution.
National Research Council.

OTC. 1998. Pollution Control Strategies in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic States To Clean Up Ground
Level Ozone: Progress to Date and Look Towards the Future. Mimeo, OTC.

PDR. 2003. Red Book: Pharmacy’s Fundamental Reference. Thomson PDR.

PDR. 2006. Red Book: Pharmacy’s Fundamental Reference. Thomson PDR.

Pope, C. Arden, Majid Ezzati, and Douglas W. Dockery. 2009. “Fine-Particulate Air Pollution and Life
Expectancy in the United States.” New England Journal of Medicine 360: 376-86.

Schmalensee, Richard, Paul L. Joskow, A. Denney Ellerman, Juan Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M.
Bailey. 1998. “An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 12(3): 53-68.

Thompson Healthcare, Inc. 2007. MarketScan Research Databases User Guide and Database Dictionary.
Commercial Claims and Encounters Medicare Supplemental and COB. Data Year 2006 Edition. Ann
Arbor, Michigan: Thomson Healthcare Inc.

USEPA. 1998. “Regulatory impact analysis for the NOx SIP Call, FIP, and Section 126 Petitions.
Volume 2: Health and Welfare Benefits.” EPA-452/R-98-003B. Washington, DC.

USEPA. 2005. Evaluating Ozone Control Programs in the Eastern United States: Focus on the NOx
Budget Trading Program, 2004. Washington, DC: USEPA.

USEPA. 2008. National Air Quality Status and Trends Through 2007. Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina: USEPA.


                                                  30
USEPA. 2009a. The NOx Budget Trading Program: 2008 Emission, Compliance, and Market Data.
Washington, DC: USEPA.

USEPA. 2009b. The NOx Budget Trading Program: 2008 Highlights. Washington, DC: USEPA.

USEPA. 2010. Documentation for EPA Base Case v.4.10 Using the Integrated Planning Model.
Washington, DC: USEPA.

Weiss, Kevin B., and Sean D. Sullivan. 2001. “The Health Economics of Asthma and Rhinits. I.
Assessing the Economic Impact.” Current Reviews of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 107(1): 3-8




                                             31
               Appendix: The NOx Budget Trading Program and Particulate Matter

This appendix provides one explanation based in atmospheric chemistry as to why the NOx Budget
Trading Program might have little or no effect on particulate matter. We begin by defining the relevant
compounds:

PM10 and PM2.5: particulate matter
NOx: nitrogen oxides
NO: nitric oxide, a component of NOx
NO2: nitrogen dioxide, a component of NOx
NH4NO3: ammonium nitrate, the component of PM2.5 and PM10 which NOx can form
NO3: nitrate, a derivative of NOx
NH4: ammonium
SO4: sulfate, formed as a byproduct of electricity generation
NH4e: excess ammonium, i.e., ammonium which remains after NH4 has bonded with SO4
NH3: ammonia
HNO3: nitric acid, a derivative of NOx

A summary is that excess ammonium (NH4e) is the necessary ingredient for nitrate (NO3) to become
ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), which is a component of particulates. In the absence of NH4e, NOx and
NO3 do not form particulate matter. NH4e levels were low in the Eastern U.S. during the operation of the
NOx Budget Trading Program because levels of sulfate (SO4) were high enough to absorb much of the
available NH4 so that little sulfate remained to bond with nitrate.

A more detailed explanation follows. For NOx to become a component of PM10 or PM2.5, NOx must
decompose to nitrate (NO3). Nitrate then must undergo a reaction with excess ammonium (NH4e) to form
ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3). Ammonium nitrate is a component of particulate matter but nitrate is not.
So a necessary condition for NOx to increase particulate matter is the presence of sufficient excess
ammonium to convert nitrate into ammonium nitrate.

To assess the empirical relevance of this explanation, we calibrated an air quality model (CRDM) using
the 2002 National Emissions Inventory, as in Muller and Mendelsohn (2012). According to calculations
from CRDM, the Eastern U.S. had relatively low levels of NH4e during the operation of the NOx Budget
Trading Program. Excess ammonium levels were low in part because NH4 preferentially bonds with SO4,
which is a byproduct of sulfur emissions. Even with the Acid Rain program, sulfur levels were high
enough in the Eastern U.S. in 2003-2007 that little NH4 remained as NH4e after the NH4-SO4 reaction
occurred.

According to calculations using CRDM, in the period 2003-2007, the Eastern U.S. had relatively low
levels of excess ammonium, which could explain why we fail to find consistent evidence consistently that
the NOx Budget Program affected particulate levels. Pandis and Seinfeld (2006), a widely-cited
atmospheric chemistry text, note that this phenomenon is well-established:

       “The formation of ammonium nitrate is often limited by the availability of one of the reactants.
       Figure 10.24 shows the ammonium concentration as a function of the total available ammonia
       and the total available nitric acid for a polluted area. The upper left part of the figure (area A) is
       characterized by relatively high total nitric acid concentrations and relatively low ammonia.
       Large urban areas are often in this regime. The isopleths are almost parallel to the y-axis in this
       area, so decreases in nitric acid availability do not affect significantly the NH4NO3 concentration
       in this area.” (p. 483)


                                                    32
Appendix References

Pandis, Spyros N. and John H. Seinfeld (2006). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: From Air Pollution
to Climate Change (2nd Edition). NY, NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.




                                                33
Figure 1. Total Daily NOX Emissions in NBP-Participating States


   8




   6




   4




   2
    Jan 1                    May 1                               Oct 1          Dec 31
                                       Day of Year

                                      2005                2002

Notes: Graph depicts values from an OLS regression of NOx emissions on 6 day-of-week
indicators and a constant. We control for day-of-week fixed effects since additional electricity
generation on weekdays adds visible weekly cycles to the image, although the overall picture is
unchanged in the raw data. The values in the graph equal the constant plus the regression
residuals, so that the graph depicts fitted values for the reference category (Wednesday). Y-axis is
measured in thousands of tons. Data include Acid Rain Units. NBP participating states include:
Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. See the text for more
details.




                                                     34
Figure 2. Summer-Equivalent Seasonal NOx Emissions (Mil. Tons)

(A) States Participating in NBP
   1.6




   1.2




   0.8




   0.4
         1997   1998   1999   2000   2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006   2007

                              Summer Months                  Winter Months



(B) States Non-Participating in NBP
   1.6




   1.2




   0.8




   0.4
         1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002    2003    2004    2005    2006   2007

                              Summer Months                 Winter Months

Notes: The data show raw, unadjusted emissions totals. The y-axis is in millions of tons of summer-
equivalent NOx emissions. Summer is defined as May-September, winter as January-April and October-
December. Summer-equivalent multiplies the winter total by 5/7. NBP participating states include:
Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. States not participating in NBP include:
Arkansas, Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Lousiana, Minnesota, Montana,
                                                            35
Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, South Carolina,
Texas, Utah, Washington, Wyoming. Alaska, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Mississippi, Missouri,
New Hampshire, Vermont, and Wisconsin are excluded from the main analysis sample. See the text for
more details.




                                                     36
Figure 3. NBP Market Impact on Ambient Ozone Pollution

(A) Event Study for Daily Ozone 8-Hour Values, 1997-2007
    8

    6



    3



    0



   -3



   -6


        1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003    2004     2005   2006   2007

                                NBP Impact               +/- 2 std err

Notes: Ozone 8-hour value is measured as the maximum rolling 8-hour mean of hourly values
within each day, which is the statistic used in EPA non-attainment designations. Estimate for year
2001 restricted to take a value of 0. Regression models include detailed weather controls, and a
full set of county*year, season*year, and county*season fixed effects. Regression is GLS
weighted by the square root of the number of underlying pollution readings. Standard errors
based on covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each state-season. See Figure
2 notes or text for NBP participation status designation. See Appendix Table 5 for the full set of
estimates underlying this figure.




                                                   37
Figure 3. NBP Market Impact on Ambient Ozone Pollution (Continued)

(B) Number of Summer Days in 11 Ozone Bins, NBP Participating States, 2001-2002

                 40



                 30



                 20



                 10



                             0



          -10
                                                      0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70*70-80*80-90*90-100 100+


(C) NBP Market Impact on Number of Summer Days in 11 Ozone Bins
                                               40
     Market Impact: Summer Days in Indicated Bin
   -10       0       10     20        30




                                                    0-10   10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70* 70-80* 80-90* 90-100 100+

                                                                            Estimate            +/- 2 std. err.

Notes: Ozone 8-hour value is measured as the maximum rolling 8-hour mean of hourly values within each
day, which is the statistic used in EPA non-attainment designations. Panel B shows the average number of
summer days (out of a possible 153 days) in 11 categories for daily ozone 8-hour value in the NBP states in
                                                                                           38
2001-2002 (pre-NBP period). Panel C shows the estimated impact of NBP on the number of summer days
in 11 categories for daily ozone 8-hour value. The asterisks in the x-axis of Panel C represent EPA non-
attainment standards in ppb: 85 (1997 standard), 75 (2008 standard), and 60-70 (2010 proposed standard).
Estimates in Panel C are based on regression models that include detailed weather controls, and a full set of
county*year, season*year, and county*season fixed effects. Regression in Panel C is GLS weighted by the
square root of the number of underlying pollution readings. Standard errors based on covariance matrix
allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each state-season. See Figure 2 notes or text for NBP participation
status designation.




                                                         39
Figure 4. Impact of NBP Market on Log Medication Costs ($2006)
   0.04



   0.02



   0.00



   -0.02



   -0.04



   -0.06
           2001   2002       2003      2004       2005         2006    2007

                              NBP Impact            +/- 2 std err


Notes: Log medication cost is the log of total medication costs per person-season in a county. All
medication and hospital costs are in 2006 dollars, deflated using the BLS CPI for urban
consumers. Estimate for year 2001 restricted to take a value of 0. Regression models include
detailed weather controls, and a full set of county*year, season*year, and county*season fixed
effects. Regression is GLS weighted by the square root of MarketScan population in a given
county-year-season. Standard errors based on covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation
within each state-season. See Figure 2 notes or text for NBP participation status designation.




                                                   40
Figure 5. Impact of NBP Market on Hospital Costs ($2006)

   60

   40

   20

     0

   -20

   -40

   -60

   -80

         2001    2002       2003       2004       2005         2006    2007

                             NBP Impact            +/- 2 std err


Notes: Hospitalization costs are total hospitalization costs per person-summer in a county. All
medication and hospital costs are in 2006 dollars, deflated using the BLS CPI for urban
consumers. Estimate for year 2001 restricted to take a value of 0. Regression models include
detailed weather controls, and a full set of county*year, season*year, and county*season fixed
effects. Regression is GLS weighted by the square root of MarketScan population in a given
county-year-season. Standard errors based on covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation
within each state-season. See Figure 2 notes or text for NBP participation status designation.




                                                  41
Figure 6. Impact of NBP Market on Mortality Rates: Elderly Mortality
    100




      0




   -100




   -200

          1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004     2005   2006   2007

                                 NBP Impact                +/- 2 std err




Notes: The dependent variable is the all-cause mortality rate for persons aged 75+ per 100,000
persons aged 75+. Estimate for year 2001 restricted to take a value of 0. Regression models
include detailed weather controls, and a full set of county*year, season*year, and county*season
fixed effects. Regression is GLS weighted by the square root of the relevant population in a given
county-year. Standard errors based on covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation within
each state-season. See Figure 2 notes or text for NBP participation status designation.




                                                     42
Table 1. Mean Summer Values of Pollution, Weather, and Health, by Ozone Level
                                      All Counties                           Low Ozone                          High Ozone
                         Counties With                           Counties                           Counties                             p-value of
                               Data        Mean        s.d.      With Data    Mean         s.d.     With Data     Mean         s.d.     H0 : (8)-(5)=0
                                (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)            (10)
Pollution Emissions (000's of tons/summer)
 NOx Emissions                 2,539        0.52       (1.99)       84          1.67      (3.26)       84          1.30       (4.14)       [0.090]
 SO2 Emissions                 2,539        1.50       (6.52)       84          2.92      (6.20)       84          1.41       (4.04)       [0.000]
 CO2 Emissions                 2,539        384       (1,299)       84         1,263     (1,896)       84          918       (2,030)       [0.003]
Ambient Pollution
 Ozone 8-Hour Value             168        48.06       (9.28)       84         41.28      (6.10)       84          54.85      (6.58)       [0.000]
 Ozone Days ≥65 (ppb)           168        23.60      (22.64)       84         10.93      (9.41)       84          36.28     (24.81)       [0.000]
 NO2 (ppb)                      110        11.45       (5.39)       34          8.67      (4.57)       37          12.15      (4.85)       [0.000]
 CO (ppm)                       125         0.44       (0.24)       35          0.46      (0.22)       33           0.42      (0.17)       [0.058]
             3
 PM 2.5 (μg/m )               298         13.33       (4.19)        47         10.70      (3.01)       45          11.63      (4.45)       [0.002]
            3
 PM 10 (μg/m )                   39       27.28       (6.26)         4         25.14      (3.85)        6          29.70      (6.86)       [0.002]
 SO2 (ppb)                      150        3.26       (2.27)        32          2.04      (1.49)       33           2.60      (1.97)       [0.001]
Weather
 Temperature (ºF)             2,539       70.59       (5.79)        84         73.82      (7.40)       84          72.40      (5.90)       [0.000]
 Precipitation (1/100")       2,539       11.46       (5.37)        84         13.91      (8.59)       84           7.35      (6.12)       [0.000]
 Dew Point Temp. (ºF)         2,539       58.31       (7.58)        84         62.36      (8.59)       84          55.28      (9.57)       [0.000]
Medication Costs ($ Per Person)
 All                          2,435       338.53     (302.10)       84        269.69     (84.92)       84         284.89     (107.62)      [0.007]
 Respiratory + Cardio.        2,435       87.84       (97.86)       84        69.33      (28.66)       84         70.94       (30.18)      [0.348]
Hospitalizations ($ Per Person)
 All                          2,435       502.62     (2120.44)      84        474.77     (418.56)      84         484.25     (703.12)      [0.779]
 Respiratory + Cardio.        2,435       99.69       (768.61)      84        92.47      (250.19)      84         73.58      (142.45)      [0.112]
Mortality (Deaths Per 100,000 People)
 All                          2,539       402.42     (121.32)       79        331.26     (89.47)       79         316.25     (76.94)       [0.003]
 Respiratory + Cardio.        2,539       180.80      (69.93)       79        144.31     (45.37)       79         137.08     (39.59)       [0.005]
Notes: All currency in 2006 dollars deflated using the US CPI for urban consumers. Emissions, medications, and deaths are totals per summer.
Ambient pollution and weather are mean summer values. Low and High ozone are based on comparisons to the county with median summer
ozone. Means are across counties (i.e., not weighted). All data 2001-2007.




                                                                             43
Table 2. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Emitted Pollution
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
1. NOx                        -0.362*** -0.375*** -0.366*** -0.330***
                                (0.053)   (0.053)   (0.071)   (0.066)
  Effect / Mean                 -0.344    -0.356    -0.348    -0.384

2. SO2                         -0.077**     -0.115      -0.071     -0.069**
                                (0.037)     (0.070)     (0.048)     (0.033)
  Effect / Mean                 -0.027      -0.040      -0.024      -0.027

3. CO2                          -3.338      -19.036     -6.187      -12.647*
                               (4.384)     (16.070)     (6.127)      (6.610)
  Effect / Mean                -0.008        -0.043     -0.014       -0.029

 County-by-Season FE              x           x           x           x
 Summer-by-Year FE                x           x           x           x
 State-by-Year FE                 x           x
 County-by-Year FE                                        x           x
 Detailed Weather Controls                    x           x           x
 Data Begin in 2001                                                   x
Notes: Each observation represents a county-year-season. Winter emissions are multiplied by 5/7, so all
values are summer-equivalent. Response variable measured in thousands of tons. Mean represents 2001-
2002 summer in NBP areas. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each state-season.
Unless otherwise noted, the sample period begins in 1997. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05
(**), <0.01 (***).




                                                  44
Table 3. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Ambient Pollution
                                            (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)
1. Ozone 8-Hour Value                  -2.910***   -4.223***   -2.965*** -3.250*** -3.428***
                                         (0.773)     (1.236)     (0.747)   (0.597)   (0.600)
  Effect / Mean                           -0.057      -0.082      -0.058    -0.063    -0.068

2. Ozone Days ≥ 65                     -7.395***   -8.264***   -7.461**   -8.401*** -8.621***
                                         (2.504)     (2.746)    (2.964)     (2.546)   (2.511)
  Effect / Mean                           -0.229      -0.255     -0.231      -0.251    -0.278

3. CO: Carbon Monoxide                 -0.048**      -0.036      -0.042     -0.017     0.000
                                        (0.023)     (0.027)     (0.035)    (0.026)    (0.028)
  Effect / Mean                          -0.091      -0.068      -0.081     -0.033     0.000

4. SO2 : Sulfur Dioxide                  0.159       0.157       0.097      0.106      0.123
                                        (0.122)     (0.248)     (0.183)    (0.157)    (0.148)
  Effect / Mean                          0.034       0.034       0.021      0.023      0.029

5. NO2 : Nitrogen Dioxide              -1.130***     -0.023    -1.210*** -0.995***   -1.249**
                                         (0.209)    (0.895)      (0.397)   (0.370)    (0.485)
  Effect / Mean                           -0.067     -0.001       -0.072    -0.061     -0.068

6. PM 2.5 : Particulates Less than       n.a.        n.a.        n.a.       -0.382   -1.011***
2.5 Micrometers                          n.a.        n.a.        n.a.      (0.278)     (0.277)
   Effect / Mean                         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.       -0.023      -0.062

7. PM 10 : Particulates Less than 10     n.a.        n.a.        n.a.       -0.896     0.114
Micrometers                              n.a.        n.a.        n.a.      (1.018)    (1.249)
   Effect / Mean                         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.       -0.030     0.004

County-by-Season FE                        x           x          x          x           x
Summer-by-Year FE                          x           x          x          x           x
State-by-Year FE                           x           x
County-by-Year FE                                                 x          x           x
Detailed Weather Controls                              x          x          x           x
Data Begin in 2001                                                           x           x
Weighted by Population                                                                   x
Notes: Each observation represents a county-year-season. Pollution readings are mean values.
Regressions are GLS weighted by the square root of the number of underlying pollution readings unless
otherwise noted. Insufficient PM data are available for the 1997-2007 period. Mean is for 2001-2002
summers in NBP States. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each state-season.
Unless otherwise noted, data begin in 1997. Number of observations for each pollutant based on 1997-
2007 sample (2001-2007 sample for PM) is 3,124 (Ozone); 2,244 (CO); 4,172 (PM2.5); 546 (PM10);
2,684 (SO2); 1,782 (NO2). Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                     45
Table 4. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Log Medication Costs
                                         (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)
1. All Medications                     -0.008           -0.026     -0.019***   -0.019***
                                      (0.011)          (0.021)       (0.006)     (0.006)

2. Respiratory + Cardiovascular        -0.005           -0.019     -0.023***      -0.015
                                      (0.014)          (0.023)       (0.006)     (0.010)

3. Gastrointestinal                    0.012            -0.004      -0.011*      -0.001
                                      (0.014)          (0.027)      (0.006)      (0.014)

 County-by-Season FE                      x               x             x            x
 Summer-by-Year FE                        x               x             x            x
 State-by-Year FE                         x               x
 County-by-Year FE                                                      x            x
 Detailed Weather Controls                                x             x            x
 Counties With Ozone Monitors                                                        x
Notes: All currency in 2006 dollars deflated using BLS CPI for urban consumers. Dependent variable is
log of medication costs per person-season-year in a county. Regressions are GLS with weight equal to
square root of MarketScan population in a given county-year-season. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary
autocorrelation within each state-season. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).
Number of observations is as follows: Row 1 columns (1) to (3): 30,926. Row 1 column (4): 2,338. Row
2 columns (1) to (3): 28,784. Row 2 column (4): 2,324. Row 3 columns (1) to (3): 24,080. Row 3 column
(4): 2,296.




                                                  46
Table 5. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Hospitalization Costs
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
1. All Hospitalizations              -5.317        -0.470         -5.997    -78.509***
                                    (17.127)      (17.438)       (18.948)     (23.759)

2. Respiratory + Cardiovascular     -8.148*         -8.256       -8.702     -44.872***
                                     (4.728)       (5.226)       (5.717)      (9.822)

3. External                         -2.749          -2.931       -3.629      -15.494
                                    (3.755)        (4.425)       (6.486)     (9.366)

 County-by-Season FE                    x              x             x           x
 Summer-by-Year FE                      x              x             x           x
 State-by-Year FE                       x              x
 County-by-Year FE                                                   x           x
 Detailed Weather Controls                             x             x           x
 Counties With Ozone Monitors                                                    x
Notes: All currency in 2006 dollars deflated using BLS CPI for urban consumers. Dependent variable is
dollars per person-season-year in each county-year-season cell. Regressions are GLS with weight equal to
square root of MarketScan population in a given county-year-season. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary
autocorrelation within each state-season. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).
Number of observations is 31,822 for columns (1) to (3) and 2,352 for column (4). Number of
observations differs from Table 4 because the log response variable of Table 4 excludes cells with no
drug purchases.




                                                  47
Table 6. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Mortality Rates
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)
1. All Deaths                     -2.145**      -3.033      -1.557*    -5.410***   -2.666*
                                   (0.937)     (3.469)       (0.813)     (1.825)   (1.539)

2. Respiratory + Cardiovascular     -0.745      -1.700        -0.547    -2.282*      -1.113
                                   (0.492)     (1.810)       (0.675)    (1.229)     (0.997)

3. Neoplasm                         0.089       0.153         0.099      -0.172      -0.142
                                   (0.280)     (0.752)       (0.268)    (0.401)     (0.395)

4. External                         0.307       -0.073        0.115      -0.658      0.174
                                   (0.206)     (0.368)       (0.309)    (0.657)     (0.382)

5. All Other                      -1.488***     -1.486      -1.109**   -2.956***   -1.411*
                                    (0.379)    (1.094)       (0.425)     (0.781)   (0.715)

Observations                       55,858      55,858        55,858      3,124      35,546
Clusters                             82          82            82         48          82

 County-by-Season FE                 x            x             x          x           x
 Summer-by-Year FE                   x            x             x          x           x
 State-by-Year FE                    x            x
 County-by-Year FE                                              x          x           x
 Detailed Weather Controls                        x             x          x           x
 Counties With Ozone Monitors                                              x
 Data Begin in 2001                                                                    x
Notes: Dependent variable is deaths per 100,000 population in each county-year-season
cell. Regressions are GLS with weight equal to square root of population in a given
county-year-season. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each
state-season. "All Other" row corresponds to all causes of death other than respiratory,
cardiovascular, and neoplasm. Unless otherwise noted, data begin in 1997. Asterisks
denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***). Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*),
<0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                  48
Table 7. Effect of NBP Emissions Market on Mortality Rates, by Age
                                                    Respiratory
                        Cause of Death     All       + Cardio.
                                           (1)           (2)
1. Age 0 (Infants)                       -4.612        -1.853
                                         (6.277)      (1.212)
  Response Var Mean                        306            13
  Estimated Change in 2005 Deaths          -81           -33

2. Ages 1-64                              -0.144       0.241
                                         (0.503)      (0.257)
  Response Var Mean                         104          30
  Implied 2005 Deaths                      -168         281

3. Ages 65-74                            -1.492       -3.175
                                         (5.997)      (3.505)
  Response Var Mean                        964          417
  Estimated Change in 2005 Deaths         -132         -282

4. Ages 75+                              -20.700*     -11.198
                                         (10.846)     (9.841)
  Response Var Mean                        3,182       1,795
  Estimated Change in 2005 Deaths         -1,794       -970

Notes: Dependent variable is deaths per 100,000 population in each county-year-season cell. Regressions
are GLS with weight equal to square root of population in a given county-year-season. Covariance matrix
allows arbitrary autocorrelation within each state-season. In 2005, market-area population levels in
millions were 1.8 (infants), 116.5 (1-64), 8.9 (65-75), and 8.7 (75-99). Sample includes 1997-2007 data.
Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                        49
Table 8. Effect of Ambient Ozone on Medication Purchases and Mortality: Ordinary
Least Squares and Instrumental Variables Estimates, 2001-2007
                          Log Medication Costs                        Mortality
                           Respiratory                               Respiratory
                  All       + Cardio. Gastrointestinal      All       + Cardio. External    All Other
                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)          (7)
Panel A: OLS
8-Hour Ozone     -0.002       -0.002       -0.003*        0.271***     0.081*    0.054**    0.133***
                (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.084)     (0.049)    (0.021)    (0.030)

Days ≥65 ppb     0.000        0.000         0.000         0.113***    0.035**    0.014**    0.058***
                (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.025)     (0.016)    (0.007)    (0.008)

Panel B: 2SLS
8-Hour Ozone 0.007***        0.005**        0.001         2.596**       1.194     0.234     1.401***
              (0.001)         (0.002)      (0.003)        (1.183)      (0.769)   (0.184)     (0.318)

Days ≥65 ppb   0.002***      0.002**        0.000          1.033*       0.475     0.093     0.557***
                (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.581)     (0.351)   (0.075)     (0.194)

Notes: Endogenous variable is ozone. Excluded instrument is Summer*Post*NBP. OLS includes county
fixed effects, year fixed effects, and detailed weather control variables. Data includes population of all
ages. IV regression includes specification of Table 6, column (5). GLS weights equal square root of the
relevant population. Regressions use counties with ozone monitors. Covariance matrix allows arbitrary
autocorrelation within each state-season. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                     50
Table 9. The Welfare Impacts of the NBP and the Social Benefits of Ozone Reductions
                                      Medications ($                     Mortality                 Total ($
                                        Million)         Number of Deaths     Monetized Value ($   Million)
                                                                                   Million)
Panel A. An Upper Bound Estimate of NBP's Social Costs
 Upper Bound Per Year                                                                               $759
 Upper Bound, 2003-2007 Total                                                                      $3,414

Panel B. Estimates of the NBP's Benefits
  Total Per Year                            $873               2,175                 $883          $1,756
  Total 2003-2007                          $3,929              9,788                $3,973         $7,902

Panel C: The Social Benefits of Ozone Reductions in the Eastern US
  1 ppb Ozone Decrease                    $312                 3,524                $1,431         $1,743
  1 Less Day With Ozone > 65 ppb          $106                 1,402                 $569           $675

Notes: All currency in 2006 dollars deflated using BLS CPI for urban consumers. Mortality dollar impact
uses the VSL of $1.93 million (2006 dollars) from Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004) and the age
adjustments from Murphy and Topel (2006, p. 888). The implied VSLs are as follows: $1.9 million
(infants); $1.5 million (age 1-64); $0.6 million (age 65-74); $0.2 million (age 75+). Total 2003-7 decrease
due to NBP assumes impact is for half of 2003 summer and for all of summers 2004-2007. NBP cost
upper bound is based on the mean permit price of $2,080/ton and estimated total abatement quantity of
412,380 tons. Panel C takes the IV estimates from Table 8 and applies them to the full population of the
NBP region.




                                                         51
Appendix Figure 1. Participation in NBP by State




Notes: Dark blue states are those participating in NBP during the 2003-2007 period (NBP states). Light
blue states are not participating (non-NBP states). White states are excluded from the main analysis
sample.




                                                 52
Appendix Table 1. Sensitivity Analysis: Emitted and Ambient Pollution
                                 Emitted Pollution                                Ambient Pollution
                           NOx           SO2       CO2      Ozone      Ozone≥65   CO     PM2.5    PM10        SO2         NO2
                            (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)           (7)      (8)       (9)         (10)
1. Original               -0.330     -0.069   -12.647   -3.250     -8.401   -0.017        -0.382   -0.896     0.106       -0.995
 State-Season Clusters  (0.066)*** (0.033)** (6.610)* (0.597)*** (2.546)*** (0.026)      (0.278)   (1.018)   (0.157)   (0.370)***
 County Clusters        (0.075)*** (0.054) (7.598)* (0.535)*** (2.442)*** (0.033)        (0.311)   (1.229)   (0.236)    (0.474)**
 State Clusters         (0.093)*** (0.047) (9.406) (0.842)*** (3.591)** (0.036)          (0.390)   (1.443)   (0.221)     (0.523)*
 State-Year Clusters    (0.050)*** (0.041)* (6.465)* (1.205)*** (3.770)*** (0.029)       (0.487)   (1.404)   (0.178)    (0.408)**
 County-Season Clusters (0.053)*** (0.038)* (5.372)** (0.382)*** (1.747)*** (0.024)     (0.223)*   (0.874)   (0.169)   (0.338)***

2. Counties With Ozone    -0.228*      -0.251    -69.209   -3.250***   -8.401*** -0.016 -0.583 -4.133 0.152             -1.111*
Monitors                  (0.121)     (0.204)   (45.352)    (0.597)     (2.546) (0.029) (0.411) (5.807) (0.251)         (0.569)

3. Including ME, NH, and -0.330***    -0.068** -12.373* -3.250***      -8.401*** -0.019 -0.380 -1.067 0.106 -0.995***
VT                         (0.066)     (0.032) (6.415)   (0.597)        (2.546) (0.025) (0.273) (1.053) (0.157) (0.370)

4. Monitors Operating ≥                                    -2.962*** -10.872*** -0.018 -0.519** -0.055 0.098            -0.649*
30 weeks                                                     (0.451)   (1.900) (0.023) (0.260) (1.183) (0.143)          (0.388)

5. Summer*Post*NBP                                           0.220       1.026
*VOC-Constrained                                            (1.179)     (4.631)

6. Summer*Post*NBP*                                        1.537***    4.936**
(High Weekend O3 )                                          (0.572)    (2.290)
Notes: Unless otherwise noted, each table entry shows the coefficient on Summer*Post*NBP from a
separate regression. Regression uses specification and sample of Tables 2-3 column (4) unless otherwise
noted. The entries after row 1 present different levels of clustering for standard errors. "Including ME, NH,
and VT" redefines the regression sample to include data from these three states. "Monitors Operating ≥ 30
weeks" uses a monitor selection rule which requires each monitor to have valid readings in 30 weeks of
each year in the data, rather than the 47-week rule used in the main results. "Summer*Post*NBP*VOC-
Constrained" reports the interaction of the main triple-difference term with an MSA indicator for being
VOC constrained based on Blanchard (2001). "Summer*Post*NBP*(High Weekend O3) interacts the main
triple-difference term with an indicator for whether the weekend/weekday ozone ratio of a county exceeds
1.05. This provides an alternative indicator of VOC-constrained regions. Regressions use 2001-2007 data.
Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                              53
Appendix Table 2. Sensitivity Analysis: Medications
                                               Respiratory
                                     All        + Cardio.         Gastrointestinal
                                       (1)          (2)                  (3)
1. Original                          -0.019       -0.023               -0.011
 State-Season Clusters            (0.006)***   (0.006)***            (0.006)*
 County Clusters                  (0.006)***   (0.006)***             (0.011)
 State Clusters                    (0.008)**    (0.009)**             (0.008)
 State-Year Clusters              (0.007)***   (0.008)***             (0.010)
 County-Season Clusters           (0.005)***   (0.005)***             (0.008)

2. Including M E, NH, and VT      -0.018***    -0.023***               -0.009
                                   (0.006)      (0.006)               (0.006)

                                  -0.015***    -0.022***            -0.019***
3. Log M edications (Not Costs)    (0.005)      (0.005)              (0.005)

4. Panel of People                 -0.013*      -0.018**              -0.001
                                   (0.007)       (0.007)              (0.010)

5. Levels (Not Logs)              -10.129***   -2.542***            -1.260***
                                    (2.115)      (0.642)              (0.316)

6. Purchase-Specific Costs        -0.016***    -0.022***            -0.023***
                                   (0.006)      (0.005)              (0.008)

Notes: Each table entry shows the coefficient on Summer*Post*NBP from a separate regression.
Regressions use specification of Table 4 column (3) unless otherwise noted. The entries after row 1
present different levels of clustering for standard errors. "Including ME, NH, and VT" redefines the
regression sample to include data from these three states. “Medications” uses counts of medication
purchases, rather than cost measures. "Panel of People" uses the much smaller panel of persons who
appear in all observations of the MarketScan sample. "Levels (Not Logs)" specifies the response variable
in levels rather than logs. "Purchase-Specific Costs" uses the raw reported prices, rather than averaging
across national drug codes to deal with outliers as in the main analysis. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10
(*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                             54
Appendix Table 3. Sensitivity Analysis: Hospitalization Costs
                                             Respiratory
                                     All      + Cardio.    External
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)
1. Original                        -5.997       -8.702      -3.629
 State-Season Clusters            (18.948)     (5.717)     (6.486)
 County Clusters                  (21.937)     (8.813)     (7.007)
 State Clusters                   (26.942)     (8.127)     (9.223)
 State-Year Clusters              (20.316)     (7.732)     (6.673)
 County-Season Clusters           (15.525)     (6.236)     (4.958)

2. Including M E, NH, and VT       -1.538       -6.084      -3.224
                                  (18.198)     (5.473)     (6.208)

3. Hospitalizations (Not Costs)    0.000      -0.002**      0.000
                                  (0.003)      (0.001)     (0.001)

4. Panel of People                 1.077        3.009       0.635
                                  (7.176)      (4.141)     (2.635)

5. Logs (Not Levels)               0.007       -0.116      -0.107
                                  (0.038)      (0.086)     (0.103)

Notes: Each table entry shows the coefficient on Summer*Post*NBP from a separate regression. The
entries after row 1 present different levels of clustering for standard errors. Regressions use specification
and sample of Table 5 column (3) unless otherwise noted. "Including ME, NH, and VT" redefines the
regression sample to include data from these three states. "Hospitalizations (Not Costs)" uses counts of
hospitalizations, rather than cost measures. "Panel of People" uses the much smaller panel of persons who
appear in all observations of the MarketScan sample. "Logs (Not Levels)" specifies the response variable
in logs rather than levels. Regressions use 2001-2007 data. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05
(**), <0.01 (***).




                                                           55
Appendix Table 4. Sensitivity Analysis: Mortality
                                           Respiratory
                                   All      + Cardio.         External
                                   (1)          (2)             (3)
1. Original                      -1.557       -0.547           0.115
 State-Season Clusters         (0.813)*      (0.675)          (0.309)
 County Clusters                (1.155)      (0.777)          (0.338)
 State Clusters                 (1.157)      (0.960)          (0.439)
 State-Year Clusters            (1.645)      (1.116)          (0.357)
 County-Season Clusters        (0.816)*      (0.550)          (0.239)

2. Including M E, NH, and VT   -1.699**      -0.671            0.146
                                (0.792)      (0.656)          (0.301)

3. Logs (Not Levels)           -0.006***    -0.008**           0.007
                                 (0.002)     (0.003)          (0.012)

4. Age-Adjustment               -1.504*      -0.762            0.116
                                (0.848)      (0.673)          (0.305)

Notes: Each table entry shows the coefficient on Summer*Post*NBP from a separate regression.
Regressions show specification and sample of Table 6 column (3) unless otherwise noted. The entries
after row 1 present different levels of clustering for standard errors. "Including ME, NH, and VT"
redefines the regression sample to include data from these three states. "Logs (Not Levels)" specifies the
response variable in logs rather than levels. “Age-Adjustment” modifies the response variable to use age-
adjusted mortality counts, rather than total deaths per population. Regressions use 1997-2007 data.
Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), <0.01 (***).




                                                         56
