NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CONTRIBUTION OF
INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSFERS TO

TOTAL WEALTH: A REPLY

Laurence J. Kotlikoff

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 1827

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1986

We thank Greg Mankiw, Andrew Myers, Jim Poterba, and Andrei Shleifer
for helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation and projects in Taxation and
Capital Formation and Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

DEER Working Paper #1827
February 1986

The

Contribution of Intergenerational
Transfers to Total Wealth:
A Reply

ABSTRACT

This paper responds to Franco Modigliani's recent critique of our 1981
paper on the importance of intergenerational transfers for U.S.

savings.

Modigliani's paper is the latest salvo in a long running debate over the
importance of intergenerational transfers in explaining savings behavior.

While Modigliani corrects an algebraic error of minor consequences in our
earlier paper, its correction does not, in our view, call into question the

fundamental conclusion that life cycle considerations can account for only a
small part of aggregate capital accumulation.

Inevitably, it is possible to

challenge aspects of any complex empirical calculation.
seem to us incorrect in most cases and

Modigliani's attacks

generally fail to address our primary

method of determining the importance of intergenerational transfers. Many
considerations at least as important as those raised

by Modigilani suggest

that our method produces an overestimate of the importance of life cycle
wealth.

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
National Bureau of Ecxnomic
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cairbridge, MA 02138

Research

Lawrence H. Surrnrs

Epartrent of

Eonornics

Littauer Center 229
Harvard University

Cartridge, MA 02138

—2—

Franco Modigliani's (1984) review of the evidence and analysis in our

1981 paper is the latest salvo in a long running debate over the importance
of
intergenerational transfers in explaining savings behavior. We welcome this
opportunity to address his criticisms and to place our 1981 results in

perspective. While Modigliani corrects an algebraic error of minor
consequences in our earlier paper, its correction does not, in our view, call
into question the fundamental conclusion that life cycle considerations
can
account for only a small part of
it is possible to challenge

aggregate capital accumulation. Inevitably,

aspects of any complex empirical calculation.

Modigliani's attacks seem to us incorrect in

most cases and generally fail to

address our primary method of determining the importance of intergenerational

transfers. Many considerations at least as important as those raised by
Modigliani suggest that our method produces an overestimate of the importance

of life cycle wealth. Modigliani is also extremely selective in his reporting
of the available evidence from other studies on the importance of
intergenerational transfers.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 evaluates the pre—existing
empirical evidence on the importance of intergenerational
adduces a number of considerations

transfers and

suggesting the plausibility of our

conclusion that life cycle considerations are not paramount in explaining

aggregate savings. Section 2 reviews our principal wealth accumulation method
for estimating the importance of transfers and Modigliani's criticisms of this

method. While Modigliani argues correctly that a modified treatment of
consumer durable expenditures would increase the estimated share of life cycle

wealth, our preferred adjustment is quite small. In addition, we find his
attack on our definition of life cycle wealth as "non—standard" unpersuasive

both historically and analytically. Indeed, we view our definition as

—3—

perfectly reasonable given the issue being addressed. Section 3 examines
estimates based on transfer flows, and shows that the available evidence does
not permit firm conclusions and provides no reason for doubting the

conclusions based on our main approach. Section 4 concludes the paper and
discusses directions for future research.

I. REVIEW OF EARLIER EVIDENCE
Modigliani's review of the available empirical evidence includes the
assertion that "all other estimates (agree) on the conclusion that wealth
received by inheritance and major gifts represent a modest fraction of the
total and that an exogenous large reduction in the flow of bequests would not

have a major effect on the privately held stock of wealth." This assertion is
belied by a large number of studies appearing before and after our 1981 paper
suggesting the overwhelming importance of bequest and other transfer saving in

aggregate wealth accumulation. Here we review five essentially independent
types of evidence suggesting the importance of intergenerational transfers.

We then argue that the survey evidence cited by Modigliani does not
demonstrate the unimportance of intergenerational transfers.

Historical Saving Patterns
The essential prediction of life cycle theory is that people save to

prepare for their retirement when they must dissave and consume. Without
periods of retirement or, at least, significantly decreased labor earnings at

the end of life there can be no life cycle motive for savings. Yet
substantial positive national saving rates antedate the advent of retirement

as an important economic phenomenon. Darby (1979) points out that, although
the ratio of expected retirement years to expected life span increased by 67

—4—

percent from 1890 to 1930, aggregate saving rates showed no increase during
this period as would be predicted by the life

cycle theory. Darby states "...

the saving income ratio during 1890—1930 was 3 to 4 times
higher than can be
explained on even a generous reading of the zero—bequest model." Indeed,
Feldstein's (1977) calculations based on the work of Kuznets suggest that the
rate of national saving in the United States
World War I than it has been since then.

was substantially greater before

Clearly the incentive to save for

retirement was far smaller in the earlier period than it is today)- Another
type of evidence suggesting that retirement saving may be less important than
many think is that the rate of saving today is high in

many less developed

countries where retirement is uncommon.

Age—Wealth Profiles

Decumulation of wealth after retirement is an essential aspect of the

life cycle theory. Yet simple tabulations of wealth holdings by age, Mirer
(1979) or saving rates by age, Thurow (1976) and Danziger et. al. (1984), do
not support the central prediction that the aged dissave. Mirer reports that
wealth holding tends to increase with

age. Thurow reports positive saving

rates for persons in all age groups, while Danziger et.al. report that saving
rates increase with age with ".

. .the elderly spend(ing) less than the

nonelderly at the same level of income and (with) the very oldest of the

elderly having the lowest average propensity to consume". A number of
questions can be raised about these and other analyses of age wealth profiles
including possible selection biases and their failure to take account of the

effects of Social Security. A careful survey of the literature on this issue
by Bernheim (1986) concluded that

—5—

"While some other studies have found evidence of wealth decumulation
after retirement, none have found that it occurs as rapidly as predicted
by life cycle models without bequest motives."

In his own analysis Bernheim (1986) finds ".

. .relatively

little dissaving

among any group of retirees", and his tests of rates of accumulation lead to
"...

empirical

refutation of life cycle implications."

Evidence from Annuity Markets
The strict life cycle model without allowance for bequest motives makes

strong predictions about the demand for annuities. Since the date of death is
uncertain and since bequests provide no utility, life cycle models imply that

there should be a very strong demand for annuity insurance. In fact, the
demand for annuities appears to be very weak. Friedman and Warshawsky (1984)
report that the loads on annuity insurance are no higher than the loads on
other frequently purchased types of insurance such as automobile collision

insurance or insurance against theft. Yet annuity purchases are a rarity.
Friedman and Warshawsky argue that it is necessary to invoke bequest motives

to explain this behavior. While Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) advance a
possible alternative explanation, namely that families will self—insure to a
large extent when annuity insurance is only available on very unfavorable
terms, this cannot fully account for the widespread failure to annuitize.

Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985) review a number of settings where
annuities are available on a fair or even subsidized basis and report that

even in these cases there is little demand to purchase annuities. They
conclude from this evidence that many consumers must have significant bequest
motives.

—6—

Wealth and Subsequent Consumptjon
An accounting identity holds that the present value of a consumer's
future consumption must equal the present value of the income he will receive
plus his existing wealth minus any transfers that he will make. This suggests

that the importance of transfers

may be inferred by looking at the fraction of

wealth and future labor income that is devoted to future consumption. Two
studies using very different types of data have taken this approach to
estimating the importance of intergenerational transfers.

Darby (1979) used

data on individuals' wealth holding and subsequent labor income and
consumption to conclude that at most 29 percent of U.S. private net worth is
devoted to future consumption.

White (1978) used aggregate data on the age

structure of the population, age earnings

profiles and consumption along with

a wide variety of parametric assumptions to conclude that the life cycle
hypothesis can account for only about a quarter of aggregate savings.

Simulation Studies

Simulation analyses also call into question the pure life cycle model.
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1985) show, in a detailed life cycle simulation model,
that realistic specification of U.S. demographics, preferences, and fiscal

institutions implies a very much smaller wealth to income ratio than that

actually observed for U.S. Their results differ from those of Tobin (1967)
because of their inclusion of social security and their more realistic
assumptions concerning the growth rate of consumption over the life cycle. In
order to generate substantial life cycle savings Tobin found it necessary to
assume that consumption grows at a much faster rate than actually observed.

—7—

Other simulation studies by Atkinson (1971) and Oulton (1976) point out
the difficulty of explaining wealth inequality on the basis of the zero

intergenerational transfer life cycle model. They find that the substantial
inequality in wealth relative to earnings can only be explained by bequest
behavior.

Modigliani' s Evidence

With his Table 1 Modigliani attempts to demonstrate an overwhelming
preponderance of evidence indicating that intergenerational transfers are not

an important aspect of private wealth holdings. Most of his evidence takes
the form of the observation, obtained in several surveys, that most people
report most of their wealth coming from their own saving rather than from
bequests or gifts. There are a nun1ber of problems with Modigliani's inference

from this evidence. First, as he acknowledges, much of total wealth may arise
from intergenerational transfers even if they are unimportant for the vast
majority of people who have little wealth and whose parents have or had little

wealth. Second, Modigliani's survey evidence fails in many cases to take
account of intervivos gifts. Even where gifts are included it is unlikely
that respondents report fully "implicit gifts" such as low interest loans,

shares in the family business, or payments of tuition. Third, none of the
surveys cited by Modigliani take account of the return earned by recipients on

past inheritances or gifts. It is likely that the accumulated value of most
transfers substantially exceeds their nominal value. Forth, the substantial
underreporting of wealth has been documented in the surveys Modigliani cites.
It seems plausible that unearned wealth is particularly subject to
underreporting.

—8—

Modigliani also attempts in Table 1 to provide estimates of the

importance of transfers based on "bequest flow" methods. These suffer from
the same difficulties of measurement as his other evidence. Some additional
conceptual difficulties are noted in Section III.
We turn next to a review of our method of accounting and

Modigliani's

criticisms of it. Before plunging into the details of the calculation, it is
perhaps appropriate to reiterate that our reading of the evidence is less

extreme than Modigliani suggests. Robert Solow (1982) considers much of the
same evidence, and states "My tentative conviction is that (the) view (that
intergenerational transfers appear to be the major element determining U.S.

wealth accumulation) is essentially right. It is reinforced by general
qualitative considerations."

II. DEFINING AND MEASURING LIFE CYCLE WEALTH
In his paper Modigliani focuses to a very large extent on two issues. The
first is "bequest flow" estimates of the importance of intergenerational
transfers to savings, and the second is the proper definition of life cycle

versus transfer wealth. Modigliani devotes little space to our main
contribution, the direct calculation of life cycle wealth. We devoted most of
our paper to the direct calculation of life cycle wealth because, as we
stressed, the "bequest flow" approach overestimates life cycle wealth due to

the absence of data on a variety of transfer flows. In addition, unlike the
direct calculation, the bequest flow approach requires invoking steady state

and other simplifying assumptions that may not be valid. This section
considers the measurement of life cycle wealth while the next section treats
the bequest flow calculations.

—9—

We address first the issue of properly defining life cycle wealth and
then discusses our direct estimates of life cycle wealth, including the proper

adjustment for the consumption of durables stressed by Modigliani. This
adjustment does not alter the basic conclusion that the pure life cycle model
without intergenerational transfers cannot explain the bulk of U.S. wealth.
We also point out several reasons why our calculation of life cycle wealth
appears to be significantly upward biased.

Defining Life Cycle Wealth
Our definition of life cycle wealth is motivated by the following

question: Are the U.S. data on labor earnings, rates of return, consumption,
and wealth broadly consistent with the view that intergenerational transfers

play a negligible role in U.S. wealth accumulation? Stated differently, can
one reject the null hypothesis that the life cycle model without

intergenerational transfers fully explains U.S. wealth? We defined life cycle
wealth according to the theorectical prediction of the zero intergenerational
transfer, life cycle model, namely as the sum over cohorts of the accumulated

difference between past streams of labor earnings and consumption. We defined
the difference between actual U.S. wealth and life cycle wealth as transfer

wealth. Transfer wealth must equal the sum over cohorts of the accumulated
value of past net intergenerational transfers.
While Modigliani asserts that this definition is non—standard and
unconventional, it is as standard as the life cycle theory itself; indeed, it
is the definition used by Ando and Modigliani (1963), and it is the definition
used in the two previous extensive analyses by Tobin (1967) and Darby (1979)

of the role of the pure life cycle model in U.S. wealth accumulation. While
Modigliani suggests that this definition yields "nonsensical" results, his

—10—

example of the use of this definition in his Table 2 clearly illustrates its
ability to distinguish between economies with and without significant
intergenerational transfers.

Rather than totaling over cohorts the accumulated difference between
labor earnings and consumption, Modigliani would have us total over cohorts
the sum of their past saving, where saving is income less consumption. The

problem with this definition is that income may include capital income earned

on previously received intergenerational transfers. Hence, the sum of saving
out of income can not be used to test with maximum power the null hypothesis
that the zero transfer life cycle model accounts for essentially all of U.S.

wealth because income may itself reflect intergenerational transfers. Nor can
Modigliani's definition be implemented without extremely elaborate adjustments
to remove the inflation component of the capital income earned from investing

gifts and bequests. Implementing it without inflation adjustments would lead
to the unacceptable implication that perfectly balanced inflation would
increase the share of life cycle wealth; i.e.

,

transfer

wealth defined by

Modigliani is the simple sum of past net transfer received by living

generations measured in nominal terms. A final limitation of Modigliani's
definition is that it does not correspond to an answer to any well posed
behavioral question.

Once one finds that the data are highly inconsistent with the zero
transfer, life cycle formulation, a natural behavioral question to raise is:
What would be the impact on U.S. wealth of eliminating all intergenerational

transfers? We raised this economic, as opposed to accounting, issue in our
paper, indicating how our definition and estimate of life cycle wealth could
be used to address this unrealistic, but nonetheless interesting
counterfactual. The answer to this economic question is, of course,

—11—

independent of accounting convention. Our assessment, to which we still
subscribe, was that totally eliminating intergenerational transfer would, in

partial equilibrium, reduce U.S. wealth by at least 50 percent. This economic
as opposed to accounting statement suggests a much more important role for
intergenerational transfers than has generally been thought to be the case.

The Age of Adulthood
A second issue of definition discussed in our paper and raised as well by

Modigliani is the proper age of adulthood. As Modigliani points out this is
an arbitrary choice. At one extreme one could assume that adulthood begins at
birth, in which case the accumulated difference between the labor earnings and
consumption of young cohorts would be significant negative numbers, and our
calculation of 1974 life cycle wealth would be substantially smaller than the
figure we report; indeed, this assumption would lead to a negative value for

life cycle wealth. At the opposite extreme one could assume that adulthood
begins at a very late age, say age 40. In this case all the consumption and
earnings of those under age 40 must be imputed to their relatives over age 40,
and the value of life cycle wealth would be very much larger than we report.

In our calculation of 1974 life cycle wealth we choose age 18 as the age

of adulthood. In our view this age, while appropriate for the post war
generations alive in 1974, is probably too old for older cohorts alive in 1974

some of whom were born in the last century. Many of these older generations
entered the labor force at younger ages than is currently typical, and they

certainly had much shorter lifespans. Hence, it seems reasonable to believe
that the generally perceived age of adulthood for the older cohorts in 1974

was less than age 18, and perhaps as young as 16. Indeed, until the l950s
labor force participation rates were calculated relative to the over 14

—12—

population. Had we used age 16 for older 1974 cohorts as the age of adulthood
we would have reported considerably less life cycle wealth than what we did
report.

Given our choice of age 18 as the age of adulthood, we ascribe all

consumption expenditures and earnings of those 18 and over to those adults who
are directly consuming the expenditures and supplying the labor.

Hence, the

consumption of a 25 year old graduate student of educational services, as well
as food, clothing, etc. is counted as her consumption rather than that of her

parents. In contrast, Modigliani argues that the consumption of educational
services should be ascribed to the parents when the parents are financing the

education. A problem with this line of reasoning is that money is fungible;
i.e. ,

there

is no reason to treat differently the case of a graduate student

whose tuition is directly paid by her parents and the graduate student who
pays the tuition from her own check book, but receives an equivalent amount of

money from her parents "for" food, "for" a car, "for" a vacation, etc. More
importantly, provision of higher education and support during the period of
education represents a major form of intergenerational transfers and should be
treated as such. In sum, we see no reasonable way to label certain payments

from parents to their adult children as "transfers" and others as "parental

consumption". From the perspective of the customary view of the life cycle
model it would be inappropriate to treat children as adults, but it is equally
inappropriate to treat adults as children.

Consumer Durables

In our earlier paper we reported 1974 life cycle wealth of $733 billion
compared with 1974 household net worth of $3,884 billion, implying that 1974

life cycle wealth is only 18.9 percent of 1974 total wealth. The life cycle

—l 3—

wealth figure was constructed by accumulating earnings less consumption for

each male and female cohort with living members in 1974. The age and sex—
specific levels of consumption and earnings used in this calculation were
derived by distributing total consumption and labor earnings in each year
beginning in 1900 according to cross section profiles of relative consumption
and earnings by age and sex.

In forming cross section relative age—consumption profiles we simply used

expenditures on durables rather than imputing rent on durables. As Modigliani
points out, this treatment of durables has the effect of ascribing too much
consumption in a given year to younger individuals and too little consumption
to older individuals and biases our calculation towards too little life

cycle

wealth. In retrospect there is a very easy way to adjust for durables. This
is just to exclude the stock of consumer durables from total wealth. Our
previous treatment of durables involved treating durables expenditures as
consumption for purposes of calculating cohort—specific values of consumption,

but, unfortunately, not for purposes of calculating total wealth. Stated
differently, our calculation of life cycle wealth really corresponds to life
cycle accumulation of wealth excluding durables and should be compared with

total wealth excluding durables. Since the stock of durables in 1974 was $530
billion, this correction lowers the total stock of wealth to be explained to

$3,349. Since $773 billion is only 21.9 percent of adjusted total wealth,
this adjustment raises our estimate of the life cycle wealth share only
trivially, from 18.9 percent to 21.9 percent.

In contrast to this correction of 3 percentage points, the correction for
the failure to impute rent on durables reported by Modigliani is 26 percent

raising from 18.9 to 44.9 percent the share of life cycle wealth. Before
thinking of the straightforward adjustment procedure described in the

—14—

preceding paragraph, we assisted Modigliani in using the 1972 Consumer
Expenditure Survey to try to estimate both the stock of durables and the

implicit rent on durables. This initial crude adjustment for durables
involved using the 1972 cross sectional durables expenditure information and

invoking steady state assumptions to infer past expenditures on durables by

households in the 1972 survey. These estimated past purchases of durables
were then depreciated to arrive at estimated 1972 stocks of durables, from

which rent was then imputed. The calculation turned out to be quite sensitive
to the assumed steady state growth rate. One version of the calculation
corresponds to Modigliani's reported 26 percent adjustment. We place little
reliance on this adjustment since, unlike any of the other calculations in our

estimation of life cycle wealth, it invokes quite unrealistic steady state

assumptions. These include the assumption that past expenditures on durables
at each age equaled the 1972 expenditure of the corresponding age group
deflated by a constant growth rate factor.

Modigliani's preferred adjustment raises the estimate of life cycle
wealth from $733 billion to $1,743 billion, or 44.9 percent of total wealth.
Note that while this figure is over twice as large as our much more defensible
21.9 percent adjusted estimate, life cycle wealth is still less than half of
total wealth implying an important role for intergenerational transfers.

Upward Biases in our Original Calculation of Life Cycle Wealth
As we pointed out in our original paper there are several biases in our

calculation suggesting that we overestimated life cycle wealth. In order to
generate at least some positive value for life cycle wealth we adjusted
upwards standard estimates of the labor income of the self—employed by 20
percent. Since the ratio of self employed workers to employees was

—15—

substantially larger in the prewar period than it is today, the calculated

value of life cycle wealth is fairly sensitive to this assumption. Using
standard estimates of the labor income of proprietors would reduce estimated

life cycle wealth by about $700 billion. We also assumed in the calculation a
ratio of average female earnings to average male earnings equal to .55,
although the data suggest that a ratio closer to .45 is more appropriate.

Using .45 as the ratio would reduce our estimate of life cycle wealth by

between $100 and $150 billion. A variety of other biases also increased our
estimate of life cycle wealth. These include our assumption that the profile
of relative consumption by age is flat after age 75 and our assumption of zero

earnings after age 75. In addition, one could argue that for many older 1974
cohorts an age of adulthood younger than 18 is appropriate. This adjustment
would lower the estimate significantly. Needless to say, if we adjust for
durables by simply excluding the stock of durables from total wealth and make
these additional adjustments to our initial $733 billion figure, we would
arrive at a negative value of life cycle wealth.

Explaining our Result
It may be useful to repeat our basic explanation for why life cycle wealth is

so small in the U.S. Unlike simple class room depictions of hump saving in
which the consumption profile is flat and the earnings profile rises to
retirement, actual age earnings and age consumption profiles, such as those in
Figures 1, and 2 which are reproduced from our paper, have essentially

identical shapes and levels prior to at least age 45. Between ages 45 and 60
there is clearly some hump saving in that earnings profiles continue to rise
through the early 50s and then decline slowly through age 60 while consumption
profiles flatten out, and after age 60 there is clearly dissaving in the sense

—16—

that the age consumption profile exceeds the age earnings profile. However,

since this pattern of hump saving and dissaving occurs quite late in the life
cycle one would not expect a large accumulation of life cycle wealth in the
aggregate because the life cycle wealth of the more numerous generations below

age 45 is so small. The simple fact is that consumption does not rise more
rapidly through life than labor income.

III. LOWER BOUND ESTIMATES OF LIFE CYCLE WEALTH BASED ON THE "BEQUEST FLOW
METHOD"
The "bequest flow" method refers to using information on the current flow
of intergenerational transfers and assuming the economy is in a steady state

to estimate stocks of life cycle wealth. In our original paper we presented
estimates for transfer wealth based on this method. Modigliani focuses
extensively on this short section of our paper. We stressed that these were
lower bound estimates because there are no data sources that systematically
report intergenerational transfers made in the form of implicit and explicit

gifts. Explicit gifts, which may be in kind as well as in cash, are clearly

acknowledged as such by donors and recipients. Implicit gifts, such as making
one's son an equal earning partner in a lucrative family business or providing
low interest loans to children, may not be viewed as a gift by donors and

recipients and would be hard to identify and quantify in a survey. Since the
U.S. distribution of wealth is highly skewed implicit gifts, while perhaps

small in number, could be very large in value. Hence, any flow estimates of
transfer wealth, including those of Modigliani, should be viewed as
potentially seriously downwards biased.

—17—

A second concern with the bequest flow method is that it requires
invoking steady state assumptions that may be far from valid. It may be, for
example, that the flow of intergenerational transfers in relation to the scale
of the economy was much greater in the 1920s than in the 1960s and 1970s, the

period for which our transfer flow data is available. Finally, even if one is
willing to accept the steady state assumption, the simple formulae that we and
Modigliani examine assumes that everyone dies at a given age D, that all
transfers are received at a given age I, and all transfers are made at a given

age, C. This is obviously unrealistic, and it is not clear exactly what
choice of these three ages best approximates reality. As we indicated in the
beginning of our earlier paper, the correct approximation depends critically
on the steady state value of the real interest rate, r, and the steady state

growth rate, n. For example, when r exceeds n, our measure of transfer wealth
depends on the period of accumulation. Hence, if half of transfers are
received at age 20 and half at age 60, using age 40 for I would be
inappropriate, since transfers received at age 20 should receive more weight
in the approximation formula because they are accumulated for a much longer
period than transfers received at age 60 and because the accumulation function

is a nonlinear function of age. In sum, we feel that direct calculation of
life cycle wealth is decidedly preferred to using the steady state "bequest
flow" method both because of the nature of available data and the

approximations required in the latter approach. This view led to the emphasis
in our earlier paper on the direct estimation of life cycle wealth.

Turning to our actual flow calculation, Modigliani points out an
algebraic error in our formula relating the stock of transfer wealth, T, to

the annual flow of intergenerational transfers, t. The correct formula, which
is simply a rewrite of Modigliani's, is:

—18—

T —

—s--- e_D

(r—n)

[

i—

e]

In the formula in our paper we omitted the last term e(Tr)I.
To illustrate the implication of the formula we discussed an example in
which D equals 55 (a real word age of death of 73 if the age of adulthood is

18), (G—I) equals 30, and (r—n) equals .01. Because of our algebraic error we

did not assume a value for I. In his paper Modigliani uses a value of I equal
to 25, which corresponds to a real world age of 43. We favor a value of I
equal to 15 reflecting the fact that the appropriate approximation to I should
be smaller if r exceeds n than if r equals n; i.e., since when r exceeds n,
transfer wealth depends on the period of accumulation using the simple
transfer—weighted age of transfer receipt in the formula would bias downward

the estimated stock of transfer wealth. It appears that a similar statement
is true of the choice of the age gap factor (C—I); thus, it is likely that our
choice of 30 for (C—I) is too small given that we apply the formula to the
case that r exceeds n.

In the illustration in our paper we used a value of 45 for the factor

multiplying t in the formula for T. Taking I equal to 25 Modigliani
calculates a value of 35 for this factor. With our preferred value for I of
15 the factor is 39. Since we reported a lower bound estimate for t of $45.4
billion our revised upper bound "bequest flow" estimate for the stock of life
cycle wealth, using I equals 15, is $2,113 billion, which is 54 percent of

1974 household wealth. Note that if we use an age gap (C—I) factor of 45
which may be more appropriate since r exceeds n, the upper bound estimate of
life cycle wealth is $1,429 billion, or only 37 percent of 1974 household net
worth.

—19—

IV. IMPLICATIONS OF OUR FINDINGS FOR VIEWING THE LIFE CYCLE MODEL AND FOR
FUTURE RESEARCH
The finding that intergenerational transfers are a key feature of U.S.
wealth accumulation has not lessened interest in the pure life cycle model.
On the contrary, a variety of researchers, including Sheshinski and Weiss
(1981), Davies (1981), Eckstein, Eichenbaum, and Peled (1983), and Abel
(1983), and Hubbard (l984a, l984b) have investigated the potential for
unintentional intergenerational transfers within models in which households
have pure life cycle preferences, but in which annuity markets do not exist.
Kotlikoff, Spivak, and Shoven (1984, 1986) also consider nonaltruistic life
cycle preferences and show that significant intergenerational transfers can
arise in a setting of partial annuity insurance provided by family members.
Other researchers, such as Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985) view
intergenerational transfers within a pure life cycle model as the implicit
payment by parents to their children for material and other types of support.
A third view of intergeneration transfers that contains an important role for
the pure life cycle model is espoused by Kurz (1984) and others, namely that

society is heterogeneous, with a large number of relatively poor households
with pure life cycle preferences and a small number of relatively altruistic
extended families with significant bequest motives.

Since the short and potentially long run impact of fiscal policies
depends on the relative number of life cycle households in the U.S. economy, a
statistic that is unknown, it remains important to understand the impact of

fiscal policies within the pure life cycle model. To that end Summers (1981),
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1986), Seidinan (1984), Gahvari (1985), Lawrence

(1983), and many others have examined fiscal policies within pure life cycle

models. These theoretical and simulation studies have been accompanied by a

—20—
large volume of empirical research testing the implications of the pure life
cycle model.

In sum, research on, and interest in the life cycle model has never been

greater than in the last few years. Moreover, the nature and heterogeneity of

household saving behavior remains poorly understood. In our view, additional
research investigating the nature of saving preferences rather than additional
wealth accounting holds the key to understanding the very important role of
intergenerational transfers as well as the contribution of pure life cycle
saving motives to U.S. wealth accumulation.

—21—

Notes

1.

More recent statistics also point to an inverse correlation between the
duration of retirement and the U.S. saving rate. Kotlikoff and Smith
(1983) report that since 1950 the expected duration of retirement and
other nonworking periods for the average adult has almost doubled. This
change coincided with a secular decline of over 40 percent in the rate of
U.S. saving out of net national product (Boskin and Kotlikoff,l985).

N

N
Is

S

•
S

a

'a • a as•5
aaai
a
a

•

a

a •aaSa.a.• aaa.S... •5

S

S

•

a•

N

S

•S• •S•

.'

sSSaau 53$

..cO53sPt,oa

a55
5
IS

N

IS

IS
ISIS

ISIS

ISIS

55

iSIS

P5

1151

Fu.. 1.—Sum olmak and temak longitudinal average earnings and average consumpDon prohki. age 18 in 1910—age 82 in 1974.

I.. PN.*.S.

I'S

0I 5.111..

II,

S

•• e

••
•a

IS

aS

S

•

.
•

IS

5•

••IS5NNG$

. COUIINN

•S

'-V.-.- .

sa
IS

•
ISIS

ii

$55.

ISIS

IS

AN

ISIS

Fu;. 2.—Sum ol male and female longitudinal average earnings and average consumption probks, age 18 in 1940—age 52 in 1974.

—22—

References
Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani, "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests", American Economic Review, March 1963.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy,
forthcoming Cambridge University Press, 1986.
and —————, "Simulating Alternative Social Security Responses to the
Demographic Transition," National Tax Journal, June 1985.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the Pure Life Cycle
Hypothesis," forthcoming in Issues in Pension Economics, NBER vol.,
University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Bequests as a
Means of Payment", forthcoming Journal of Political Economy, 1986.
Boskin, Michael J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Public Debt and U.S. Saving: A
New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis", Carnegie—Rochester Conference
Volume Series, Feb. 1986.

Danziger, S., J. Van der Gaag, E. Smolensky, and M. Taussig, "The Life Cycle
Hypothesis and the Consumption Behavior of the Elderly," Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 1983.

Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital Stock,
Wash., DC: Amer. Ent. Inst., 1979.

Darby, Michael R. ,

Davies, James, "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement,"
Journal of Political Economy, June 1981.
Eckstein, Zvi, Marty Eichenbaum, and Dan Peled, "Uncertain Lifetimes and the
Welfare Enhancing Properties of Annuity Markets and Social Security",
mimeo, 1983.
Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshansky, "The Cost of Annuities: Implications
for Saving Behavior and Bequests," NBER Working Paper, No. 1682, Aug.
1985.

Gahvari, Firooz, "Taxation of Housing, Capital Accumulation, and Welfare: A
Study in Dynamic Tax Reform", Public Finance Quarterly, 1985.
Hubbard, Glenn R., "Uncertain Lifetimes, Pensions, and Individual Saving,"
NBER Working paper No. 1363, 1984a.
Hubbard, Glenn R., "Precautionary Saving Revisited: Social Security,
Individual Welfare, and the Capital Stock," 1984b.
Lawrence, Emily, "Do Transfers to the Poor Reduce Savings?", mimeo,1983.

—23—

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Daniel E. Smith, Pensions in the American Economy,
University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., John Shoven, and Avia Spivak, "Annuity Market's
Savings, and the Capital Stock," NBER Working Paper No. 1250, 1984.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "The Impact of Annuity Insurance on Savings and
Inequality," forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics, 1986.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Role of Intergenerational
Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 89, No. 3, 1981.
Kurz, Mordecai, "The Life Cycle Hypothesis as a Tool of Theory and Practice",
mimeo 1984.
Menchik, Paul and M. David, "Income Distribution, Life Time Saving and
Bequests," The American Economic Review, September 1983.
Mirer, Thad W., "The Wealth—Age Relation Among the Aged," American Economic
Review, June 1979.
Modigliani, Franco, "The Contribution of Intergenerational Transfer to Total
Wealth," paper presented to the Paris Conference on Modeling the
Accumulation and Distribution of Wealth, Sept. 1984.
Modigliani, Franco, "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, Twenty Years Later,"
in M. Parkin, ed., Contemporary Issues in Economics, Manchester
University Press, 1975, pp. 2—36.
Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and Aggregate
Consumption Functions: An attempt at integration," The Collected Papers
of Franco Modigliani (edited by A. Abel), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
1980.

"Utility

and
Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross—Section Data" in K.K. Kurihara, ed., Post—
Keynesian Economics, Rutgers University Press, 1954, pp. 388—436.
,

Seidman, Laurence S., "Taxes in a Life Cycle Growth Model with Bequests and
Inheritances", American Economic Review, June 1983.
Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, "Uncertainty and Optimal Social Security
Systems," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1981.
Solow, Robert, "Reflections on Saving Behavior", in Saving and Government
Policy, conf. series no. 25, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1982.
Summers, Lawrence H., "Capital Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model", American Economic Review, Sept. 1981.

—24—
Thurow, Lester, Generating Inequality, Basic Books, 1976
Tobin, James, "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth," in Ten Economic Studies
in the tradition of Irving Fisher, Ed.: William Feliner et al. NY: Wiley,
1967, pp.231—56.
White, Betsy Buttrill, "Empirical Tests of the Life—Cycle Hypothesis,"
American Economic Review, Sept. 1978, 68(4), pp.547—60.

</ref_section>

