NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND SUBNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA
Stelios Michalopoulos
Elias Papaioannou
Working Paper 18275
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18275
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We thank seminar participants at Dartmouth, Tufts, Oxford, Vienna, Brown, Harvard, Princeton, Stanford,
UC-Berkeley, UC-Davis, NYU, AUEB, the CEPR Development Economics Workshop,the CEPR-UPF
Workshop on the Political Economy of Development and Conflict, the World Bank, the IMF, the NBER
Political Economy Meetings, the NBER Summer Institute Meetings in Economic Growth and Income
Distribution and the Macroeconomy for valuable comments. We also benefited from discussions with
Yannis Ioannides, Rafael La Porta, Antonio Ciccone, Rob Johnson, Raphael Frank, Jim Feyrer, Ross
Levine, Avner Greif, Jeremiah Dittmar, David Weil, Sandip Sukhtankar, Quamrul Ashraf, Oded Galor,
Ed Kutsoati, Pauline Grosjean, Hans-Joachim Voth, Enrico Perotti, Pedro Dal Bo, Nathan Nunn, Raquel
Fernandez, Jim Robinson, and Enrico Spolaore. We are particularly thankful to Andy Zeitlin, Melissa
Dell, Andrei Shleifer, Nico Voightlander, Daron Acemoglu, and seven anonymous referees for detailed
comments and useful suggestions. We also thank Nathan Nunn for providing the digitized version
of Murdock’s Tribal Map of Africa. This paper draws on material from Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
("Divide and Rule or the Rule of the Divided?" 2011). All errors are our sole responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa
Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 18275
August 2012, Revised August 2013
JEL No. N17,O10,O4,O43,Z10
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of national institutions on subnational African development in a novel framework
that accounts both for local geography and cultural-genetic traits. We exploit the fact that the political
boundaries in the eve of African independence partitioned more than two hundred ethnic groups across
adjacent countries subjecting similar cultures, residing in homogeneous geographic areas, to different
formal institutions. Using both a matching-type and a spatial regression discontinuity approach we
show that differences in countrywide institutional structures across the national border do not explain
within-ethnicity differences in economic performance, as captured by satellite images of light density.
The average non-effect of national institutions on ethnic development masks considerable heterogeneity
partially driven by the diminishing role of national institutions in areas further from the capital cities.
Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Few other issues have received more inquiry in the social sciences than "what are the fundamental determinants of comparative development?" The institutional view asserts that poorly
performing institutional structures, such as lack of constraints on the executive, poor property rights protection, as well as inefficient legal and court systems are the ultimate causes
of underdevelopment (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) for a review). Yet other
works downplay the role of formal institutions, emphasizing instead the importance of geographical features, informal cultural norms, genetic, and epidemiological traits (see Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2013) for a review).
This paper investigates the role of national institutions on comparative development in
Africa, developing a methodology that exploits in a "quasi-experimental" setting the artificial
drawing of African borders -that took place in the European capitals in the mid-late 19th
century, well before African independence and at a time when Europeans had hardly settled
in the regions whose borders were designing. The drawing of colonial boundaries partitioned
in the eve of African independence more than 200 ethnicities across two (or more) countries.
Taking advantage of this historical accident, we compare economic performance in adjacent
regions belonging to the historical homeland of the same ethnic group, but falling in different
countries and are thus subject to different formal institutions. This identification strategy
accounts both for differences in the natural environment (as the two neighboring regions have
similar geography-ecology) and for ethnic-specific cultural and anthropological traits (as people
from the same background reside at the two sides of the border).
Our identification strategy entails two major challenges. First, we need to identify in a
systematic way ethnic homelands partitioned by national borders. The second challenge derives
from the sparsity of economic performance indicators at the local (country-ethnicity) level. On
the first issue we exploit anthropological data from the pioneering work of George Peter Murdock (1959), who has produced a map portraying the spatial distribution of African ethnicities
in the mid/late 19th century (Figure 1a). Projecting Murdock’s map on contemporary national
boundaries (Figure 1b), allows us to identify in a systematic manner ethnic groups that have
been split by the national borders. On the second issue, to overcome the paucity of economic
data across African regions we build on the recent contribution of Henderson, Storeygard, and
Weil (2012) and measure development at the ethnicity-country level using satellite images of

1

light density which are available at a fine grid.

Historical Boundaries of
Ethnicities Before Colonization
and National Boundaries

Historical Boundaries of
Ethnicities Before Colonization
Traditional Ethnic Homelands

Traditional Ethnic Homelands
Contemporary National Boundaries

Ü

Ü

Figure 1a: Ethnic Boundaries

Figure 1b: Ethnic and Country Boundaries

Figures 2a − 2b illustrate our approach using as example the Ambo, an ethnic group partitioned between Angola (a country scoring quite low in most proxies of national institutions)
in the North and Namibia (an institutionally advanced African country) in the South. In our
empirical analysis we investigate whether differences in national institutions between adjacent
countries explain differences in economic performance (as proxied by luminosity) within the
historical homeland of the same ethnic group. We perform our analysis at two levels of aggregation; across partitioned ethnic areas in each country (Figure 2a) and across pixels falling in
the homeland of split groups (Figure 2b). For the Ambo luminosity is higher in Namibia, the
more institutionally developed country.

Ü

Ü

Ambo Group Partitioned Between Angola and Namibia

Ambo Group Partitioned Between Angola and Namibia

Pixels w ith Zero Li ght Density in 07-08

Light Density in 2007-2008

Pixels w ith Positive Light Density in 07-08

Mean Luminosity for Ambo's partition in Angola: 0.0504

Border Between Angola (North) and Namibia (South)

Mean Luminosity for Ambo's partition in Namibia: 0.162

Figure 2a

Figure 2b
2

Yet, this is not the case for the Kaonde and the Anyi groups split by the Zambia - Democratic
Republic of Congo border and the Ghana - Ivory Coast border, respectively. As Figures 2c
and 2d show, a larger faction of the ethnic homeland of both groups is lit in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and in Ivory Coast, although national institutional quality is significantly
higher at the other side of the border (in Zambia and Ghana, respectively).

Ü

Ü
Anyi Group Partitioned Between
Ivory Coast and Ghana

Kaonde Group Partitioned
Between Zambia and Dem. Republic of Congo

Pixels with Zero Light Density in 07-08

Pixels with Zero Light Density in 07-08

Pixels with Positive Light Density in 07-08

Pixels with Positive Light Density in 07-08

Border Between Ghana (East) and Ivory Coast (West)

Border Between Dem. Rep. of Congo (North) and Zambia (South)

Figure 2c

Figure 2d

Results Summary Our analysis that spans all African partitioned ethnicities reveals
new empirical regularities. First, we document that differences in national institutions across
the border do not systematically translate into differences in economic performance within
partitioned ethnicities. While there is a significant positive correlation between national institutions and development across ethnic homelands, once we properly account for geographicecological and ethnic-specific differences via the inclusion of ethnicity fixed effects, the correlation weakens considerably and becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero. This pattern
obtains both when the unit of analysis is a partitioned ethnic region (see Figure 2a) and when
we take advantage of the finer structure of the luminosity data to obtain multiple observations
within each partition (see Figures 2b, c, d); moreover when we conduct a spatial regression
discontinuity (RD) analysis that identifies the (local) effect of national institutions at the border we also find a close-to-zero effect. The lack of a systematic association between national
3

institutions and regional development within partitioned African homelands cautions against
extrapolating from the positive cross-country correlations.
Our results go against the conventional wisdom in economics on the causal impact of
national institutions on development, in Africa at least; yet they are consistent with the African
historiography that de-emphasizes the importance of colonial and contemporary countrywide
institutions in the hinterland (e.g., Herbst (2000), Davidson (1992)). Moreover, our findings
are in line with recent works that emphasize traits besides formal institutions, such as cultural
norms, family ties, or important historical episodes (see Algan and Cahuc (2013), Alesina and
Giuliano (2013), and Nunn (2013) for recent reviews).
Second, we show that the insignificant correlation between national institutions and
ethnic development masks considerable heterogeneity. We find that the average effect of institutions is economically negligible and statistically insignificant for approximately 60% of
partitioned ethnicities. Yet, for some groups, consisting of approximately 20% − 25% of the
sample, a significant positive association emerges, whereas for the remaining ones the withinethnicity association turns negative. Overall, the uncovered heterogeneity provides a useful
reminder that generalizing from the findings of case studies focusing on a single border discontinuity can be quite misleading. Meanwhile, it suggests that case studies may be useful for
shedding light on the specific circumstances that allow countrywide policies to shape regional
development.
Third, building on insights from the African historiography that stress the inability of
states to broadcast power in regions far from the capital (e.g., Herbst (2000), Bates (1983)),
we examine the spatial distribution of the uncovered heterogeneity. Contrary to the overall
pattern, we find that national institutions do correlate with subnational development, but only
when both partitions are close to the respective capital cities. We also present complementary
evidence on the limited penetration of national institutions expanding our analysis to the
universe of African groups; in particular, we show that the explanatory power of national
institutions on regional development decays for ethnic homelands (and pixels within groups)
further from the capital centers.
Fourth, we augment our analysis on the differential role of national institutions far from
the capital using individual-level data from the Afrobarometer Surveys on law enforcement and
self-identification (with the nation versus the ethnicity). Our within-country analysis shows
that law enforcement weakens monotonically in areas further from the capitals. Moreover,
national (as opposed to ethnic) identification is also inversely related to distance to the capital.
These results thus further illustrate the limited penetration of country-wide institutions in the
hinterland.

4

Related Literature Our research nests and advances over several strands of literature
that examine the political economy of contemporary comparative development.
First, an influential body of research asserts that through persistence, the institutions
that European powers established during colonization are the deep roots of contemporary
economic performance (e.g., La Porta et al. (1997, 1998); Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002)).
Yet despite the implementation of ingenious instrumental-variable approaches employed in the
cross-country literature, omitted variables and estimate stability remain major concerns (see
Glaeser, La Porta, de Silanes, and Shleifer (2004), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2008), and Nunn (2012), among others). By exploiting within-country variation, our study
circumvents some inherent limitations of the cross-country framework;1 moreover, we move
beyond average effects and uncover the interplay between national institutions, state presence,
and proximity to the capital.
Second, our identification scheme that exploits border discontinuities in institutional
arrangements relates to works that study the role of national policies across a particular border.
In an early contribution Miguel (2004) compares public policies in health and education across
the Kenya-Tanzania border to examine the effect of Tanzanian nation-building efforts. Bubb
(2012) investigates how differences in de jure property rights between Ghana and Ivory Coast
affect development in border areas finding that in spite of large differences in formal institutions,
there are no differences in the actual enforcement of property rights. Cogneau and Moradi
(2011) examine differences in education and religiosity across the Ghana-Togo border and
link them to different colonial investments; whereas Cogneau, Mesplé-Somps, and Spielvogel
(2012) examine access to electricity, consumption, and health at the borders of Ivory Coast
with Ghana, Mali, and Burkina Faso, finding mixed evidence on the role of economic and
institutional development. Finally, Miles (1994) studies the development of the Hausa after
their partitioning (at the Niger-Nigeria border), documenting that differences between French
and British policies (mainly regarding the role of local chiefs) endured after independence and
had long-lasting effects.
Our study, rather than focusing on the role of national features across a single border
or within a single group, examines the role of national institutions on development across all
partitioned ethnicities in Africa. Thus our results are less sensitive to the usual "external
validity" arguments readily invoked in the context of case studies or works exploiting a single
discontinuity. Moreover, our expansive focus sheds light on the underlying heterogeneity and
uncovers the limited penetration of national institutions in areas far from the capital. The
1

In this regard our work is mostly related to works that exploit within-country variation on institutions, such
as Banerjee and Iyer (2005), Iyer (2010), Laeven and Woodruff (2007), De Long and Shleifer (1993), Dell (2010),
Grosjean (2011), Tabellini (2010), and Gennaioli, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2013).

5

latter finding is related to parallel works of Campante and Do (2013) and Campante, Do, and
Guimaraes (2013), who link capital city isolation with misgovernance and economic efficiency.
Third, our results relate to the large literature in African political economy (see Bates
(2008) and Dowden (2008) for eloquent narratives) that stresses features beyond national institutions; these include colonial investments in education, health and infrastructure (e.g.,
Huillery (2009) and Jedwab and Moradi (2012)), ethnic partitioning (e.g., Englebert, Tarango,
and Carter (2002) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013a)), fractionalization (e.g., Easterly and Levine (1997) and Alesina, Devleeschauwer, Easterly, Kurlat, and Wacziarg (2003)),
inequality across ethnic lines (e.g., Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2013)), and
geography-health (e.g., Nunn and Puga (2012) and Alsan (2012)).
Of most relevance from this body of research is our companion paper (Michalopoulos
and Papaioannou (2013c)), where we explore the long-lasting importance of ethnic (as opposed to national) political/institutional traits for contemporary African development. The
main finding is that among numerous ethnic-specific features (related, for example, to the type
of subsistence economy, occupational specialization, slavery, etc.), the legacy of pre-colonial
political centralization appears to be a robust correlate of contemporary regional economic
performance (Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) provide similar cross-country evidence). In
contrast to these works that highlight the role of historical persistence at the ethnic level, in
this paper we examine the role of national institutions, which have been a dominant theme
in the growth literature and in policy circles alike. In addition, our finding that national institutions wield significant explanatory power near the capitals, which rapidly diminishes for
regions in the hinterland, highlights the importance of ethnic norms and reveals the coexistence of a dual institutional framework within African countries (Lewis (1954), Migdal (1988)).
Moreover, a methodological innovation of the present study is that we identify the role of national institutions within partitioned ethnic groups taking advantage of the arbitrary drawing
of African borders and thus accounting for any (un)observable ethnic-specific differences across
the diverse African tribal landscape. This has significant advantages over works exploiting
cross-cultural variation and is motivated by the standard-textbook introduction on the role
of national institutions showing the divergence in economic performance within culturally and
geographically homogeneous entities, like North and South Korea, or East and West Germany
(see Weil (2008)).
In this regard our paper is related to subsequent work by Pinkovskiy (2013), who studies
discontinuities in satellite-recorded light density at night across the globe and links them to
country-level economic development -and its main correlates (e.g., human capital, institutional
capacity, etc.). In line with our findings, Pinkovskiy (2013) shows that borders of African na-

6

tions tend to be relatively underdeveloped, with limited penetration of government activities
and substantial economic activity concentrated around capital cities.2 Moreover, our focus is
on discontinuities within partitioned ethnic homelands; as such we effectively account for both
geography-ecology and ethnic-specific features, related to history, social structure, and genetics.
In fact, the uncovered weak and insignificant correlation between national institutions and subnational development within geographically and culturally homogeneous territories contributes
to an emerging body of work that emphasizes the importance of cultural norms, historical persistence, and human and geographic traits for comparative development (see Diamond (1997),
Landes (1998), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006), Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), Putterman
and Weil (2010), Ashraf and Galor (2013) and Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2012),
among others).
Paper Structure In the next section we describe how we identify partitioned groups
and discuss the luminosity data that we use to proxy subnational development. In section 3 we
discuss the estimating framework and detail the identification design. In Section 4 we report the
baseline estimates on the average effect of national institutions on economic development within
partitioned ethnic homelands. We also present spatial regression discontinuity (RD) estimates
that quantify the effect of national institutions at the border. In Section 5 we estimate the role
of national institutions separately for each split group mapping the overall heterogeneity. In an
effort to understand the latter, in Section 6 we explore how proximity to the capital shapes the
explanatory power of national institutions on regional development. In section 7 we summarize
discussing avenues for future research.

2

Data

2.1

Identifying Partitioned Ethnicities

Murdock’s map (Figure 1a) portrays the spatial distribution of ethnicities across Africa in the
mid/late 19th ; it depicts 826 ethnic areas inhabited upon colonization (in total there are 834
polygons, but 8 regions are classified as "uninhabited"). Intersecting the pre-colonial map
with the 2000 Digital Chart of the World (Figure 1b) that portrays contemporary national
boundaries we obtain 1, 247 country-ethnicity observations (e.g., Ambo in Angola, Ewe in
Togo, Zulu in South Africa). We classify an ethnicity as partitioned when at least 10% of
the historical homeland belongs to more than one contemporary state. We drop partitioned
areas of less than 100 square kilometers as tiny partitions are most likely due to the lack
2

Note that focusing on Africa is desirable since, in contrast to African borders, in Europe and most other
parts of the world national borders have been contested by numerous wars and are the outcome of active state
formation and (in)voluntary people’s movements.

7

of precision and projection error. Our procedure identifies 526 partitions that belong to the
historical homeland of 227 ethnic groups. We report estimates for 220 partitioned ethnicities
(507 country-ethnicity observations), because for six groups (the Ifora, the Kunta, the Berabish,
the Atta, the Teda, and the Asben) the local population estimates indicate zero population (in
one of the two partitioned areas); moreover, we lose information from the Imragen -which are
partitioned between Western Sahara and Mauritania- because we do not have information on
national institutions for Western Sahara.

Ethnic Groups
Partitioned by the
National Borders

Light Density in 2007-2008
Across Ethnic Partitions
National Boundaries in 2000

Ü

Light Density in 2007-2008
0.000 - 0.001
0.002 - 0.020

National Boundaries in 2000

0.021 - 0.119

Historical Ethnic Homelands

0.120 - 8.537

Ü
Figure 3b

Figure 3a

Appendix Table A lists partitioned ethnicities. Examples include the Ewe that have
been partitioned between Ghana and Togo (shares 44% and 56%, respectively), the Esa between Ethiopia and Somalia (shares 52% and 44%, respectively, while a small fraction falls in
Djibouti), and the Yao (Wayao) between Mozambique (65%), Malawi (13%), and Tanzania
(22%). Our procedure reveals that the median country in Africa has 43% of its population
belonging to partitioned ethnicities. This estimate is similar to that of Asiwaju (1985) and
Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011), who using alternative sources and techniques estimate that on average 40% of the African population belongs to partitioned ethnic groups.
Thus our analysis, while focusing on partitioned homelands, captures a significant fraction of
the African population (Figure 3a).
Case study and anecdotal evidence suggest that in spite of population movements ethnic
populations tend to reside in their respective historical homelands. Nunn and Wantchekon
(2011) document that close to 55% of respondents in the Afrobarometer Surveys currently live in
their ethnic group’s ancestral homeland. In the same vein, Glennerster, Miguel, and Rothenberg
(2013) document in Sierra Leone that after the massive displacement of the 1991 − 2002 civil
8

war there has been a systematic movement of individuals towards the areas of their ethnic
group’s historical homeland.

2.2

Satellite Light Density at Night

The nature of our study requires data on economic development at the country-ethnic homeland
level. Since there are limited geocoded measures of economic development in Africa, we build
on the recent contribution of Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) and use satellite images
on light density to proxy local economic activity.
Data come from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program’s Operational Linescan
System (DMSP-OLS) that reports time-stable images of the earth at night captured between
20 : 00 and 21 : 30. The measure ranges from 0 to 63 and is available for every 30-second
area pixel (approximately 1 square kilometer). The satellite detects lights from human settlements, fires, gas flares, lightning, and the aurora. The annual composite measure is created by
overlaying all daily images captured in a year, dropping images where lights are shrouded by
cloud cover or overpowered by the aurora or solar glare (near the poles), and after removing
ephemeral lights (like fires, lightning and other noise).3 Using these data we construct light
density per square kilometer for 2007 and 2008 averaging across pixels that fall within the
historical homeland of each ethnic group in each country.
Besides its availability at a very fine geographic level, luminosity is well suited to spatial
analyses of development in Africa for some additional reasons. First, most African countries
have low quality income statistics, both at the national and the sub-national level (Jerven
(2013)). Second, we lack data on regional incomes for most African countries; and while there
are some local proxies of poverty and health, these do not map to our ethnicity level unit of
analysis.
Despite a series of works that establish a strong within-country correlation (both across
time and across regions) between light density at night and GDP in the on-line Supplementary
Appendix (Section 1) we provide further cross-validation checks of the luminosity data in our
context.4 Specifically, using individual-level data from the Afrobarometer Surveys on access
to electrification, presence of a sewage system, access to piped water, and education we show
that light density correlates strongly with these proxies of public goods and development both
3

See Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011) for technical details on the
lights data. Satellite data on light density at night are subject to overglow/blooming; this happens because
lights tend to appear larger than they are over water and snow. While this issue is not particularly important
in our application as we do not have observations near the poles and covered with snow, in many specifications
we control for water area and distance to the coast. Another issue with the light data comes from top coding that usually happens in the capitals of developed countries. Yet, in Africa instances of top-coding are rare.
4
See Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012), Elvidge, Baugh, Kihn, Kroehl, and Davis (1997), Doll, Muller,
and Morley (2006), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013c), and Pinkovskiy (2013), among others.

9

across Afrobarometer enumeration areas within countries and within ethnic homelands as well
as across the border within partitioned ethnicities.

2.3

National Institutions

We measure national institutions using data from World Bank’s Governance Matters Database
(Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)). The World Bank assembles numerous de facto
institutional quality measures (originally compiled by various non-governmental organizations
and risk assessment agencies) and aggregates them into six categories via principal components
aiming to minimize measurement error. We mainly use the rule of law index that reflects the
effectiveness of the judiciary and the quality of property rights protection. As many studies on
African development focus on graft, we also report results using the control of corruption index.
Both variables range theoretically between −2.5 and +2.5 with higher values indicating better
functioning institutions and less corruption. To account for reverse causality and measurement
error, we use predetermined values of the institutional quality measures, taking the mean over
the period 1996−2006 (the results are robust to the choice of year). In our sample the countries
with the lowest rule of law are Somalia (−2.195), the Democratic Republic of Congo (−1.88),
and Liberia (−1.73) while South Africa (0.156), Namibia (0.1675), and Botswana (0.615) are
the most institutionally developed countries in Africa.

2.4

Data Patterns

There is significant variation both in national institutions and luminosity across African borders
(Figure 3b). Sharp border discontinuities in rule of law appear in several parts of Africa. For
example, in the Botswana and Zimbabwe border (where the Hiechware, the Subia, and the
Tlokwa are partitioned); across the Namibia and Angola border (where the Ambo are split);
between Kenya and Somalia (where the Bararetta and other Somali tribes reside); and between
Gabon and Congo (where the Duma live). Likewise, there are evident changes in luminosity
across the border within the homeland of the same ethnic group. On the one hand, despite
differences in national institutions, in around 25% of the sample there are negligible differences
in light density across the border. On the other hand, in about 40% there are more than one
log point differences in luminosity. For example, sizable jumps in luminosity appear in the
Egypt-Sudan border (where the Ababda and the Barabra are split), in the border between
Ghana and the Ivory Coast (where the Assini reside), and between Benin and Togo (where the
Popo are split).

10

3

Identification

3.1

Estimating Framework
Specification at the Country-Ethnic Homeland Level Our analysis on the re-

lationship between national institutions and regional development is based on variants of the
following specification:

yi,c = a0 + γIQLc + λ1 P Di,c + λ2 AREAi,c + Xi,c
Φ + ai + εi,c .

(1)

The dependent variable, yi,c , reflects the level of economic activity in the historical
homeland of ethnic group i in country c, as proxied by light density. Since a significant fraction
(around 30%) of the (country-ethnicity) observations takes on the value of zero, we use as dependent variable the log of light density adding a small number ((yi,c ≡ ln(0.01+LightDensityi,c )).5
The logarithmic transformation is useful because we use all observations and because we account for some extreme values in luminosity (outliers).
Specification at the Pixel Level We also exploit the fine structure of the luminosity
data to obtain multiple observations (pixels) within a partitioned ethnic area in each country;
we do so running the following regression equation (variant of (1)).

Φ + ai + ζ p,i,c .
yp,i,c = a0 + γIQLc + λ1 P Dp,i,c + λ2 AREAp,i,c + Xp,i,c

(2)

The dependent variable, yp,i,c , is a dummy that takes on the value one if pixel p is lit and
zero otherwise. Each pixel, p, falls in the historical homeland of partitioned ethnicity i located
in country c (see Figures 2b − d for examples). In our analysis we use pixels of 0.125 x 0.125
decimal degrees (approximately 12.5km x 12.5km). Since there are several unpopulated pixels
(in the Sahara or in the rainforests) and to make sure that we examine the role of national
institutions on development properly, we exclude pixels with zero population.6 This results
to more than 120, 000 observations across all African ethnic homelands, with 42, 710 of those
belonging to partitioned ethnicities.
While conceptually the unit of our analysis is a partition of a group (Figure 2a), the
pixel-level specifications (Figure 2b) are useful for several reasons. First, by looking at the
extensive margin of light density we account for the non-linear nature of luminosity. Second,
the linear probability models facilitate the interpretation of the estimates. Third, we are able
5

A zero level of light density occurs either because the area is extremely sparsely populated without any
electricity or because the satellite sensors cannot capture dimly lit areas. In the previous draft of the paper we
added one (rather than 0.01) to the luminosity data before taking the logarithm finding similar results.
6
The coefficient estimates are similar when we also consider unpopulated pixels and/or if we construct pixels
of alternative size.

11

to control for various -relevant for development- characteristics at a fine level. Fourth, it is
straightforward to augment the pixel-level specification with RD polynomials on distance to
the national border, so as to estimate the effect of national institutions at the border. Fifth, we
can estimate the pixel-level specification for each partitioned ethnicity separately and explore
potential heterogeneity on the impact of institutions on development.
Independent Variables IQLc denotes institutional quality of country c, as reflected
in the rule of law and the control of corruption measures. For split groups, each partition is
assigned to the corresponding country c. For example, regional light density in the part of the
Egba in Benin is matched to the institutional quality of Benin, while the adjacent area of the
Egba in Nigeria is assigned the value of Nigeria.
In most specifications we control for log population density, P D(p),i,c , because the association between luminosity and economic development strengthens and because by doing so
the estimates capture the role of institutions beyond population density. We also control for
the log of land area, AREA(p),i,c ; although most pixels are of the same size, those intersected
by the coast line, national and ethnic boundaries are smaller (see Figures 2b, c, d).
Vector X(p),i,c includes additional controls at the ethnic-homeland level (in (1)) or at the
pixel level (in (2)).7 The Data Appendix provides variable definitions and data sources. Table
1 reports summary statistics in the sample of partitioned ethnicities (at the country-ethnic
homeland level in Panel A and at the pixel level in Panel B).8
Inference In all specifications we employ the approach of Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2011) and cluster standard errors along the country and the ethnic-family dimension.
Murdock assigns the 826 groups into 96 ethnolinguistic clusters. This double-clustering parameterization accounts for two main concerns related to non-adjusted standard errors. First,
within each country we have several ethnic homelands (or pixels) where the country-level rule
of law and the control-of-corruption measures take the same value and thus clustering at the
7

Specifically, we control for land suitability for agriculture and average elevation. The latter has affected
African development both via goods and slave trades (see Nunn and Puga (2012)). We also control for surface under water to account for blooming in the luminosity data and for the potential positive effect of water
streams on development via trade. Moreover, we control for malaria suitability since many studies document its
detrimental effect on development (see Gallup and Sachs (2001)). We also include indicators for the existence
of oil and diamonds fields to account for the "natural resource" curse (see Ross (2012)). Finally, we add a set
of controls measuring the distance from the capital city, the national border, and the coast, respectively. The
coefficient on distance from the capital may reflect the impact of colonization and the limited penetration of
national institutions due to the poor infrastructure (we formally explore this possibility below). Distance to the
border captures the potentially lower level of development in border areas. Distance to the sea coast captures
the effect of trade, but to some extent also the penetration of colonization. This is because during the colonial
era (and the slave trades) Europeans mainly settled in coastal areas.
8
In Supplementary Appendix Table 2 we report summary statistics for the full sample of African ethnic
homelands, 1, 209 country-ethnic observations and 120, 501 pixels.

12

country-level is required (Moulton (1990)). Likewise, clustering at the ethnic family accounts
for intra-ethnic-family correlation in (un)observed features. Second, the multi-way clustering
method allows for arbitrary residual correlation within both dimensions and thus accounts
for spatial correlation; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011) explicitly cite spatial correlation as an application of the multi-clustering approach (see Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) and
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013c) for applications of the multi-way clustering method
in a similar context). We also estimated standard errors accounting for spatial correlation
of an unknown form using Conley’s (1999) GMM method. The two approaches yield similar
standard errors.

3.2

Validity of Identification Design

For our identification strategy that compares economic development at the homelands of the
same ethnicity in adjacent countries to be valid, one needs that border drawing should not have
been influenced by local circumstances and factors that themselves shape or reflect economic
well-being (see Angrist and Pischke (2008)). Moreover the ethnic areas across the border need
to be similar across all relevant for development dimensions. We have thus investigated these
issues in detail.
First, all the anecdotal evidence suggests that colonizers drew African borders in an
arbitrary manner (see Wesseling (1996), Asiwaju (1985), Herbst (2000), and Englebert (2009)
for eloquent reviews); the delineation of African borders took place in a period (late 19th
century), when Europeans had not yet settled (most of) Africa and had limited knowledge of
its political and economic geography; moreover, at that time colonizers were mostly assigning
spheres of influence via the establishment of protectorates, colonies and free-trade-areas, let
alone the borders of future African states. Consistent with the historical narratives on the
artificiality of African borders, Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011) document that close
to 80% of African borders follow latitudinal or longitudinal lines, the highest percentage across
all continents. Moreover, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013a) show that besides land
mass and water area, there are no systematic differences between non-split and partitioned
ethnicities, across dozens of potentially relevant for development factors, related to geography,
natural resources, the disease environment, and historical traits (capturing the intensity of
pre-colonial conflict, political centralization, the type of subsistence economy, the intensity of
the slave trades, etc.). Yet, since some borders may have been drawn taking into account
local conditions, in the Supplementary Appendix we report estimates restricting attention
to ethnicities partitioned by borders that follow relatively straight lines (as identified by the
"box-count" method of Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011)). The results are virtually

13

unchanged (see the associated discussion in the Supplementary Appendix and Appendix Tables
9A and 9B).
Second, although research shows that ethnic groups tend to occupy geographically homogenous territories (Michalopoulos (2012)), we investigated whether differences in institutional quality across the border correlate with differences in various characteristics. Table 2 Panels A and B report ethnicity fixed effects estimates ("similarity" regressions) that associate
geographic, ecological, and natural resource measures with the rule of law and the control of
corruption index, respectively. In Panels C and D we focus on the two largest partitions of
the 220 split groups (440 observations) and examine whether there are systematic differences
between regions falling in the relatively high and the relatively low institutional quality country. The results are supportive of our identification strategy, as they point out that the two
(or more) partitions of partitioned ethnicities are appropriate counterfactuals. Differences in
geography-ecology, location, and natural resources across the border within partitioned ethnic
homelands are small and not systematically linked to differences in national institutions.9

4
4.1

Baseline Results
Preliminary Evidence. Cross-sectional Analysis.

Before we report the baseline ethnicity fixed effects estimates, we examine the cross-sectional
patterns running simple LS specifications that associate regional development with national
institutions. Due to reverse causation and omitted variables, these specifications do not identify
causal effects; yet they are useful for understanding the raw data patterns. Table 3 - Panel
A reports estimates at the country-ethnicity level (1, 209 observations), while Panel B reports
similar estimates at the pixel level (120, 501 observations). Specification (1) shows that there is
a positive and significant correlation between the rule of law index and regional development.
In column (2) we control for log population density and log land area, whereas in column (3) we
control for distance of each ethnic area (in Panel A) or each pixel (in Panel B) to the capital city,
the national border, and the coast ("location controls"). While all distance terms enter with
significant coefficients, the estimate on the rule of law index retains its economic and statistical
significance. In column (4) we augment the model with a rich set of geographic-ecological
and natural-resource controls. Conditioning on geography reduces the coefficient on national
institutions (approximately by 35%) though the estimate retains its statistical significance.10
9
In Supplementary Appendix Section 2 we report similar specifications at the pixel level and present regression
discontinuity graphs showing that there are no jumps at the border within ethnicities across numerous geographic
and location feature (Appendix Figures 4a − 4g).
10
Land suitability for agriculture, which reflects climatic (temperature and precipitation) conditions, enters
most models with a positive and significant estimate. The malaria stability index enters in all specifications with

14

The results are similar when we use the control of corruption index (in (5)-(8)).
The coefficient in column (4) of Panel A implies that a one-point-increase in the rule of
law index (roughly 2 standard deviations), which corresponds to moving approximately from
the institutional quality of Angola to that of Gabon, is associated with a 0.70 log points increase
in regional luminosity (approximately half a standard deviation) and an 8% higher likelihood
that a pixel is lit.
The correlations in Table 3 echo the findings of cross-country works; although the association between institutional quality and development weakens when one accounts for geography,
it remains significant. Yet the fact that a small set of observable geographic features explains
a moderate fraction of the cross-sectional correlation between institutional quality and ethnic
development suggests that other unobserved or hard-to-measure aspects of geography-ecology
and culture may further weaken the association.

4.2

Ethnicity-Fixed-Effects Estimates

Having established that regions across the national border that are part of the historical homeland of the same ethnicity are reasonable counterfactuals (in Table 2) and having explored the
cross-sectional patterns (in Table 3), we now examine the correlation between national institutions and luminosity within partitioned groups. Table 4 - Panel A gives the results at the
country-ethnic homeland level (equation (1)), while Panel B reports the results at the pixel
level (equation (2)). For comparability, in odd-numbered columns we report cross-sectional
estimates, while in even-numbered specifications we add ethnicity fixed effects. The crosssectional estimates in columns (1) and (5) suggest that border areas that belong to countries
with higher institutional quality display higher levels of development. For example, the estimate of the linear probability model in column (1) implies that a one-point increase in the rule
of law index increases the likelihood that a populated pixel is lit by approximately 11%.
Yet when we solely exploit within-ethnicity variation, the coefficients on rule of law and
control of corruption drop sizably and become statistically insignificant. This is a uniform
pattern across all permutations. At the country-ethnic homeland level the estimates fall from
0.65 to 0.19 and from 0.79 to 0.26. The coefficient drop in the linear probability models is
starker; the estimate drops from 0.11 to 0.025 in the case of rule of law and from 0.14 to 0.037
in the case of the control of corruption index.11 We also investigated formally whether the
a statistically negative estimate. The coefficient on land area under water is positive and in many specifications
significant. Elevation enters with a negative estimate, which is significant in some models. The petroleum
dummy enters always with a significantly positive coefficient. The diamond dummy enters with a negative
coefficient that is significant in some permutations.
11
The results are similar when we use the level of luminosity at the country-ethnic homeland level as the
dependent variable. In the analogous to columns (1) and (5) cross-sectional models the estimate (standard

15

estimates on national institutions are statistically different between the cross-sectional and the
within-ethnicity models performing a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) Hausman-like test;
the latter suggests that the difference in the coefficients is statistically significant at standard
confidence levels. The insignificance of the ethnicity fixed-effects estimates is not driven by a
decrease in the precision of the coefficients, since the standard errors remain largely unchanged
(in Panel A) or even fall (in Panel B); it is the drop in the coefficient magnitude that is
substantial.
Figures 4a-4b below illustrate the lack of a systematic within-ethnicity correlation between light density and institutional quality at the national level. The insignificance is not
driven by a few (influential) observations; the within R2 of the unconditional model is tiny, less
than 0.02, implying a negligible economic effect.

Econonomic Development and National Institutions
Evidence from Within Ethnicities Across the National Borders

Econonomic Development and National Institutions
Evidence from Within Ethnicities Across the National Borders

Condit ional on Ethnicity FE and Log Population Density

2
1
0
-2

-1

Log Light Density of Group i in Count ry c

2
1
0
-1
-2

Log Light Density of Group i in Count ry c

3

3

Conditional on Ethnicity FE and Log Population Density

-1.5

-1
-.5
0
.5
National Institutional Quality in Country c; Rule of Law Index

-1

1

-.5
0
.5
Nat ional Institutional Quality in Country c; Control of Corruption Index

1

Figure 4b

Figure 4a

In Table 5 we restrict estimation to areas close to the national border focusing in columns
(1)-(2) and (5)-(6) on areas within 50 kilometers from each side of the border (total 100 kilometers), while in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we focus on regions within 25 kilometers of each
side of the border (total 50 kilometers). The idea of this approach (which is similar in spirit to
local regressions in regression discontinuity designs) is that by focusing on areas very close to
the border, we further neutralize the role of unobservable factors. While in the cross section
there is a strong positive association between national institutions and regional development,
the within-ethnicity coefficients of rule of law and control of corruption are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. This applies both at the country-ethnicity sample (in Panel
A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B). The lack of significance is not driven by an increase in
the standard errors; in all permutations two-standard-error bands in the within-ethnicity estimates exclude the analogous cross-sectional ones. The cross-sectional estimates fall by more
error) on the national institutions measures is 0.18 (0.09) and 0.215 (0.1065). Once we include ethnicity fixed
effects the estimates (standard errors) fall considerably to 0.05 (0.09) and 0.05 (0.13). See Appendix Table 6.

16

than two thirds once we add ethnicity fixed effects (from 0.68 to 0.083 in (1) and from 0.86 to
0.09 in (4)). Similarly, the linear probability estimates drop from 0.10 − 0.14 to 0.02, implying
tiny economic effects. The statistical and economic insignificance of the coefficient is therefore
casting doubt on the causal interpretation of the simple cross-sectional association between
national institutional quality and subnational development.12
A Note on Ethnicity Fixed Effects Across all model permutations in Tables 4 − 5,
the ethnicity fixed effects are jointly significant at the 99% confidence level. Moreover, most of
the ethnicity constants are individually highly significant. This suggests that African subnational development has a strong local geographic-ecological or/and ethnic-specific component.
Since our focus is on isolating the effect of national institutions from local geographic and cultural traits, we do not examine in detail which aspects of the local environment the ethnicity
fixed effects capture. Yet, given the importance of this issue, in the Supplementary Appendix
(Section 3) we conduct a preliminary analysis using anthropological data from George Peter
Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (1967) that records various quantitative measures of cultural,
economic, and political traits for a large sample of African ethnicities. The cross-ethnicity
specifications show that simply conditioning on the degree of pre-colonial political centralization (a key correlate of both economic and institutional development in Africa; see Gennaioli
and Rainer (2007, 2006) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013c)) or/and the type of
the subsistence economy (dependence on agriculture and pastoralism, in particular) weakens
considerably the cross-sectional coefficient on the national institutions proxy that becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero. These preliminary findings are in accord with recent
works on the deep origins of African development that emphasize the key role of ethnic traits,
as opposed to national features (see Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013b) for a review of
recent studies).

4.3

Regression Discontinuity (RD) Estimates

We now report the results from the regression discontinuity (RD) approach that identifies the
(average) effect of national institutions at the border.
Our RD specification within the two major partitions of each ethnic group takes the
following form:

yp,i,c = a0 + γIQLHIGH
+ f(BDp,i,c ) + λ1 P Dp,i,c + λ2 AREAp,i,c + Xp,i,c
Φ + ai + ζ p,i,c . (3)
c
12
The insignificance of the coefficient on national institutions is not driven by the double clustering of the standard errors. In many specifications clustering only at the country level suffices to make the estimate statistically
indistinguishable from zero at standard confidence levels.

17

The difference with specification (2) is that since we aim at identifying the effect of
national institutions on regional development at the border, we add RD-polynomials of the
distance from the centroid of each pixel to the national border (f(BDp,i,c )), allowing the coefficients on the polynomial terms to be different for each side of the boundary. IQLHIGH
is a
c
dummy variable that takes on the value one for pixels falling in the country with the relatively
better institutions, as reflected either in the rule of law or in the control of corruption index.13
This RD-type design (see Imbens and Lemieux (2008); Lee and Lemieux (2010)) exploits the
discontinuity in the quality of national institutions at the border to identify institutions’ local
average (treatment) effect.
Previous research has employed variants of the above regression equation using different
control functions of the running variable (distance to the border in our application) and limiting
estimation close to the discontinuity using different bandwidths. Some researchers control for
high-order polynomials in the forcing/running variable using all observations (both far and
close to the discontinuity), as this approach maximizes the sample and is more efficient (e.g.,
Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004)). Others estimate local regressions limiting their analysis to
an area close to the discontinuity either including or excluding the polynomial control function
(e.g., Dell (2010), Angrist and Lavy (2002)). For completeness, we employ all approaches and
experiment with different bandwidths.
Baseline Results Table 6 - Panel A reports the RD results that identify the effect of
national institutions on development exactly at the border. In columns (1)-(2) we use all pixels
across the two major partitions of split-by-the-border ethnic homelands, controlling flexibly
for the distance to the discontinuity using a cubic RD polynomial and a fourth-order RD
polynomial, respectively. On average the likelihood that a pixel is lit is just one percentage
point higher in the country with the relatively higher institutional quality. The coefficient on
the dummy that switches to one for ethnic regions falling in the relatively less corrupt country
is even smaller (in (7)-(12)). Specifications (3)-(6) and (9)-(12) report local-linear regression
results narrowing estimation to pixels within 50 or 25 kilometers from each side of the border
(total bandwidth 100km and 50km, respectively), while including the RD polynomial terms.
The coefficient on the high institutional quality country is close to zero (in some specifications
is negative) and statistically insignificant. In Panel B rather than including a common to all
partitioned ethnicities RD polynomial, we include ethnic-specific polynomial terms on distance
to the border (i.e., allowing for the effect of the running variable to be different for each
13
In previous drafts of the paper, we used the value of the rule of law or the control of corruption measures, rather than the high/low institutional quality transformation. The coefficients on the two proxies of
national institutions measures in these "difference-in-discontinuities" specifications were small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero.

18

group). The RD estimates on the national institutions measures are small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero across all perturbations.
Graphical Illustration Figures 5a and 5b provide a visual illustration of the RD
results. The Figures plot the average likelihood that a pixel is lit for bins of 5 kilometer width,
conditioning on log pixel area and log population density in areas close to the national border
(the vertical line marks the national border). We report results using a 100 kilometer and a 50
kilometer bandwidth, respectively. The Figures also plot predicted pixel-level luminosity from a
regression that includes a third-order RD polynomial on distance to the border fitted separately
for pixels in the partitions that fall in the relatively high institutional quality country (where
distance takes on positive values) and pixels falling in the relatively low institutional quality
country (where distance takes on negative values). In line with the RD estimates in Table 6
there are no discernible differences in luminosity crossing the national boundary towards the

-100

-50
0
50
Distance t o the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

100

National Institutions and Light Density in 2007-2008
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins
.1

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitt ed on each Side

0

0

.1

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitt ed on each Side

-.1

Luminosity within a 5-km Bin Conditional Ln(Pop. Dens.) and Ethnicit y FE

National Institutions and Light Density in 2007-2008
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

-.1

Luminosity within a 5-km Bin Conditional Ln(Pop. Dens.) and Ethnicit y FE

more institutionally developed country.

-50

0
Distance t o the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

50

Figure 5b

Figure 5a

Large Discontinuities In Table 7 we report RD specifications (with a third and
fourth-order polynomial in distance to the national border) as well as simple ethnicity fixed
effects estimates for the two-major partitions of groups split between countries with large, defined as higher than the median or larger than the 75th percentile, differences in rule of law or
in graft. By focusing on adjacent countries exhibiting substantial differences in national institutions (e.g., Botswana-Zimbabwe, Kenya-Somalia, Ghana-Ivory Coast) we minimize concerns
that the insignificance of the estimates is due to measurement error or/and is driven by small
differences in national institutions across the border. The estimated coefficients on the two
measures of national institutions are quantitatively small (very close to zero) and statistically
insignificant across all permutations.

19

4.4

Sensitivity Checks

We have performed numerous perturbations to investigate the robustness of the lack of systematic association between national institutions and regional development within partitioned
African ethnicities. We report and discuss in detail these robustness checks in the on-line Supplementary Appendix (in Section 4). Specifically, we show that the results are similar when:
(1) we express luminosity in levels and estimate the specifications with either OLS or Poisson
pseudo-maximum likelihood estimator that accounts for the non-linear nature of the luminosity (see Silva and Tenreyro (2006)); (2) we use the alternative institutional quality measures
from World Bank’s Governance Database; (3) we use the 2007 values of the rule of law or the
control of corruption measures; (4) we restrict estimation to ethnic homelands partitioned by
straight-line-like borders; (5) we proxy ethnic development with log population density; (6) we
account for population clustering near the border, temporary migration, and bleeding of the
lights data by excluding areas very close to the border; (7) we drop observations iteratively
from the Northern, Southern, Central, Western, or Eastern Africa, respectively; (8) we replace
ethnicity fixed effects with border fixed effects; (9) we experiment with a two-dimensional RD
polynomial on latitude and longitude (see Dell (2010)); (10) we perform our analysis in a
smaller sample of 32 partitioned ethnicities using data from the 2005 Afrobarometer household
surveys on public goods provision and education as the dependent variable.

5

Heterogeneity

Our estimates so far summarize the average effect of national institutions on development
across all split ethnicities; conducting the analysis for the universe of split groups is useful
as it accounts for idiosyncratic features both across specific borders and across ethnicities.
Moreover, studying the link between national institutions and ethnic development across all
partitioned homelands makes the estimates less prone to "external validity" concerns that
characterize case-study evidence. Nevertheless, the richness of the quasi-natural experiment of
ethnic partitioning in Africa allows us to estimate the role of national institutions separately
for each split group. Doing so will help reveal whether the weak correlation between national
institutions and subnational development within groups reflects a generalized phenomenon or
conceals considerable heterogeneity. Finding the latter will set stage for exploring the factors
that give rise to the observed pattern.
As a first step of moving beyond average effects, we repeated our estimation for groups
split within each of the main African regions (using Nunn’s (2008) classification). The results
(reproduced in Appendix Table 16) suggest that the relationship between national institutions

20

and ethnic development varies across African regions. On average for (28) groups split within
countries in Southern Africa those partitions belonging to the more institutionally developed
nations are more economically developed. However, the opposite is true when we focus within
North Africa (though the number of split groups is quite small). In Eastern and Western
Africa differences in national institutions have no bearing on the within-ethnicity economic
performance, while in Central Africa there is some evidence of a significantly positive association.
National Institutions and Subnational Development - Heterogeneity

National Institutions and Subnational Development - Heterogeneity

Conditional on Log Population Density and Log Pixel Area

0

0

1

1

2

Density
2

Density
3

3

4

4

5

Unconditional Estimates

-1

-.5
0
.5
Ethnic-Specific Coefficient on High Rule of Law Index

-1

Figure 6a

-.5
0
.5
Ethnic-Specific Coefficient on High Rule of Law Index

Figure 6b

Perhaps more importantly, we estimate the correlation between national institutions and
pixel-level development separately for each split group. Figure 6a reports the distribution of
the unconditional estimates on the high rule of law binary index; this is similar to a simple test
of means of the likelihood that a pixel is lit on the two sides of the border. Figure 6b plots the
distribution of the estimate when we condition on log population density and log pixel area.14
(The results are similar when we include additional controls or/and RD polynomials.)
A couple of interesting patterns emerge. First, both the average and the median value
of the ethnic-specific estimates are zero; this applies both to the unconditional and to the
conditional coefficients. Moreover, the mass of the distribution is centered on zero. Not only
the coefficient is small, but for about 120 groups (62.5%) the absolute value of the t-statistic
in the conditional estimates is less than 1.60, implying statistically insignificant patterns.
Second, better national institutions translate into a significantly higher regional development for approximately 38 cases (around 20% of the sample). The Ambo, depicted in Figure
2b, is one such example. Other examples where differences in rule of law translate into increased luminosity include the Thonga (split by the border of South Africa and Mozambique),
14

The histogram plots 190 ethnic-specific coefficients. This is because for 30 ethnicities, all pixels on both sides
of the border are unlit (hence the role of national institutions cannot be estimated). Examples of ethnicities
with zero luminosity on both sides of the border include the Mundu (split by the Sudan-Zaire border), the Koma
and the Suro (split by the Ethiopian-Sudan border), and the Karamojong (split between Kenya and Uganda).

21

the Seke (split between Gabon and Equatorial Guinea), and the Tukulor (split by the SenegalMauritania border).
Third, in approximately 30 − 34 cases the coefficient for the high institutional quality
country is significant, but with the "wrong" sign; so in roughly 17% of the sample of partitioned
groups, we obtain the counter-intuitive pattern of within-ethnicity development being higher
in the country with the relatively worse national institutions. For example, in the homeland of
the Anyi in Ivory Coast (rule of law index −1.25) 60% of populated pixels (132) are lit, while
in the more institutionally advanced Ghana (rule of law index −0.23), only 30% of all (89)
populated pixels are lit (see Figure 2c).15
Overall, the uncovered heterogeneity provides a useful reminder that extrapolating from
the findings of an analysis that focuses on a single border discontinuity can be quite misleading.
At the same time it raises the question about the determinants of the observed variation.

6

Penetration of National Institutions

In this section we link the heterogeneous relationship between national institutions and subnational development with the limited reach of African governments in areas far from the capital.
First, we discuss the argument of the African historiography on the limited presence of the
colonial and national governments in the hinterland. Second, we estimate the baseline empirical model (equation (2)) linking national institutions to development separately for pixels
close to and far from the respective capitals. Third, we explore the interaction between capital distance and national institutions in shaping regional development for all African ethnic
homelands. Fourth, we test the conjecture regarding the limited reach of the state in remote
areas using direct proxies of law enforcement at the regional level.

6.1

The Argument

Europeans’ presence in Africa was (with some exceptions) limited to the coastline and the
capital cities (see Herbst (2000) for a summary). Hence, colonial institutional arrangements,
reflected through persistence on today’s national institutions, would have limited reach far
from the capital cities. Similarly, several African scholars have argued that due to the lack
of infrastructure (roads, transportation systems) and the unfavorable geography (desert areas,
rugged terrains, rainforests), colonial and post-colonial institutions have minimal impact on the
hinterland (Mamdani (1996)). Herbst (2000), for example, reproduces a quote of a senior official
15
One possible interpretation for this finding may be related to the observation that law enforcement declines
further from the capital city (see Section 6 below). This implies that in order to benefit from well-functioning
institutions economic activity may relocate closer to the capital producing, in some instances the counter-intuitive
negative relationship between national institutions and economic development at the border.

22

in Central African Republic saying that "the State stops at PK 12, twelve kilometers from the
capital, Bangui." In his influential work Bates (1983) argues that African national leaders did
not even try to extend state’s power in the countryside, focusing instead on consolidating power
in the capital and the few large urban centers.
Moreover, the Scramble for Africa resulted in many countries having peculiar shapes,
further inhibiting the presence of national governments in remote areas (Herbst (2000), Englebert (2009)). For example, the Casamance region in Southern Senegal (where the partitioned
Diola-Jola reside) is isolated from Dakar, as Gambia effectively cuts Senegal into two parts.
Likewise, the rainforest of Central Africa limits the presence of the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo in the Eastern provinces of North and South Kivu, located hundreds
of miles away from Kinshasa. The latter are quite often ruled by local militias and rebel groups.
Furthermore, Europeans mostly ruled from the capitals that were located close to the
coast, as colonizers had little interest in settling the hinterland that was controlled with the
assistance of local chiefs. Herbst (2000; pp. 16) notes that "rather systematically, Europeans
created capitals that moved power toward the ocean and away from the interior centers of power
that Africans had slowly created ". He lists many examples where colonizers decided to ignore
local needs and established capital cities outside preexisting polities. As extreme examples he
lists Mauritania and Bechuanaland (Botswana) that were ruled during colonization by capitals
outside their nominal territories (Saint-Louis and Mafeking, respectively).16

6.2

National Institutions and Proximity to the Capital. Evidence from Partitioned Ethnicities
Baseline Estimates The key hypothesis that emerges from this narrative is that colo-

nial and contemporary national institutions are less likely to be influential in areas far from the
capital centers. Yet in the vicinity of the latter, national institutions are likely to be important.
In this section we formally explore this conjecture. In Table 8 in odd-numbered columns we
estimate the baseline ethnicity-fixed-effects specification for pixels of split groups that are close
to the capitals; in even-numbered columns we examine the within-ethnicity association between
national institutions and development across pixels that are far from the capital city.
Panel A reports results using all pixels, while Panel B gives local linear regression estimates restricting estimation to pixels within 50 kilometers from each side of the border. In
columns (1)-(4) we use as a cutoff the median distance to the capital across all pixels (367.4
kilometers). The estimates on the rule of law and the control of corruption measures in columns
(1) and (3) are positive (0.07 and 0.12), considerably larger than the baseline estimates in the
16

Moving the location of the capital was a key question for African leaders at independence. Yet with a few
exceptions (Tanzania, Malawi, and Nigeria), most countries did not relocate them.

23

full sample of split ethnicities (where the estimate was around 0.03 for both measures; see
table 4). The coefficient on the control of corruption index is significant at standard confidence
levels, while the estimate on the rule of law index is weakly insignificant (p-value 0.15). In
contrast, when we focus on pixels that are far from the respective capital city on both sides
of the national border, the coefficients on the rule of law and the control of corruption index
in columns (2) and (4) become much smaller (0.02 - 0.03); both estimates are statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
In columns (5)-(8) we use the median relative distance to the capital within each country
to distinguish between pixels that are relatively close and relatively far from the capital.17 The
estimates in columns (5) and (7) on the two proxies of national institutions are positive (0.105
and 0.146) and statistically significant, suggesting that better functioning national institutions
translate into a higher development within partitioned ethnic homelands, but only when we
look at pixels that are relatively close to the respective capital cities. In contrast, the small
(0.01 − 0.02) and statistically insignificant estimates on national institutions in columns (6)
and (8) suggest that within partitioned groups for pixels that are relatively far from the capital
on both sides of the border there seems to be no association between institutional quality and
subnational development. The coefficient in column (7) implies that for pixels of partitioned
ethnic homelands that are relatively close to the respective capitals, a one-standard-deviation
increase in the control of corruption index (approximately 0.5) increases the probability that
a pixel is lit by approximately 7% (more than half of the average likelihood that a pixel is lit;
see Table 1).
A couple of examples help to illustrate these results. Both partitions of the Fon, a group
split between Benin and Togo, are close to the corresponding capitals (on average pixels are
100 kilometers away from Porto-Novo and Lome, respectively). Luminosity in the Fon-land
in Benin, where the rule of law index equals −0.43, is on average 53.8%, while luminosity
is 24% in the less institutionally developed Togo, where the rule of law index equals −0.94.
Another example is the Chaga, split by the Tanzanian-Kenyan border; all pixels in both sides
of the border are close to Nairobi and Dodoma. 37.5% of populated pixels of the Chaga in
Tanzania are lit (rule of law index equals −0.45) while luminosity at the Kenyan side of the
border is significantly lower with only 22.8% of pixels being lit (rule of law index in Kenya is
−1.02). Another interesting case is the Ronga, a Shona group split between Mozambique (rule
17
To derive the relative distance within-country we divide pixel-level capital distance by the maximum distance
to the capital in each country. This standardization is motivated by the fact that African states are of different
land mass (ranging from small ones like Burundi and Benin to very large ones, such as Sudan, Angola, and the
Democratic Republic of Congo). Another benefit of using relative (as compared to absolute) distance is that we
mitigate concerns that our estimates are driven by large countries which naturally have larger values in absolute
capital distance.

24

of law equals −0.745) and South Africa (rule of law index equals 0.156). Ronga’s homeland
in Mozambique’s has 41.5% of its pixels lit. Incidentally the capital Maputo falls within its
boundaries hence all pixels are classified as close. Yet, in the more institutionally advanced
South Africa 64% of the pixels in the Ronga partition that are close to Pretoria are lit.
It is instructive to put the magnitudes of the coefficients in perspective and obtain a
welfare assessment in terms of the affected population. Across African countries (as of 2000)
there were roughly 200 million people that reside in the homelands of partitioned ethnicities.
Of those 200 million individuals, 45% live relatively far from the respective capitals with the
remaining 55% reside relatively close to the capitals, where national institutions seem to have
a bearing on regional economic performance.
RD Visualization Figures 7a − 7b provide a graphical illustration of the differential
association between national institutions and regional development within partitioned groups
for pixels that are relatively close (on both sides of the border) and pixels that are relatively

-50

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

50

National Institutions and Light Density in 2007-2008
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins; All Bins Far from the Capital
.1

Third Order Polynomial Separately Fitted on each Side

0

0

.1

Third Order Polynomial Separately Fitted on each Side

-.1

Luminosity of a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ln(Pop. Dens.) and Ethnicity FE

National Institutions and Light Density in 2007-2008
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins; All Bins Close to the Capital

-.1

Luminosity of a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ln(Pop. Dens.) and Ethnicity FE

far from the capital city (on both sides of the border), respectively.

-50

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

50

Figure 7b

Figure 7a

The Figures plot the average likelihood that pixels within 5 kilometer bins are lit, conditional on
log population density and log land area; the Figures also plot predicted luminosity using cubic
RD polynomials on distance to the border. When we focus on pixels of partitioned ethnicities
that are relatively close to the respective capitals on both sides of the border (Figure 7a),
pixel-level luminosity at the side of the border with the better-functioning national institutions
is significantly higher. In contrast, when we zoom in on pixels that are relatively far from the
respective capital cities (Figure 7b), there are no differences in luminosity, in spite of differences
in national institutions.
Robustness In the Supplementary Appendix (in Section 5) we report several sensitivity checks showing that regional development is significantly higher in the part of split
25

homelands falling in the country with better functioning institutions, but only for pixels that
are (relatively) close the capital. Specifically, this pattern obtains when: (1) we use information from all split groups by pooling all pixels (40, 209 observations) and interact the national
institutions measures (as well as all controls) with a dummy variable indicating pixels that are
close (or relatively close) to the respective capital; (2) we drop iteratively each of the five main
African regions; (3) we proxy national institutions with the alternative composite measures
of World Bank’s Governance Database; (4) following Acemoglu and Johnson (2005) we proxy
"property rights" institutions with Polity’s Project executive constraints measure or we proxy
"contractual" institutions with the legal formalism indicators of Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes, and Shleifer (2003); and (5) we use proxies of "early" political institutions (at African
independence).

6.3

Evidence from All Groups

In principle, the conjecture of the African historiography that the role of national institutions
dissipates as one moves further from the capital regards the universe of ethnic homelands. In
Table 9 we augment the baseline model (equation (2)) with the (absolute or relative) distance
of each pixel to the capital city and an interaction term between distance to the capital and
national institutions.
In columns (1) and (4) we report cross-sectional specifications. Due to omitted variables,
reverse causation, and other forms of endogeneity, these specifications do not identify casual
relationships; yet these models are useful to quantify the correlation between institutional and
economic development at the capital ; the estimate in column (4) suggests that a one-pointincrease in the rule of law index increases the likelihood that a pixel at the capital city is lit
by approximately 18%; for comparability the analogous cross-sectional estimate in table 3 was
approximately half, 0.095. Moreover, the negative and significant coefficients on both absolute
and relative distance to the capital indicate that subnational development declines as one moves
further from the capital. Yet the most interesting finding is the significantly negative coefficient
on the interaction term between distance to the capital and rule of law; this implies that the
correlation between national institutions and regional development declines for regions further
from the capital centers.
In columns (2) and (5) we include a vector of country-specific constants as this allows us
to account for time-invariant country-level characteristics. The coefficient on distance to the
capital and most importantly the coefficient on the interaction term between distance to the
capital and the rule of law index remain significant at conventional levels.

26

Figure 8a Figure 8b
Column (3) and (6) report our preferred country-ethnicity fixed effect specifications;
estimating these quite restrictive models -that include a vector of 1209 ethnic constants- is
feasible as proximity to the capital changes not only across but also within ethnic homelands.
As in our baseline estimates in the sample of partitioned ethnic groups (in Tables 4 − 8),
by exploiting solely within ethnic homeland variation, we account for ethnic-specific features,
related to either geography or culture; moreover the inclusion of ethnicity fixed effects also
account for any relation between pre-colonial ethnic features and the location of the capital by
colonizers.18 The coefficient on the interaction term between national institutions and regional
development continues to enter with a negative sign; moreover, the coefficient is statistically
significant at standard confidence levels. Thus, the within-ethnicity results in the full sample
of African ethnic homelands are quite similar to the pattern obtained within split ethnicities
(shown in Table 8). The statistically negative estimate on the interaction in columns (3) and
(6) implies that the decaying role of countrywide institutional structures far from the capitals
is a general phenomenon and not an artefact of country-specific and more importantly ethnicspecific differences within countries. Figures 8a − b provide a graphical illustration of how
(relative) distance to the capital mediates the within-ethnicity correlation between rule of law
and subnational development in the African continent.19

6.4

The Reach of the Law beyond the Capital Cities

The pattern uncovered in Tables 8 − 9 points out that the influence of national institutions
on subnational development diminishes in areas further from the capital cities. These findings
are consistent with the view of the African historiography that both the colonial and the
national state is becoming increasingly absent in remote areas with a concomitant decline in
law enforcement. In an attempt to provide direct evidence of the differential state presence in
areas far and close to the capital, we used individual-level data from the third round of the
Afrobarometer Surveys, conducted in 2005 across a representative sample of either 1, 200 or
18

Most African capitals were imposed by the colonial powers with little worry on the post-independence needs
of African states (Herbst (2000)). Nevertheless, it is plausible that colonizers or early state-builders may have
decided on the location of the capital taking into account pre-existing differences across ethnic groups, placing,
for example, the capital closer to groups that cooperated or were more developed. The inclusion of ethnicity
fixed-effects, thus, also accounts for this potentiality.
19
Our finding that the positive correlation between national institutions and regional development weakens as
one moves further from the capital cities is also related to the literature on optimal country size (Alesina and
Spolaore (2003)) and recent works studying the implications of the location of the capitals on institutional and
economic development (Campante and Do (2013) and Campante, Do, and Guimaraes (2013)).

27

2, 400 respondents in 17 Sub-Saharan countries.20
The Afrobarometer Surveys include two questions closely related to law enforcement.
The first question regards law enforcement of a serious crime and reads: “How likely do you
think it would be that the authorities could enforce the law if a person like you committed a
serious crime? " The second question regards tax evasion and reads: “How likely do you think
it would be that the authorities could enforce the law if a person like you did not pay a tax
on some of the income you earned? ” Both measures range from 1 to 4, with higher scores
indicating that law enforcement is more likely.
To examine whether perceived law enforcement decays in remote areas, we regressed these
two proxies on (absolute and relative) distance to the capital. In columns (1)-(8) in Table 10 we
report the results. In all specifications we exploit within-country variation including a vector
of country fixed effects. Odd-numbered columns report unconditional estimates, while in evennumbered columns we include a rich set of individual controls.21 The coefficient on absolute
distance to the capital (in (1), (2), (5), and (6)) is negative and significant, suggesting that the
likelihood of law enforcement declines for respondents residing further from the capital city.
The same pattern applies when we use relative distance to the capital (in columns (3), (4),
(7), and (8)). Individuals located in enumeration areas (villages/towns/cities) relatively further
from the respective capitals answer that it is less likely for the law to be enforced. These results
clearly indicate a declining presence of authorities in the hinterland.
The specifications reported in columns (9)-(12) provide auxiliary evidence on the declining presence of the state in areas far from the capital using survey data on individual’s selfidentification. In these linear probability models the dependent variable is a dummy equal
to one if the respondent identifies either exclusively or predominantly with the nation rather
than his/her ethnic group. Across all specifications both absolute and relative distance enter
negatively implying that in areas far from the capital people are more likely to identify with
their ethnicity, as compared to the state.22
It should be acknowledged that systematic measurement error in the institutional quality
proxies may also explain the weakening correlation between rule of law and regional development in areas far from the capital. Since most institutional variables are measured in the
20
These countries are: Benin, Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The question on national
versus ethnic identification was not asked in Zimbabwe. The 3rd round of the Afrobarometer Surveys were also
conducted in Cape Verde; yet we do not have answers to these questions.
21
Following Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) in even numbered columns we control for the respondent’s age and
age squared, a gender indicator, a dummy variable for urban households, 22 religion fixed effects, 25 occupational
fixed effects, 5 living conditions fixed effects, and 9 education constants.
22
In Supplementary Appendix 23 we show that a similar pattern emerges when we use as outcomes an index
capturing how easy it is to obtain identity documents or basic household services (like electrification, piped
water, and sewage system) from the government.

28

capital cities capturing the rules governing activities of the formal economy, they might not
reflect accurately the institutional features in rural areas (Pande and Udry (2006)). Yet the
evidence uncovered in Table 10 clearly indicates that law enforcement and state presence more
generally decline with distance to the capital centers.

7

Conclusion

We study the role of national institutions in shaping regional development captured by satellite images on light density at night by employing a novel approach that accounts both for
(un)observed geographical-ecological features and ethnic-specific (cultural, historical) factors.
We take advantage of the fact that the arbitrarily drawn colonial borders that endured after African independence partitioned several ethnic groups in different countries, subjecting
identical cultures residing in geographically homogeneous territories to different country-level
institutions.
We present four sets of results. First, our analysis documents that -in contrast to previous cross-sectional works- differences in economic performance within ethnicities partitioned
between neighboring countries cannot be explained by differences in national institutions. The
lack of within-ethnicity association between formal institutions and subnational development
casts doubt on the causal interpretation of the cross-sectional strong correlation, for Africa at
least. This finding, nevertheless, is in line with studies of the African historiography that downplays the role of national institutional structures stressing instead the key role of ethnic-specific
traits, related to the role of chiefs, culture, and pre-colonial organization (see Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2013b) for a literature review). Moreover, our results are in accord with a growing body of research that emphasizes the persistent effect of geographical features, cultural and
ethnic norms, epidemiological traits as well as history on long-run comparative development
(see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013) and Nunn (2013) for reviews).
Second, we move beyond average effects by examining the association between national
institutions and regional development for each partitioned group in Africa. The analysis reveals
considerable heterogeneity. Third, in an effort to shed light on the factors shaping heterogeneity
and motivated by studies in the African historiography that emphasize the inability of many
African governments to broadcast power outside the capitals (Herbst (2000)), we find that unlike split groups in the hinterland, differences in national institutions map into within-ethnicity
differences in luminosity for those located close to the respective capitals. This phenomenon
is not specific to split groups. In fact, it reflects a generalized pattern. Looking at the universe of African groups reveals that the explanatory power of national institutions monotonically declines with distance to the capital city. Fourth, we use individual-level data from the
29

Afrobarometer Surveys and show that law enforcement decays with distance to the capital.
Moreover, ethnic (as opposed to national) identification becomes stronger for individuals in the
hinterland.
These correlations vividly illustrate the limited penetration of the state in remote areas, suggesting -that at least within Africa- treating countries as homogeneous entities where
nationwide characteristics, in our case the quality of national institutions, exert a uniform influence across regions may be quite misleading. In fact, the uncovered patterns are supportive
to an old idea among development scholars (e.g., Lewis (1954)) on the coexistence in Africa
(and other parts of the developing world) of a "dual" economic-institutional framework with
customary rules being dominant in the countryside and colonial-national institutions becoming
relevant for regions closer to the capitals (see also Herbst (2000)).
Our paper calls for future research. One could employ our methodology that compares
well-being in border areas using high resolution proxies of development (such as satellite light
density) to shed light on the debate regarding the determinants (correlates) of comparative
economic development; examining, for example, the effect of financial development, public
policies, foreign aid, fragmentation, etc. Moreover, subsequent works could build on our analysis
regarding the declining role of national institutions in areas far from the capital and explore the
impact of other geographic, cultural, national or ethnic-specific features that may attenuate or
strengthen the importance of national policies in promoting subnational development. Finally,
our evidence suggests that research on the role of institutions on development should move
beyond average effects and examine the delicate interplay between formal institutions, state
capacity, and ethnic traits.

30

8

Data Appendix

Light Density at Night: Light Density is calculated averaging light density observations
across pixels that fall within the unit of analysis. We use the average of the values in 2007 and
2008. In the regressions at the ethnic homeland we use Log (0.01 + Average Luminosity). In
the Supplementary Appendix we also use the level of luminosity as the dependent variable. In
the regressions at the pixel level we use as the dependent variable a dummy variable that takes
on the value of one if the area is lit and zero otherwise.
Source: Available at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/global_composites_v2.html.
Population Density: Log (population density per sq. km. in 2000). Source: Nelson,
Andy, 2004. African Population Database Documentation, UNEP GRID Sioux Falls. Available
at: http://na.unep.net/siouxfalls/datasets/datalist.php
Area: Log (land area) at the country-ethnic homeland level or at the pixel level. Please
note that while most pixels are of the same surface area (2.5x2.5 degrees), pixels intersected
by the coastline, borders, and lakes are smaller.
Water Area: In the regressions at the country-ethnicity level we use the Log (1 +
total area covered by rivers or lakes in sq. km.). In the regressions at the pixel level we use
a dummy variable that takes on the value of one when some water body (river, lake, or other
stream) falls in each pixel and zero otherwise. Source: Constructed using the "Inland water
area features" dataset from Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, CO, USA. Global
Ministry Mapping System.
Elevation: Average elevation in km of each ethnicity-country or each pixel. Source:
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and U.S. National Geophysical
Data Center, TerrainBase, release 1.0 (CD-ROM), Boulder, Colorado.
http://www.sage.wisc.edu/atlas/data.php?incdataset=Topography
Land Suitability for Agriculture: Average land quality for cultivation within each
country-ethnicity homeland or within each pixel. The index is the product of two components
capturing the climatic and soil suitability for farming. Source: Michalopoulos (2012); Original
Source: Atlas of the Biosphere.
Available at http://www.sage.wisc.edu/iamdata/grid_data_sel.php.
Malaria Stability Index: Average prevalence of malaria within each ethnicity-country
or within each pixel. The index takes into account the prevalence and type of mosquitoes
indigenous to a region, their human biting rate, their daily survival rate, and their incubation
period. Source: Kiszewski, Mellinger, Spielman, Malaney, Sachs, and Sachs (2004)
Distance to the Capital City: The geodesic distance from the centroid of each
ethnicity-country/pixel to the capital city of the country it belongs to, measured in 1000s
31

of km’s. Source: Calculated using the Haversine formula.
Relative Distance to the Capital City: Distance to the Capital City divided by the
maximum distance to the capital in the same country.
Distance to the Sea Coast: The geodesic distance to the nearest coastline from the
centroid of each ethnicity-country/pixel, measured in 1000s of km’s. Source: Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA. Series name: Global Ministry Mapping
System. Series issue: Version 3.0
Distance to the National Border: The geodesic distance to the nearest national
border from the centroid of each ethnicity-country/pixel, measured in 1000s of km’s. Source:
Calculated using ArcGis.
Petroleum: Indicator variable that equals one if an oil field is found in the region (or
pixel) of ethnic group i in country c. Source: The Petroleum Dataset v.1.1 contains information
on all known on-shore oil and gas deposits throughout the world.
http://www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Petroleum-Dataset/PetroleumDataset-v11/
Diamond: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a diamond mine is found
in the region (or pixel) of ethnic group i in country c. Source: Map of Diamond Resources.
www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Diamond-Resources/
Rule of Law: The index is "capturing perceptions of the extent to which agents have
confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and
violence." The standardized index ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with higher values indicating better functioning institutions. We use the average value over the period 1996 − 2006. In the
regression discontinuity (RD) analysis we also define a dummy (indicator) variable that takes
on the value one pixels falling in the country with the higher level of the rule of law index.
Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)). available at:
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp.
Control of Corruption: Index on the control of corruption "capturing perceptions
of the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and
grand forms of corruption, as well as capture of the state by elites and private interests." The
standardized index ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with lower values indicating a higher degree of
corruption. We use the average value over the period 1996−2006. In the regression discontinuity
(RD) analysis we also define a dummy (indicator) variable that takes on the value one for pixels
falling in the country with the higher level of the control of corruption index. Source: World

32

Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)).
available at:
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp.
Law Enforcement 1: Ordered (range 1 − 4) variable capturing law enforcement regarding committing a serious crime based on individuals’ responses to the following question:
"How likely do you think it would be that the authorities could enforce the law if a person
like you committed a serious crime? " A score of 1 indicates "not at all likely"; a score of 2
suggests "not very likely"; a score of 3 indicates "likely"; and a score of 4 indicates "very
likely". Source: Afrobarometer Surveys. 3rd Round. Question Number: Q70B. available at:
http://www.afrobarometer.org/data/round-3-merged
Law Enforcement 2: Ordered (range 1 − 4) variable capturing law enforcement regarding tax evasion based on individuals’ responses to the following question: "How likely do
you think it would be that the authorities could enforce the law if a person like you did not pay
a tax on some of the income you earned? " A score of 1 indicates "not at all likely"; a score
of 2 suggests "not very likely"; a score of 3 indicates "likely"; and a score of 4 indicates "very
likely". Source: Afrobarometer Surveys. 3rd Round. Question Number: Q70D. available at:
http://www.afrobarometer.org/data/round-3-merged
National Identification: Dummy variable that takes on the value of one if the respondent replies that he or she identifies more strongly with the nation rather than his/her
ethnicity. The question reads: "Let us suppose that you had to choose between being a [Ghanaian/Kenyan/etc.] and being a _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ [respondent’s identity group]. Which of these
two groups do you feel most strongly attached to? " The variable equals one if the respondent
replies that he identifies solely or predominantly with his nation and zero otherwise. Source:
Afrobarometer Surveys. 3rd Round. Question Q82. available at:
http://www.afrobarometer.org/data/round-3-merged

33

References
A, D.,

 S. J 

(2005): “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political

Economy, 113(5), 949—995.
A, D., S. J  ,

 J. A. R 

(2001): “The Colonial Origins of Com-

parative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91(5),
1369—1401.
(2002): “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern
World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1231—1294.
(2005): “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Handbook of
Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, pp. 109—139. Elsevier North-Holland,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
A

, A., A. D , W. E , S. K ,

 R. W   (2003):

“Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 155—194.
A

, A., W. E ,

 J. M   (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the

European Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.
A

, A.,

 P. G

 (2013): “Family Ties,” in Handbook of Economic Growth,

Volume 2, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
A

, A., S. M #,

 E. P # 

 (2013): “Ethnic Inequality,” Work-

ing Paper, NBER No. 18512.
A
A

, A.,
, Y.,

 E. S#  (2003): The Size of Nations. MIT Press.
 P. C  (2013): “Trust, Institutions and Economic Development,” in

Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 2. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
A

, M. M. (2012): “The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Developmen,” manuscript,

Harvard University.
A , J.,

 V. C. L  (2002): “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil

Learning,” Economic Journal, 112(482), 735—765.
A , J.,

 J.-S. P  (2008): Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University

Press, Princeton, NJ.
34

 O. G  (2013): “The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,

A ), Q.,

and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 1—46.
A ,, A. (1985): “The Conceptual Framework,” in Partitioned Africans, pp. 1—18. St.
Martin Press, New York.
B

,, A.,

 L. I (2005): “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The

Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 95, 1190—
1213.
B , R. H. (1983): “Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics
in Contemporary Africa,” in State versus Ethnic Claims: African Policy Dilemmas, ed. by
D. Rothchild, and V. A. Olunsorola. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.
(2008): When Things Fell Apart. State Failure in Late-Century Africa. Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY.
B, R. (2012): “States, Law, and Property Rights in West Africa,” Working Paper, New
York University School of Law.
C  , C. A., J. G ,

 D. M (2011): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way

Clustering,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(2), 238—249.
C #

, F.,

 Q.-A. D (2013): “Isolated Capital Cities, Accountability, and Corrup-

tion: Evidence from US States,” mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.
C #

, F., Q.-A. D,

 B. G   (2013): “Isolated Capital Cities and Misgov-

ernance: Theory and Evidence,” mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.
C , X.,

 W. D. N  (2011): “Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic

Statistics,” Proceeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(21), 8589—8594.
C  , D., S. M#3-S#,

 G. S# (2012): “Development at the Bor-

der: A Study of National Integration in Post-colonial West Africa,” mimeo, Paris Scool of
Economics.
C  , D.,

 A. M  (2011): “Borders that Divide: Education and Religion in

Ghana and Togo since Colonial Times,” Department of Economics, University of Sussex
Working Paper 2911.
C , T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics, 92(1), 1—45.
35

D  , B. (1992): The Black Man’s Burden. Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State.
James Currey, Oxford, United Kingdom.
D L , B.,

 A. S) (1993): “Princes or Merchants? City Growth before the

Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics, 36(2), 671—702.
D, M. (2010): “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), 839—
857.
D  , J. (1997): Guns, Germs, and Steel. The Fates of Human Societies. W.W. Norton
and Co, New York, NY.
D,

, S., R. L

P , F. L#--S

,

 A. S) (2003): “Courts,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 453—517.
D, C. N., J.-P. M,

 J. G. M (2006): “Mapping Regional Economic

Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery,” Ecological Economics, 57(1), 75—92.
D , R. (2008): Africa: Altered States, Ordinary Miracles. Portobello Books Ltd, London,
UK.
E , W.,

 R. L  (1997): “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divi-

sions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203—1250.
E, C., K. B , E. K , H. K,

 E. D  (1997): “Mapping of City

Lights Using DMSP Operational Linescan System data,” Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 63, 727—734.
E , P. (2009): Africa, Unity, Sovereignty and Sorrow. Lynne Rienner Publishers,
Inc., Boulder, Colorado.
E , P., S. T 

,

 M. C  (2002): “Dismemberment and Suffocation: A

Contribution to the Debate on African Boundaries,” Comparative Political Studies, 35(10),
1093—1118.
G #, J. L.,

 J. D. S  (2001): “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” The American

Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 64(1), 85—96.
G

, N., R. L

P , F. L#--S

,

 A. S) (2013): “Human

Capital and Regional Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 105—164.

36

G

 I. R   (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality

, N.,

in Africa,” in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and
K. Konrad. MIT Press.
(2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.
G , E. L., R. L P , F. L.  S

,

 A. S) (2004): “Do Institutions

Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3), 271—303.
G

, R., E. M,

 A. R  (2013): “Collective Action in Diverse

Sierra Leone Communities,” Economic Journal, 123(568), 285—316.
G,

, P. (2011): “Long Term Institutional Persistence: Ottoman Rule and Financial

Development in the Regions of Europe,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 39(2), 1—16.
 L. Z   (2006): “Does Culture Affect Economic Out-

G, L., P. S #  ,

comes?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23—48.
H  , V. J., A. S ,

 D. N. W (2012): “Measuring Economic Growth

from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 994—1028.
H, J. (2000): States and Power in Africa. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
H, E. (2009): “History Matters: The Long Term Impact of Colonial Public Investments
in French West Africa,” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics, 1(2), 176—215.
I , G. W.,

 T. L6 (2008): “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to

Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615—635.
I, L. (2010): “Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-term Consequences,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 693—713.
J , R.,

 A. M  (2012): “Colonial Investments and Long-Term Development

in Africa: Evidence from Ghanaian Railways,” mimeo George Washington University and
Sussex University.
J , M. (2013): Poor Numbers: How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics
and What to Do about It. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
K )

, D., A. K

,

 M. M  (2008): “Governance Matters VIII: Ag-

gregate and Individual Governance Indicators, 1996-2007,” Policy Research Working Paper
Series 4654, The World Bank.
37

K , A., A. M , A. S#

, P. M 

, S. E. S ,

 J. S 

(2004): “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5), 486—498.
L

P , R., F. L#--S

,

 A. S) (2008): “The Economic Conse-

quences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2), 285—332.
L P , R., F. L#--S

, A. S),

 R. V  (1997): “Legal Deter-

minants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131—1150.
(1998): “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113—1155.
L  , L.,

 C. W)) (2007): “The Quality of the Legal System, Firm Ownership,

and Firm Size,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(4), 601—614.
L

, D. S. (1998): The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some
So Poor. W.W. Norton, New York, NY.

L, D. S.,

 T. L6 (2010): “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”

Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 281—355.
L, D. S., E. M,

 M. J. B (2004): “Do Voters Affect Or Elect Policies?

Evidence from the U. S. House,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 807—859.
L, A. W. (1954): “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” The
Manchester School, 22(1), 139—191.
M 

, M. (1996): Citizen and Subject. James Currey, London, UK.

M #, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.
M #, S., A. N  ,

 G. P  (2012): “Trade and Geography in the

Origins and Spread of Islam,” NBER Working Paper No. 18438.
M #, S.,

 E. P # 

 (2011): “Divide and Rule or the Rule of the

Divided? Evidence from Africa,” NBER Working Paper No. 17184.
(2013a): “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa,” NBER Working Paper
No. 17620.
(2013b): “On the Ethnic Origins of African Development: Traditional Chiefs and Precolonial Political Centralization,” mimeo Brown University and London Business School.
38

(2013c): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African Development,”
Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.
M , J. S. (1988): Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State
Capabilities in the Third World. Princeton University Press, Pinceton, NJ.
M, E. (2004): “Tribe or Nation? Nation-Building and Public Goods in Kenya versus
Tanzania,” World Politics, 56(3), 327—362.
M, W. F. (1994): Hausaland Divided: Colonialism and Independence in Nigeria and Niger.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London.
M , B. R. (1990): “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
Variables in Micro Units,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2), 334—338.
M , G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and their Culture History. McGraw-Hill, New
York, NY.
(1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. The University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
N

, N. (2012): “Culture and the Historical Process„” Economic History of Developing

Regions, 27(S1), 108—126.
(2013): “Historical Development,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2, ed.
by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
N

, N.,

 D. P

(2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,”

Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20—36.
N

, N.,

 L. W

  (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in

Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.
P

 C. U (2006): “Institutions and Development: A View from Below,”

, R.,

in Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of the Econometric Society, ed. by R. Blundell,
W. Newey, and T. Persson. Cambridge University Press.
P

 , M. (2013): “Economic Discontinuities at Borders: Evidence from Satellite Data
on Lights at Night,” mimeo MIT.

P

, L.,

 D. N. W (2010): “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run

Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4),
1627—1682.
39

R, M. L. (2012): The Oil Curse: How Petroleum Wealth Shapes the Development of
Nations. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
 S. T  (2006): “The Log of Gravity,” Review o Economics and

S , J. M. S.,

Statistics, 88(4), 641—658.
S# , E.,

 R. W   (2009): “The Diffusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal

of Economics, 124(2), 469—529.
(2013): “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 51(2).
T  , G. (2010): “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677—716.
W, D. N. (2008): Economic Growth. Prentice Hall.
W , H. L. (1996): Divide and Rule: The Partition of Africa, 1880-1914. Praeger,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

40

Table 1: Summary Statistics
variable

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

p25

median

p75

min

max

Panel A: Partitioned Ethnic Homelands Sample
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)
Ln (1 + Water Area)
Ln (Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability For Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the Border
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507
507

0.228
-3.168
2.650
0.242
1.876
0.605
0.415
0.747
0.063
0.101
0.524
0.591
0.039
-0.914
-0.797

0.768
1.586
1.929
0.407
1.490
0.434
0.224
0.323
0.243
0.301
0.371
0.425
0.039
0.573
0.501

0.000
-4.605
1.647
0.000
0.798
0.281
0.273
0.548
0.000
0.000
0.280
0.225
0.012
-1.355
-1.091

0.015
-3.696
2.936
0.075
1.906
0.469
0.439
0.905
0.000
0.000
0.429
0.552
0.029
-1.021
-0.864

0.095
-2.258
3.945
0.264
2.963
0.938
0.573
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.685
0.931
0.052
-0.543
-0.651

0.000
-4.605
-5.069
0.000
-2.170
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.013
0.000
0.000
-2.198
-1.664

8.561
2.148
6.386
2.464
5.665
2.181
0.959
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.882
1.739
0.250
0.615
0.814

Panel B: Pixel-level. Partitioned Ethnic Homelands Sample
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)
Light Density 0-1
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)
Water Area Indicator
Ln (Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability For Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the Border
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

42710
42710
42710
42710
42710
42710
42566
41149
42710
42710
42710
42710
42710
42710
42710
42710

0.312
-4.111
0.124
2.074
0.129
4.885
641.612
0.341
0.710
0.018
0.004
0.532
581.363
65.938
-0.909
-0.779

2.335
1.465
0.329
1.771
0.335
0.650
470.408
0.259
0.395
0.135
0.062
0.369
414.433
68.091
0.606
0.534

0.000
-4.605
0.000
0.734
0.000
4.857
292.111
0.103
0.365
0.000
0.000
0.271
233.430
15.754
-1.355
-1.141

0.000
-4.605
0.000
2.143
0.000
5.211
526.048
0.325
0.989
0.000
0.000
0.439
507.473
44.255
-0.820
-0.864

0.000
0.000
62.857
-4.605
-4.605
4.141
0.000
0.000
1.000
3.328
-5.094
9.121
0.000
0.000
1.000
5.243
2.303
5.259
969.556 -406.000 4623.750
0.511
0.001
0.999
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.707
0.001
1.933
896.488 0.286 1735.680
93.799
0.000 448.539
-0.506
-2.198
0.615
-0.651
-1.664
0.814

The table reports descriptive statistics for all variables employed in the empirical analysis for the sample of partitioned ethnic
homelands in Africa. Panel A reports summary statistics at the country-ethnicity level. Panel B reports summary statistics at the pixel
level. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.

Table 2: Validity of Identification Design at the Country-Ethnicity Homeland Level
Dependent Variable is:
Ln (Land
Area)
(1)

Ln (Area
under
Water)
(2)

Mean
Elevation
(3)

Land
Suitability
(4)

Malaria
Stability
(5)

Oil
Indicator
(6)

Diamond
Indicator
(7)

Distance to
the Capital
(8)

Distance to Distance
the Sea
to the
Coast
Border
(9)
(10)

Panel A: Rule of Law
Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

-0.0474
(0.2058)

0.0480
(0.0453)

0.0041
(0.0217)

0.0091
(0.0184)

-0.015
(0.0230)

0.0365*
(0.0199)

-0.0161
(0.0433)

-0.1887
(0.1233)

0.0001
(0.0178)

-0.0037
(0.0049)

0.682
507

0.796
507

0.964
507

0.935
507

0.941
507

0.753
507

0.547
507

0.582
507

0.986
507

0.639
507

Panel B: Control of Corruption
Control of Corruption
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

-0.0686
(0.2229)

0.037
(0.0610)

0.0119
(0.0222)

-0.0052
(0.0243)

-0.0324
(0.0233)

0.0431
(0.0294)

-0.0199
(0.0612)

-0.1753
(0.1490)

0.0037
(0.0176)

-0.007
(0.0077)

0.683
507

0.795
507

0.964
507

0.935
507

0.941
507

0.753
507

0.547
507

0.565
507

0.986
507

0.551
507

Panel C: High Rule of Law - Two Major Partitioned Ethnic Areas
High Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0696
(0.1111)

0.0475
(0.0346)

-0.0013
(0.0171)

0.0129
(0.0132)

-0.0103
(0.0195)

0.0409
(0.0271)

-0.0273
(0.0414)

-0.1584
(0.1029)

0.0036
(0.0111)

0.0031
(0.0049)

0.818
440

0.866
440

0.972
440

0.952
440

0.953
440

0.804
440

0.629
440

0.612
440

0.991
440

0.639

Panel C: High Control for Corruption - Two Major Partitioned Ethnic Areas
High Control of Corruption
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicities
Ethnicity Fixed Effects

0.0262
(0.1259)

0.0547
(0.0351)

-0.0074
(0.0185)

0.0105
(0.0160)

-0.0025
(0.0217)

0.0318
(0.0262)

-0.0091
(0.0455)

-0.0304
(0.1182)

-0.0032
(0.0103)

-0.0002
(0.0058)

0.817
440

0.867
440

0.972
440

0.952
440

0.953
440

0.802
440

0.627
440

0.569
440

0.991
440

0.638
440

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

220
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating various geographical, ecological, and other characteristics with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in
World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in Panel A) and control of corruption index (in Panel B) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. In Panels C and D we focus on
the two major partitions of an ethnic group (in total 440 ethnic areas of 220 partitioned ethnicities). The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value one for the areas
falling in the country with the higher value in the rule of law index (in Panel C) or in the control for corruption index (in Panel D).
The dependent variable in column (1) is the log (land area); in column (2) is the log (1 + land area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)); in column (3) is mean
elevation; in column (4) is an index of land suitability for agriculture; in column (5) is the average of a malaria stability index; in column (6) is an indicator for country-ethnic
areas with an oil field; in column (7) is an indicator for country-ethnic areas with a diamond mine. In columns (8)-(10) the dependent variable is the distance of the centroid of
each country-ethnic area from the capital city, the sea coast, and the national border, respectively. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below
the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 3 - Cross-Sectional Analysis
National Institutions and Regional Development
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Control of Corruption
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnic Homeland Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.8229*** 0.8017*** 0.7646*** 0.6513***
(0.2839) (0.2451) (0.2507) (0.1962)
0.080
1209

0.314
1209

0.379
1209

0.468
1209

1.0328*** 1.0351*** 0.9945*** 0.8218***
(0.3421) (0.2517) (0.2334) (0.2158)
0.0950
1209

0.3340
1209

0.3950
1209

0.475
1209

Panel B: Pixel Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

0.1248*** 0.1199*** 0.0988*** 0.0765**
(0.0443) (0.0415) (0.0380) (0.0334)

0.1470*** 0.1467*** 0.1223*** 0.0968**
(0.0478) (0.0431) (0.0404) (0.0409)

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.049
120501

0.175
120501

0.192
120501

0.256
116412

0.056
120501

0.185
120501

0.198
120501

0.260
116412

Pop. Dens. & Area
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World
Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)) at the
country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B). In Panel A the dependent variable is log (0.01 + light
density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the
value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero otherwise.
In the specifications in columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the countryethnicity level (in Panel A) or at the pixel-level (in Panel B). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for location
characteristics augmenting the specification with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area or each pixel from the
capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic
controls in columns (4) and (8) includes log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)) for the models in Panel A and
an indicator that takes on the value one if there is some water body in the pixel for the models in Panel B, land suitability for
agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and at the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Table 4: National Institutions and Regional Development
across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Control of Corruption
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnic Homeland Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations

0.6510*** 0.1943
(0.1951) (0.1898)
0.292
__
507

0.792
0.061
507

0.5150** 0.2159
(0.2024) (0.2135)
0.392
__
507

0.798
0.067
507

0.7904*** 0.2566
(0.2268) (0.2197)
0.298
__
507

0.792
0.062
507

0.6019*** 0.2675
(0.2329) (0.2439)
0.393
__
507

0.798
0.067
507

Panel B: Pixel Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

0.1072*** 0.0246
(0.0400) (0.0165)

0.0834** 0.0278
(0.0324) (0.0181)

0.1371*** 0.0370
(0.0464) (0.0273)

0.1097*** 0.0403
(0.0415) (0.0290)

0.149
__
42710

0.331
0.059
42710

0.202
__
41025

0.340
0.066
41025

0.160
__
42710

0.331
0.059
42710

0.209
__
41025

0.340
0.066
41025

No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index
(in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B).
In Panel A the dependent variable is log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the
dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero
otherwise. Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates,
where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported).
In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) or at
the pixel level (in Panel B). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for location and geography, augmenting the specification
with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country (in Panel A) or each pixel (in Panel B) from the capital city of each country,
distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls includes log (1 + area
under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)) for the models in Panel A and an indicator that takes on the value one if there is some
water body in the pixel for the models in Panel B, land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. Besides the adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the
difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses doubleclustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 5: National Institutions and Regional Development across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups in
Areas Close to the Border. Local Regressions
Rule of Law
100 km

Bandwidth
(1)

Control of Corruption
50 km

(2)

(3)

100 km
(4)

(5)

50 km
(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnic Homeland Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations

0.6788*** 0.0827
(0.2116)
(0.2318)
0.311
__
432

0.842
0.027
432

0.5975*** 0.1503
(0.2098)
(0.2480)
0.285
__
432

0.848
0.033
432

0.8585*** 0.0866
(0.2465)
(0.2602)
0.324
__
432

0.842
0.027
432

0.7458*** 0.1765
(0.2591)
(0.2951)
0.293
__
432

0.848
0.033
432

Panel B: Pixel Level
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area

0.0994*** 0.0168
(0.0384)
(0.0181)

0.1031**
0.0159
(0.0407)
(0.0163)

0.1292*** 0.0269
(0.0471)
(0.0259)

0.1346*** 0.0197
(0.0492)
(0.0210)

0.134
__
21289

0.319
0.051
21289

0.137
__
13408

0.345
0.046
13408

0.144
__
21289

0.319
0.051
21289

0.149
__
13408

0.345
0.046
13408

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in
columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B). In Panel
A the dependent variable is log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the dependent
variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero otherwise.
In columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) we focus on ethnic areas within 50 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers).
In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we focus on ethnic areas within 25 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers).
Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we
include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000)
and log land area at the country-ethnic homeland level (in Panel A) and in the pixel-level (in Panel B). Besides the adjusted R-squared,
the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model
simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

Table 6: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Border
Regression Discontinuity (RD) Estimates
Rule of Law
Bandwidth
RD Polynomial

All Pixels
3rd-order 4th-order
(1)

(2)

Control of Corruption

100 km
3rd-order
(3)

50 km

All Observations

100 km

50 km

4th-order 3rd-order 4th-order 3rd-order 4th-order 3rd-order 4th-order 3rd-order 4th-order
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Panel A: Global Regression Discontinuity (RD) Polynomial
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.0166
(0.0138)

0.0058
(0.0135)

0.0123
(0.0165)

0.0050
(0.0185)

-0.0010
(0.0240)

0.0122
(0.0272)

0.0038
(0.0154)

-0.0086
(0.0137)

0.0116
(0.0166)

0.0123
(0.0176)

0.342
0.059

0.342
0.059

0.320
0.037

0.320
0.037

0.347
0.064

0.347
0.064

0.342
0.059

0.343
0.060

0.320
0.037

0.320
0.037

-0.0030 0.0079
(0.0223) (0.0276)
0.347
0.064

0.347
0.064

Panel B: Ethnic-Specific Regression Discontinuity (RD) Polynomial
0.0175
(0.0125)

0.0203
(0.0154)

0.0037
(0.0124)

0.0135
(0.0183)

0.0068
(0.0176)

0.0185
(0.0318)

0.0020
(0.0119)

0.0114
(0.0138)

0.0011
(0.0136)

0.0094
(0.0181)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.416
0.133

0.427
0.144

0.412
0.129

0.423
0.140

0.441
0.158

0.459
0.176

0.416
0.133

0.427
0.144

0.412
0.129

0.423
0.140

0.441
0.158

0.459
0.176

Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.

40209
Yes
Yes

40209
Yes
Yes

21289
Yes
Yes

21289
Yes
Yes

13408
Yes
Yes

13408
Yes
Yes

40209
Yes
Yes

40209
Yes
Yes

21289
Yes
Yes

21289
Yes
Yes

13408
Yes
Yes

13408
Yes
Yes

Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

0.0124
0.0128
(0.0189) (0.0283)

The table reports regression discontinuity (RD) estimates. Estimation is performed across the two major partitions of split ethnic group. In Panel A we include a global (common to
all partitioned ethnicities) RD polynomial in distance of the centroid of each pixel to the national border, allowing the polynomial terms to differ on the two sides of the border. In
Panel B we include ethnic-specific RD polynomials in distance of the centroid of each pixel to the national border, allowing the polynomial terms to differ on the two sides of the
border. In odd-numbered columns we include a third-order RD polynomial, while in even-numbered columns we include a fourth-order RD polynomial. In columns (3)-(6) and (9)(12) we restrict estimation to pixels close to the national border using two different bandwidths. In columns (3), (4), (9), and (10) we focus on pixels within 50 kilometers on each
side of the national border (total 100 kilometers). In columns (5), (6), (11), and (12) we focus on pixels within 25 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 50
kilometers). The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value in the rule of law index (in columns (1)-(6)) or in
the control of corruption index (in columns (7)-(12)). All specifications include ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported), the log of pixel-level population density and the log
of pixel surface area. Besides the adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of
a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and at the ethnolinguistic level dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 7: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Border
Regression Discontinuity (RD) Estimates. Large Discontinuities
Rule of Law
Cutt-off
Global RD Polynomial

median
No

Control of Corruption
75th percentile

3rd-order 4th-order

75th percentile

No

3rd-order

4th-order

No

3rd-order 4th-order

No

3rd-order 4th-order

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.0049
(0.0376)

-0.0207
(0.0330)

0.009
(0.0204)

0.0133
(0.0215)

-0.003
(0.0201)

0.041
(0.0346)

0.0367
(0.0336)

0.0024
(0.0251)

(1)

(2)

Institutional Quality

0.0159
(0.0186)

0.0116
(0.0199)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.398
0.072

0.400
0.074

0.400
0.075

0.458
0.075

0.461
0.078

0.462
0.080

0.399
0.064

0.399
0.065

0.400
0.065

0.457
0.078

0.460
0.080

0.461
0.082

Observations
Ethnicities

19349
110

19349
110

19349
110

10031
51

10031
51

10031
51

19814
108

19814
108

19814
108

10353
46

10353
46

10353
46

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.

(3)

median

-0.0027 0.0134
(0.0212) (0.0311)

The table reports simple fixed effects as well as regression discontinuity (RD) estimates focusing on large discontinuities in national institutions across the border. Estimation is
performed across the two major partitions of each ethnic group. In columns (2), (5), (8), and (11) we include a third-order RD polynomial on distance to the national border. In
columns (3), (6), (9), and (12) we include a fourth-order RD polynomial on distance to the national border. In columns (1)-(3) and columns (7)-(9) we use the median value of
differences in the rule of law index across adjacent countries to identify large discontinuities. In columns (4)-(6) and columns (10)-(12) we use the 75th percentile of differences in
the rule of law index across adjacent countries to identify large discontinuities. The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with
the higher value in the rule of law index (in columns (1)-(6)) or in the control of corruption index (in columns (7)-(12)). All specifications include ethnicity fixed effects (constants
not reported), the log of pixel-level population density and the log of pixel surface area. Besides the adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the
difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the
ethnolinguistic level dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 8 - Heterogeneity: National Institutions and Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnicities Close and Far from the Capital Cities
Rule of Law

Control of Corruption

Absolute Distance to the Capital
Close
Far
Close
Far
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Rule of Law

Control of Corruption

Relative Distance to the Capital
Close
Far
Close
Far
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Panel A: All Observations/Pixels
Institutional Quality

0.0675
(0.0438)

0.0206
(0.0233)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.421
0.089

0.210
0.062

0.423
0.091

Observations
Number of Ethnicities

12546
85

15225
95

12546
85

Double-clustered s.e.

0.1220**
0.0330
(0.0581) (0.0258)

0.1064*
(0.0585)

0.0127
(0.0225)

0.1455**
0.0218
(0.0675) (0.0237)

0.211
0.063

0.451
0.084

0.245
0.046

0.452
0.085

0.246
0.047

15225
95

10612
66

19385
139

10612
66

19385
139

Panel B: Local Regressions (100km bandwidth)
Institutional Quality

0.0450
(0.0618)

0.0040
(0.0239)

0.1111*
(0.0651)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.407
0.085

0.195
0.044

0.410
0.087

Observations
Number of Ethnicities

6129
81

8120
94

Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area
Location & Geography

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Double-clustered s.e.

0.0153
(0.0269)

0.1140*
(0.0641)

-0.0005
(0.0235)

0.1564**
(0.0620)

0.0112
(0.0258)

0.196
0.044

0.445
0.090

0.225
0.036

0.447
0.092

0.225
0.036

6129
81

8120
94

4655
60

10987
137

4655
60

10987
137

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected
in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1), (2), (5), and (6)) and control of corruption index (in columns
(3), (4), (7), and (8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The unit of analysis is a pixel of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12
kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit and zero
otherwise. In odd-numbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are close to the capital city. In evennumbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are far from the capital city. In columns (1)-(4) we use
as a cut-off the median value of absolute distance to the capital across all African pixels, while in columns (5)-(8) we use as a cut-off
the median value of the within-country distance to the respective capital city.
In Panel A we use all pixels of partitioned ethnicities. In Panel B we report local linear regressions restricting estimation to pixels of
partitioned ethnicities within 50 kilometers from each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers). All specifications include a
vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log population density, log land area,
distance of the centroid of each pixel from the capital city of each country (in columns (5)-(8) we use relative distance to the capital city
of each country), distance from the closest sea coast, distance from the national border, an indicator for pixels with a water body (lakes,
rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field
indicator. Besides the adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared
minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 9: National Institutions, Distance to the Capital, and Regional Development
Pixel-Level Estimates in the Full Sample
Absolute Distance to the Capital

Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Distance to the Capital
Double-clustered s.e.

Rule of Law X
Distance to the Capital
Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.
Location Controls
Geographic Controls
Country Fixed Effects
Country-Ethnicity FE

Relative Distance to the Capital

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.1434***
(0.0426)

__

__

0.1790***
(0.0472)

__

__

-0.1352***
(0.0511)

-0.2103***
(0.0404)

-0.1097**
(0.0534)

-0.3098***
(0.0846)

-0.2530***
(0.0502)

-0.1457***
(0.0499)

-0.1243***
(0.0363)

-0.1513***
(0.0315)

-0.0850**
(0.0352)

-0.2297***
(0.0624)

-0.1850***
(0.0461)

-0.1042**
(0.0439)

0.261
116412

0.362
116412

0.429
116412

0.267
116412

0.362
116412

0.429
116412

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

The table reports OLS estimates associating regional development with distance to the capital city and contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index across the full sample of country-ethnic homelands
in Africa. The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers). The dependent variable is a
dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise.
Columns (1) and (5) give unconditional estimates. In columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) we control for log (population density), log land
area, distance of the centroid of each pixel from the capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, distance from
the national border, an indicator for pixels with a water body (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture,
elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The specifications in columns (3) and (7)
include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (4) and (8) include a vector of
country-ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 10: Law Enforcement and Ethnic Identification as Function of Distance to the Capital
Afrobarometer Sample. Country-Fixed-Effects Estimates
Law Enforcement 1: Serious Crime
(1)
Absolute Distance
Double-clustered s.e.

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.1238*** -0.1027**
(0.0446) (0.0408)

Relative Distance

Law Enforcement 2: Tax Evasion
(5)

(6)

(8)

-0.1118*** -0.1006***
(0.0410)
(0.0386)
-0.0860** -0.0665*
(0.0375) (0.0354)

Double-clustered s.e.

(7)

National versus Ethnic Identification
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-0.0850** -0.0740*
(0.0414) (0.0382)
-0.0655* -0.0563*
(0.0341) (0.0326)

-0.0949** -0.0819**
(0.0411) (0.0379)

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.069
20466

0.075
19862

0.068
20466

0.075
19862

0.053
20842

0.062
20230

0.052
20842

0.062
20230

0.096
20125

0.108
19503

0.097
20125

0.109
19503

Individual Controls
Country FE

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports country fixed effects OLS estimates, associating legal enforcement (in columns (1)-(8)) and ethnic identification (in columns (9)-(12)) as reflected by individual
responses in the Afrobarometer Surveys (3rd round) at the individual level with distance to the capital.
The dependent variable is columns (1)-(4) is an ordered index (range from 1 to 4) based on individual responses on how likely it is that authorities will enforce the law if a person
like the respondent committed a serious crime. The dependent variable is columns (5)-(8) is an ordered index (range from 1 to 4) based on individual responses on how likely it is
that authorities will enforce the law if a person like the respondent did not pay taxes on income earned. For both measures a score of 1 indicates “not at all likely”, a score of 2
indicates “not very likely”, a score of 3 indicates “likely” and a score of 4 indicates “very likely”. The dependent variable in columns (9)-(12) is a dummy variable that takes on the
value of one if the respondent replies that she identifies more strongly with her nation than the ethnicity she belongs to.
Even-numbered columns include a rich set of individual controls. The individual-level conditioning set includes age, age squared, a gender indicator variable, an urban indicator, 22
religion fixed effects, 25 occupation fixed effects, 5 living conditions fixed effects, and 9 education fixed effects. All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants
not reported).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the enumeration area and
at the ethnicity level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

On-line Supplementary Appendix
(not for publication)
National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa∗

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University and NBER

Elias Papaioannou
London Business School, NBER and CEPR

August 10, 2013

Abstract
The Supplementary Appendix is split into five sections. Section 1 reports the results
from a cross-validation analysis of the luminosity data that we use to proxy economic development at the regional level within African ethnic homelands. Section 2 gives descriptive
statistics and provides further evidence on the validity of our identification strategy that
compares economic development within the historical homeland of partitioned groups. Section 3 provides some guidance as to what the ethnicity fixed effects reflect. Section 4 reports
numerous sensitivity checks of the qualitatively and quantitatively weak association between
national institutions and economic performance within partitioned ethnic homelands. Section 5 reports various sensitivity checks illustrating the heterogeneous relationship between
national institutions and subnational development in areas far and close from the capital
cities.

∗

We thank 7 anonymous referees for proposing many of the sensitivity checks reported in this Supplementary
Appendix. This paper draws on material from Michalopoulos and Papaioannou ("Divide and Rule or the Rule
of the Divided?" 2011). All errors are our sole responsibility. All errors are our sole responsibility.

0

1

Cross-Validation Analysis

While a plethora of recent works shows that luminosity is a significant correlate of economic development both across and within countries (Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012), Elvidge,
Baugh, Kihn, Kroehl, and Davis (1997), Doll, Muller, and Morley (2006), Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2013b), and Pinkovskiy (2013)), we performed several additional cross-validation
exercises investigating the relationship between luminosity and various economic indicators
both across countries and within ethnic homelands in our sample of countries.
Cross-country Analysis We first examined whether luminosity correlates with development across African states. Appendix Figure 1a illustrates the unconditional correlation
between log light density and log real GDP per capita in 2000. There is a strong positive
association. The R2 of the regression is 0.35 and the estimate on luminosity is more than 6
standard errors larger than zero. Besides economic well-being, light density also reflects urbanization. Appendix Figure 1b shows the relationship between log real GDP per capita and log
light density partialling out log population density (in 2000). The conditional on urbanization
relationship between log light density and log GDP p.c. is even stronger; the coefficient on log
light density increases from 0.31 to 0.47 and the t-statistic jumps to 10.

Light Density and Income Per Capita Across African Countries

Light Density and Income Per Capita Across African Countries
Unconditional Relationship

2

9

Tunisia

Lesotho
Senegal
Benin
CoteGhana
D'Ivoire
Zimbabwe

Namibia

Egypt
Morocco
Gabon
Swaziland
Algeria

Republic of Congo
Lesotho
Senegal
Ghana
Benin
Cote D'Ivoire
Nigeria
Zimbabwe

Libya

Congo (Democratic Republic of the)

0

Mozambique
Rwanda
Cameroon
Kenya
Djibouti
The Gambia
Uganda Burkina Faso
Sudan
Liberia
Comoros
Malawi
Burundi
Somalia
Madagascar
Guinea-BissauEthiopia Mali
Mauritania
Angola
Togo
Zambia
Guinea
Tanzania
Central African Republic
Sierra Leone
Niger

-1

Nigeria
Cameroon
Djibouti
Mauritania
SudanKenya
The Gambia
Somalia
Liberia
Burkina Faso Rwanda
Mali
A ngola
Uganda
Madagascar
Guinea-Bissau
Malawi
Central African Republic
Ethiopia Zambia
Guinea
Burundi TogoComoros
Tanzania
Niger
Chad
Sierra Leone

7

Sout h Africa
Botswana

1

Egypt
Morocco
Swaziland

Algeria
Libya

Equatorial Guinea

Tunisia

Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)

Republic of Congo

Mozambique

South Africa

Gabon

8

Botswana
Namibia

6

Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)

Conditional on Population Density

Equatorial Guinea

Chad

5

-2

Congo (Democratic Republic of the)

-6

-4

-2

0

2

-2

Log (1 + Average Light Density in 2007-2008)

-1

0

1

2

3

Log (1 + Average Light Density in 2007-2008)

Appendix Figure 1a

Appendix Figure 1b

Within-Group Analysis We further cross-validated the luminosity data using comparable across countries survey-level data from the 2005 Afrobarometer Surveys on household’s
access to electrification, access to piped water, presence of a sewage system, and respondents’
years of schooling. The Afrobarometer surveys are based on interviews conducted in a random
sample of either 1, 200 or 2, 400 individuals of voting age in 17 Sub-Saharan African countries.1
1

These countries are: Benin, Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

1

We assign each respondent’s current location (Afrobarometer’s enumeration area) to one of the
826 homelands in Murdock’s (1959) ethnolinguistic map and we then examine the association
with luminosity.
Appendix Table 1 reports in a regression framework the within-ethnicity correlation
between the four proxy measures of development and log light density. Besides the inclusion of
ethnicity fixed effects, in all specifications we condition on log population density to account
for differences in urbanization (as we do in most of our empirical specifications in the main
part of the paper). The specifications in columns (1), (4), (7), and (10) show that there is a
strong and highly significant association (at the 99% confidence level) between luminosity and
all proxies of subnational development. We also estimate specifications using variation across
enumeration areas within split groups (in (2), (5), and (8), and (11)) and within non-split
ethnicities (in (3), (6), (9), and (12)), respectively. The positive correlation between luminosity
and development is strong in both samples suggesting that luminosity is a reliable proxy of
economic performance within both split and non-split homelands.
We also explored how differences in luminosity across the national border within the
historical homeland of the same ethnicity reflect differences in economic performance averaging
the individual responses at the level of each ethnic partition. There are 32 ethnic groups
split in adjacent countries whose individual partitions have at least one enumeration area in
the Afrobarometer Surveys. We then examined the within-ethnicity across-the-national-border
association between log light density and each of the four development proxies. Appendix
Figures 2a − 2d depict the respective scatter-plots partialling out differences in log population
density. Ethnic partitions with higher light density are populated by individuals enjoying better
access to public goods (electrification, sewage system, and piped water) and are on average more

Light Density and Piped Water Across Border within Ethnic Homelands

EGBA-NGA
NYANJA-MWI
SUBIA-BWA
THONGA-ZAF
NKOLE-UGA
KGATLA-ZAF

LAMBYA-MWI
KOBA-BWA
NDAU-MOZ
NDEBELE-BWA
TUMBUKA-MWI
BUSA-NGA
XAM-ZAF
RONGA-MOZ
SOTHO-ZAF
GUSII-TZA
TAWARA-MOZ
TLOKWA-ZAF
KUNDA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-BWA
CHEWA-MWI
NARON-BWA MALINKE-MLI
YAO-MWI
MANYIKA-MOZ ZIMBA-MWI
SONINKE-SEN
MPEZENI-ZMB
HLENGWE-ZWE
GOMANI-MWI WANGA-UGA
MAKONDE-TZANUSAN-NAM
MASAI-KEN
MASAI-TZA
NUSAN-ZAFMAKONDE-MOZ
WANGA-KEN GOMANI-MOZ
MPEZENI-MWI
HL ENGWE-MOZ
SONINKE-MLI
ZIMBA-MOZ MANYIKA-ZWE
YAO-MOZ
MALINKE-SEN NARON-NAM
CHEWA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-NAM
KUNDA-ZMB
TLOKWA-BWA
TAWARA-ZWE
SUBIA-NAM
GUSII-KEN
SUBIA-ZMB
SOTHO-L
RONGA-ZAF
XAM-LSOSO
BUSA-BEN
TUMBUKA-ZMB
NDEBELE-ZWE
NDAU-ZWE
LUNGU-TZA
KOBA-NAM
LAMBYA-ZMB
KGATLA-BWA
NKOLE-TZA
THONGA-MOZ

1

Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c

2

Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE

-1

0

LUNGU-ZMB

NYANJA-MOZ

-2

EGBA-BEN

-.5

0
Presense of Piped Water in the Ethnicity i in Country c

.5

Appendix Figure 2a

Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c
-2
-1
0
1
2

educated.
Light Density and Education Levels Across Border within Ethnicities
Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE
EGBA-NGA
NYANJA-MWI
SUBIA-BWA
THONGA-ZAF
NKOLE-UGA
KGATLA-ZAF
LAMBYA-MWI KOBA-BWA
LUNGU-ZMB
NDAU-MOZ
NDEBELE-BWA
TUMBUKA-MWI
BUSA-NGA
RONGA-MOZ SOTHO-ZAF
XAM-ZAF
GUSII-TZA
TAWARA-MOZ
TLOKWA-ZAF
KUNDA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-BWA
CHEWA-MWI
NARON-BWA
MAL INKE-MLI
YAO-MWI
MANYIKA-MOZ
ZIMBA-MWI
SONINKE-SEN
HLENGWE-ZWE
MPEZENI-ZMB
GOMANI-MWI
WANGA-UGAMASAI-KEN
NUSAN-NAM
MAKONDE-TZA
GUN-NGA
MASAI-TZAWANGA-KEN
GUN-BEN
MAKONDE-MOZ
NUSAN-ZAF
GOMANI-MOZ
MPEZENI-MWI
HLENGWE-MOZ
SONINKE-MLI
ZIMBA-MOZ
MANYIKA-ZWE
YAO-MOZ
MALINKE-SEN
NARON-NAM
CHEWA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-NAM
KUNDA-ZMB
TLOKWA-BWA
TAWARA-ZWE
SUBIA-NAM
GUSII-KEN
SOTHO-LSO RONGA-ZAF SUBIA-ZMB
XAM-LSO
BUSA-BEN
TUMBUKA-ZMB
NDEBELE-ZWE
NDAU-ZWE
LUNGU-TZA
KOBA-NAM LAMBYA-ZMB
KGATLA-BWA
NKOLE-TZA
THONGA-MOZ
NYANJA-MOZ
EGBA-BEN

-2

-1
0
1
Average Education of Respondents in Ethnicity i in Country c

Appendix Figure 2b

2

2

Light Density and Access to Electricity Across Border within Ethnicities

Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c
-2
-1
0
1
2

Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c
-2
-1
0
1
2

Light Density and Sewage System Across Border within Ethnicities
Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE
EGBA-NGA
NYANJA-MWI
SUBIA-BWA

NYANJA-MOZ
EGBA-BEN

-.2
0
.2
Presence of Sewage System in Ethnicity i in Country c

EGBA-NGA

NYANJA-MWI
SUBIA-BWA
THONGA-ZAF
NKOLE-UGA
KGATLA-ZAF
LAMBYA-MWI
KOBA-BWA
LUNGU-ZMB
NDAU-MOZ
NDEBELE-BWA
RONGA-MOZ
XAM-ZAF SOTHO-ZAF TUMBUKA-MWI BUSA-NGA
GUSII-TZA
TAWARA-MOZ
TLOKWA-ZAF
KUNDA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-BWA
CHEWA-MWI
NARON-BWA
MALINKE-MLI
YAO-MWI
MANYIKA-MOZ
ZIMBA-MWI
SONINKE-SEN
MPEZENI-ZMB
HLENGWE-ZWE
GOMANI-MWI
WANGA-UGA
NUSAN-NAM
GUN-NGA
MAKONDE-TZA
MASAI-KEN
MASAI-TZA
MAKONDE-MOZ
GUN-BEN
NUSAN-ZAF
WANGA-KEN
GOMANI-MOZ
MPEZENI-MWI
SONINKE-MLIHLENGWE-MOZ
ZIMBA-MOZ
MANYIKA-ZWE
YAO-MOZ
MALINKE-SEN
NARON-NAM
CHEWA-MOZ
MBUKUSHU-NAM
KUNDA-ZMB
TLOKWA-BWA
TAWARA-ZWE
SUBIA-NAM
GUSII-KEN
SUBIA-ZMB
SOTHO-LSO
XAM-LSO
RONGA-ZAF
BUSA-BEN TUMBUKA-ZMB
NDEBELE-ZWE
NDAU-ZWE
LUNGU-TZA
KOBA-NAM
LAMBYA-ZMB
KGATLA-BWA
NKOLE-TZA
THONGA-MOZ

THONGA-ZAF
NKOLE-UGA
KGATL A-ZAF
LAMBYA-MWI
KOBA-BWA
LUNGU-ZMB
NDAU-MOZ
NDEBELE-BWA
BUSA-NGA
TUMBUKA-MWI XAM-ZAF
SOTHO-ZAFRONGA-MOZ
GUSII-TZA
TAWARA-MOZ
TLOKWA-ZAF
MBUKUSHU-BWA
KUNDA-MOZ
CHEWA-MWI
NARON-BWA
MALINKE-MLI
YAO-MWI
MANYIKA-MOZ ZIMBA-MWI
SONINKE-SEN
HLENGWE-ZWE
MPEZENI-ZMB
GOMANI-MWI
WANGA-UGA
MAKONDE-TZA
NUSAN-NAM
MASAI-KEN
MASAI-TZA
NUSAN-ZAF
MAKONDE-MOZ
WANGA-KENHLENGWE-MOZ
GOMANI-MOZ
MPEZENI-MWI
SONINKE-MLI
ZIMBA-MOZMANYIKA-ZWE
YAO-MOZ
MALINKE-SEN
NARON-NAM
CHEWA-MOZ
KUNDA-ZMB
MBUKUSHU-NAM
TLOKWA-BWA
TAWARA-ZWE
SUBIA-NAM
GUSII-KEN
SUBIA-ZMB
SOTHO-LSO
XAM-LSO
RONGA-ZAF
TUMBUKA-ZMB
BUSA-BEN
NDEBELE-ZWE
NDAU-ZWE
LUNGU-TZA
KOBA-NAM
LAMBYA-ZMB
KGATLA-BWA
NKOLE-TZA
THONGA-MOZ

-.4

Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE

.4

NYANJA-MOZ
EGBA-BEN

-.5

.5

Appendix Figure 2d

Appendix Figure 2c

2

0
Access to Electricity in Ethnicity i in Country c

Summary Statistics and Further Evidence on the Identification Strategy

2.1

Descriptive Statistics

Appendix Figure 3a reports the distribution of satellite light density at night across partitioned
ethnic homelands (220 ethnicities; 507 country-ethnicity observations). Appendix Figure 3b
plots the distribution of the log of light density adding a small number (yi,c ≡ ln(0.01 +
Light Densityi,c ). This transformation assures that (i) we use all (country-ethnic homeland)
observations and (ii ) we minimize the problem of outliers. This is the main dependent variable
in our estimates at the country-ethnic homeland level (e.g., Table 4-Panel A).
Kernel density estimate

0

0

2

.1

Density
.2

Density
4

6

.3

8

.4

Kernel density estimate

0

2
4
6
mean satelitte light density in 2007-2008.

-6

8

-4
-2
0
ln of mean satelitte light density in 2007-2008 + 0.01 (all)

2

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4107

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0182

Appendix Figure 3b

Appendix Figure 3a

Appendix Table 2 Panel A reports summary statistics for all variables at the ethniccountry homeland level in the full sample (1, 209 observations) that includes both partitioned
(e.g., Ewe in Togo and Ewe in Ghana) and non-split ethnic regions (e.g., Ndebele in Botswana
3

or the Luo in Kenya). Appendix Table 2 - Panel B reports summary statistics for all variables
in the full sample at the pixel level (120, 501 observations). [Table 1 gives summary statistics
for the sample of partitioned ethnic homelands].

2.2

Further Evidence on the Identification Strategy

In Appendix Table 3 we investigate whether differences in institutional quality across the border
correlate with differences in various geographic, ecological, and natural resource characteristics
at the pixel-level. The results (of these "similarity regressions") are thus similar to those
reported in Table 2, where we performed the analysis at the partitioned-ethnic homeland level.
With the exception of distance to the capital, within partitioned ethnicities differences in
geography, ecology, location, and natural resources are small and not systematically linked to
differences in national institutions.
In Figures 4a−4g we investigate whether observable characteristics jump discontinuously
within partitioned ethnicities as one crosses the border towards the relatively more institutionally developed country. As in our baseline RD analysis (Figures 5a − b, Figures 7a − b), the
figures plot the average value of the geographic, location, ecological and natural resource attribute for intervals (bins) of 5 kilometer width (the vertical line marks the national boundary).
We look within 50 kilometers from each side of the boundary (total 100km around the national
border). The figures also plot the predicted value of the pixel-level geographic trait from a 3rd
order RD polynomial (on distance to the national border) fitted separately for pixels in the
partitions that fall in the relatively high institutional quality country (where distance to the
national border takes on positive values) and pixels falling in the relatively low institutional
quality country (where distance takes on negative values). In line with the within-ethnicity
estimates in Table 2 and the complementary (at the pixel-level) results reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 3 there are no discontinuities in geographic attributes crossing the
national boundary towards the more institutionally developed country.

4

-50

0
Distance t o the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

50

National Institutions and Land Quality Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

-.01

0

.01

.02

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitt ed on each Side

-.02

Mean Land Quality within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

0

100

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitt ed on each Side

-100

Mean Elevation within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

National Institutions and Elevation Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

-50

50

National Institutions and Water Bodies Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

0

.05

Third Order Polynomial Separately Fitted on each Side

-.05

Presence of Water Bodies within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

1

11

Third Order Polynomial Separately Fitted on each Side

-9

Distance to the Coast of a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

National Institutions and Distance to the Coast Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

-50

50

50

National Institutions and Malaria Stability Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins
.02

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitt ed on each Side

0

.005

Third Order Polynomial Separately Fitt ed on each Side

-.02

Malaria Stabilit y within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

National Institutions and Diamond Mines Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

Appendix Figure 4d

-.005

Presence of Diamond Mines within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

Appendix Figure 4c

-50

50

Appendix Figure 4b

Appendix Figure 4a

-50

0
Distance t o the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

-50

0
Distance t o the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

Appendix Figure 4f

Appendix Figure 4e

5

50

.02

Third Order Polynomial Separat ely Fitted on each Side

-.01

Presence of Petroleum Field within a 5-km Bin Conditional on Ethnicity FE

National Institutions and Petroleum Fields Within Partitioned Groups
Dots represent local averages of 5km Bins

-50

0
Distance to the National Border
Positive Values: 5km Bins in the High Rule of Law Countries
Negative Values: 5km Bins in the Low Rule of Law Countries

50

Appendix Figure 4g

3

A Preliminary Analysis on What the Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Capture

We also conducted a preliminary investigation of the features that are behind the sizable drop of
the cross-sectional estimates when we add the ethnicity constants (e.g., Tables 4−5) focusing on
the role of geographic characteristics and ethnic-specific pre-colonial economic and institutional
traits.
Observable Geographic Features First, in Appendix Table 4 we investigate how
differences in geographical traits across border regions change with the inclusion of ethnicityspecific constants. Panel A reports within-group estimates, whereas Panel B reports the analogous cross-sectional estimates (i.e., without the ethnicity constants). Across all specifications,
the cross-sectional differences are quantitatively larger than the within-ethnicity ones. For example, the cross-sectional estimates reveal a significant negative correlation between national
institutions and the malaria stability index. Similarly, there is a positive and significant correlation between water areas and national institutions. However, these differences disappear,
once we focus on adjacent border regions within the same ethnic homeland. This implies that
by looking within neighboring border areas populated by the same group, we neutralize among
other biases those driven by systematic differences in the geography.
Pre-colonial Ethnic Traits Second, in an attempt to identify ethnic-specific characteristics that weaken the role of national institutions in Appendix Table 5 we focused on the
subset of partitioned ethnicities for which we have information on various economic, cultural,
institutional, and anthropological pre-colonial traits from Murdock (1967).2 Out of the 826
2

Murdock’s (1967) data have been used recently by several authors (e.g., Fenske (2012), Gennaioli and Rainer
(2007), Alsan (2012), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013b), Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2012),

6

groups (shown in Figure 1) 534 may be linked to Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. So
the sample drops from 42, 710 (see Table 4 - Panel B) to 27, 661 pixels. In column (1) we
regress luminosity on the rule of law index, simply conditioning on pixel-level (log) population
density and (log) pixel area.3 The coefficient on the rule of law index is 0.115 and the estimate
is statistically significant at 5%. The coefficient is almost identical to the one found in the
pixel-sample of all split ethnic homelands (Table 4-Panel B, column (1)).
In column (2) we include the full set of geographic and location controls, namely distance
to the coast, distance to the capital city, distance to the national border, mean elevation, an
indicator that takes on the value one for pixels with a water body, an index of malaria suitability,
an index of land quality for agriculture, and indicators for the presence of diamond mines and
petroleum fields. These geographic controls enter with significant point estimates in most
specifications. The inclusion of this detailed set of environmental and ecological controls makes
the estimate on national institutions drop considerably (by 40%) to 0.0676; the coefficient
retains significance though the p-value falls.
In column (3) we control for the complexity of pre-colonial political organization, using
Murdock’s jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. The index ranges from
0 to 4 and reflects the number of jurisdictional levels in each society above the local (usually
village) level. A score of 0 indicates acephalous societies, scores of 1 and 2 indicate petty and
large paramount chiefdoms, while a score of 3 and 4 indicate large states. The coefficient on
the jurisdictional hierarchy index enters with a positive and highly significant coefficient; in
line with the cross-ethnicity results of Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013b) pre-colonial
political centralization correlates strongly with ethnic development. Most importantly given
our focus, the introduction of this proxy of ethnic-specific pre-colonial political complexity
makes the coefficient on the rule of law index decline (by approximately 20%) to 0.059 and
become statistically insignificant. This implies that the significant cross-sectional correlation
between national institutions and economic development was partly driven by differences in
pre-colonial political centralization across groups.4
In column (4) we add decile dummies reflecting ethnic-specific pre-colonial subsistence
on agriculture and animal husbandry, respectively. Compared to the specification with the
Nunn (2008), Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013), Giuliano and Nunn (2013)) to study the role of various ethnic
attributes, such as indigenous slavery, pre-colonial political centralization, local electoral norms, polygyny, use
of plough, etc.
3
Although most pixels are of the same size (2.5 x 2.5 decimal degrees), pixels intersected by the coast line,
the national and ethnic boundaries are smaller.
4
This result is also in line with the cross-country results of Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) who present
cross-country regression evidence that pre-colonial ethnic-specific political centralization (averaged in each country) correlates with both institutional and economic development (as reflected in the rule of law index and log
of per capita GDP in 2000, respectively).

7

set of geographic controls in column (2), exploiting variation in current economic performance
within groups of comparable pre-colonial economic organization makes the estimate on rule of
law decline by half (from 0.0676 to 0.033) and become statistically insignificant. This result
suggests that part of association between national institutions and ethnic development was
driven by deeply-rooted ethnic differences in the organization of the local economy.
In column (5) we jointly control for the structure of the subsistence economy and the
degree of political centralization at the time of colonization; the coefficient on the rule of
law remains both quantitatively and statistically insignificant; in contrast the ethnic-specific
index of pre-colonial political centralization retains its economic and statistical significance. In
columns (6)-(10) we show that a similar pattern obtains when we proxy national institutions
with the control of corruption index.
Summary Overall, the results in Appendix Tables 4 and 5 imply that the ethnicityspecific constants capture (among other traits) both variation in observable geographic features
as well as differences in the pre-colonial structure of the economy and the political organization
of each group.

4

Sensitivity Analysis on the Average Effect of National Institutions on Ethnic Development

We have performed numerous sensitivity checks to explore the robustness of our finding in the
first part of the paper (Section 4) showing the lack of a systematic association between national
institutions and regional development within partitioned ethnic homelands. Specifically.
Luminosity in Levels In Supplementary Appendix Table 6 we report estimates expressing luminosity in levels. To account for the non-linear nature of the data (see Appendix
Figure 3a above), on top of the simple LS estimates (given in Panel A) we also report Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimates (in Panel B), that are better suited to account for
extreme values and the large number of zeros (Wooldridge (2002), Silva and Tenreyro (2006)).
In line with our baseline estimates (Tables 4 − 5), the coefficient on the national institutions
measures in the ethnicity fixed effects models is small and statistically indistinguishable from
zero.
Other Measures of Institutional Quality from the Governance Matters Database In Supplementary Appendix Table 7 we report results associating light density at the
country-ethnicity level with other aspects of governance, using data from World Bank’s Gov-

8

ernance Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)). Besides the rule of law and the
control of corruption measures that we use in the main paper, this database gives proxies of
national institutional quality along four other dimensions, government effectiveness (in (1)(2)), regulatory quality (in (3)-(4)), voice and accountability (in (5)-(6)), and political stability
(in (7)-(8)). These indexes also range from −2.5 to 2.5 with higher values reflecting better
functioning national institutions. The coefficient on the cross-sectional estimates (reported in
odd-numbered columns) is positive and statistically significant with the government effectiveness and the political stability indicators. The coefficients on the regulatory quality and voice
and accountability are also sizable, though not significant. Yet once we add ethnicity fixed
effects to explore variation across the national border within partitioned ethnic groups, all coefficients drop sizably and they are all statistically insignificant. This shows that on average
differences in national institutions do not correlate with differences in development -as reflected
in satellite images on light density at night.
Institutional Quality in 2007 By averaging the national institutions measures across
all years that we have data before 2007, we account for yearly fluctuations and hence decrease
measurement error; we also investigated whether the lack of within-ethnicity correlation between national institutions and subnational development is driven by the averaging of the
national institutions measures over the period of 1996 − 2006. In particular, we experimented
using the values of these measures in specific years. We continue finding weak and insignificant
correlations between national institutions and within-group economic performance. In Supplementary Appendix Table 8 we report estimates using the 2007 values of national institutional
quality. Panel A gives results at the country-ethnic homeland level, while Panel B gives analogous results at the pixel-level. The pattern is unchanged. While in the cross-section there is
a significantly positive association between national institutions and subnational development,
once we introduce ethnicity fixed effects the coefficients on national institutions drop considerably (by more than 50% at the country-ethnicity level and by 75% at the pixel level) and
become statistically insignificant.
Artificial Borders A merit of our approach to study the role of national institutions
in shaping subnational development within partitioned ethnic homelands is that there is wide
agreement that border design in Africa was to a great extent arbitrary (see Asiwaju (1985)
and Englebert (2009) for references). As the British prime minister at the time of Africa
colonization, Lord Salisbury summarized "we have been engaged in drawing lines upon maps
where no white man’s feet have ever tord; we have been giving away mountains and rivers and
lakes to each other, only hindered by the small impediment that we never knew exactly where the
9

mountains and rivers and lakes were." Moreover, in Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013a)
we establish formally that apart from the land mass and water area of an ethnicity’s historical
homeland, no other geographic, economic, and historical trait predicts ethnic partitioning by
the national borders.
Nevertheless, in an attempt to further mitigate concerns regarding the endogeneity of
border drawing and motivated by the work of Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011) we
constructed the fractal dimension of each bilateral border segment using the box-count method
that aims at identifying straight versus squiggly borders. The intuition behind this measure is
that more straight-line like borders are more likely to be arbitrary compared to more squiggly
ones.
The fractal dimension is constructed in the following manner: First, we generate grids of
various dimensions. The smallest box size we use is 0.001 by 0.001 decimal degrees (normalized
to 1). We also construct grids with box sizes of 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128. Second,
we project each of these grids onto a country’s border and we count the number of boxes that
each bilateral border segment intersects. Third, using all ten data points (for each border) we
regress In(boxcount) on In(boxsize); finally, we take the negative of the regression slope as
the fractal dimension for the border segment.
Values of the fractal measure of African bilateral borders range between 1 and 1.0794,
with lower values corresponding to more straight-line like borders. Consider Botswana, for
example, which shares borders with Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe. The western border
(with Namibia) has a fractal measure is 1.0139 (as the border largely follows longitudinal lines),
while the eastern border with Zimbabwe has a higher fractal measure of 1.0154, as only parts
of it follow straight lines; the southern border with South Africa has a fractal dimension of
1.0281, as it is much more squiggly (see Appendix Figure 5). The median fractal dimension
across bilateral borders in Africa is 1.01825 and the standard deviation is 0.01394.
After constructing the measures of border artificiality we re-estimated the empirical
specification focusing on partitioned ethnic groups separated by relatively straight borders
(fractal measure below the median). Appendix Tables 9A and 9B report the results. In
Appendix Table 9A the unit of analysis is the ethnicity-country (see Figure 2a in the main part
of the paper), whereas Appendix Table 9B gives the results at the pixel level (see Figure 2b in
the main part of the paper. Focusing on partitioned ethnic homelands in this subset of African
borders that are more likely to be artificial produces similar results. Across all specifications
with ethnicity fixed effects the coefficient on the two proxies of national institutions is very

10

small and always statistically insignificant.

Zimbabwe
Namibia

Botswana

South Africa

Ü

Botswana's National Borders
Botswana Boundaries
Neighboring Countries

Appendix Figure 5
Migration Anecdotal evidence suggests that national boundaries across Africa are
poorly enforced due to the lack of border patrolling, poor demarcation, and geographic conditions (desert areas in the North, rainforest in Central Africa). Hence, if people migrate to
take advantage of higher incomes in regions with better national institutions, mobility across
national boundaries may attenuate income differences on the two sides of the border. In this
case, however, population density should differ systematically between partitions as a result
of migration towards those located in the countries with relatively better institutions. Alternatively, it may be the case that population in the low institutional quality country clusters
near the border to migrate daily on the other side to work.5 We explore in detail the issue of
migration with two alternative approaches.
In Supplementary Appendix Table 10 we directly examine the effect of national institutions on population density; for completeness we use two different sources of population density
5
Note that the ease of migration might not necessarily lead to attenuation bias. In fact, migration might
accentuate the importance of institutions if firms relocate to take advantage of the better institutional environment on the other side of the border. Hence, as a result of migration of firms and people this would imply
that aggregate economic activity, captured by luminosity and/or population density, would be magnified in the
partition enjoying better national institutions. The results below suggest that this is not the case.

11

estimates at the grid level: the United Nations Environmental Program (results reported in
Panel A) and the Gridded Population of the World Database (in Panel B). There is no systematic association between the quality of national institutions and log population density in
border areas where partitioned ethnicities reside; the coefficient is small and even changes sign
across specifications. This suggests that the insignificant within-ethnicity relationship between
national institutions and regional development is not likely to be driven by migration.
Moreover, to the extent that population density reflects regional development (as in
Malthusian models), the insignificant coefficients of rule of law and control of corruption provide additional evidence that national institutions are not systematically linked to ethnic development.
To further account for cross-border migration we excluded areas close to the border.
Doing so, we account for potential temporary migration and for local trade. By excluding areas
close to the national border we also mitigate concerns related to lights’ stealing and bleeding
(and/or blooming) in the luminosity data. Supplementary Appendix Table 11 reports crosssectional (in odd-numbered columns) and within-ethnicity specifications (in even-numbered
columns). For completeness we report results both at the country-ethnicity homeland level (in
Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B). In columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) we exclude
areas within 25 kilometers from each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers), while
in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we exclude regions within 50 kilometers of each side of the
border (total 100 kilometers). The results are similar to the baseline estimates (in Tables 4 and
5). In the cross section there is a strong positive correlation between institutional quality and
luminosity; however, the coefficient drops sizably and becomes statistically indistinguishable
from zero when we add ethnicity fixed effects.
Regional Variation Supplementary Appendix Table 12 reports ethnicity fixed effects
estimates at the ethnic homeland level (in Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B), excluding
each time a different African region (using the classification of Nunn (2008)). The coefficient on
the national institutions is small and in all but two specifications statistically indistinguishable
from zero.
Border-Fixed-Effects Estimates Our analysis focuses on border areas populated
by split groups. Due to the arbitrary drawing of African borders the majority of national
boundaries have resulted in partitioned ethnic homelands. For example, a segment of the
Kenyan-Tanzanian border splits the Maasai, the Uganda-Congo border straddles the homeland
of the Konjo, whereas the Tonga is the only group whose homeland is intersected by a segment
of the national boundary separating Zimbabwe from Zambia. So, for border segments that
12

generate partitioned groups, border fixed effects are likely to capture variation roughly similar
to the one captured by ethnicity constants. This is shown to be the case in Supplementary
Appendix Table 13 where we introduce in the sample of the two-major partitions border fixed
effects instead of group-specific constants.
Afrobarometer Data We repeated our analysis using data from the 2005 Afrobarometer household surveys on public goods provision and education as the dependent variable. Due
to limited coverage, the sample reduces to 32 partitioned ethnic groups with at least one enumeration area in each of the partitions across the countries that the Afrobarometer surveys
cover. In spite of the reduction in sample size, it is useful repeating the analysis with survey
data both for cross-validation of the luminosity data and because one of the primary channels associating national institutions with development is the provision of public goods. Our
specification reads:
ye,i,c = γIQLc + λP De,i,c + ai + εe,i,c .

(1)

The dependent variable, ye,i,c , reflects average household’s access to an electricity grid,
access to piped water, access to a sewage system, and average years of schooling in Afrobarometer’s enumeration area, e, that falls in the historical homeland of partitioned ethnicity i in
country c. In each enumeration area (town, village) we use the average value of public goods
provision measures across surveyed households.
Supplementary Appendix Table 14 reports the results. We start our analysis using
luminosity as the dependent variable. Columns (1)-(2) report estimates associating national
institutions and luminosity across Afrobarometer’s enumeration areas (luminosity is calculated
within a 10km radius from each enumeration area’s centroid). Column (1) shows that there is
a significant positive association between rule of law (or the control of corruption index) and
luminosity across cities/villages. Yet the correlation weakens considerably and changes sign
when we include ethnicity fixed effects (in (2)).6
In columns (3)-(4) we use as the dependent variable household’s access to an electricity
grid (the average is 53.5%). The cross-sectional estimates show that electrification is greater in
towns/villages falling in countries with better institutions. Yet once we focus within the same
historical ethnic homeland to examine whether households’ access to an electricity grid is higher
in countries with more developed national institutions, the correlation weakens considerably
and loses significance. In columns (5)-(6) we associate national institutions with household
6
We cannot estimate local (close to the national border) regressions with the Afrobarometer data because
the sample size of Afrobarometer enumeration areas drops considerably when limiting attention to areas close
to the national border.

13

access to piped water across Afrobarometer’s enumeration areas (the mean is 0.49). While the
cross-sectional correlation is positive, adding ethnicity fixed effects to exploit across-the-border
variation in villages/towns of the same ethnic group, makes the coefficient insignificant. In
columns (7)-(8) we examine whether access to a sewage system is systematically associated
with national institutions (on average access to a sewage system is 0.24) whereas in columns
(9)-(10) we use as the dependent variable average years of schooling across respondents within
each enumeration area (on average household heads have 3 years of education). The estimates, albeit less precisely estimated, echo our previous findings. Across all permutations the
within-ethnicity coefficients on rule of law and control of corruption are small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
Two-Dimensional RD Given the spatial dimension of our data, following Dell (2010)
we also experimented with two-dimensional RD polynomials in latitude and longitude. Supplementary Appendix Table 15 reports these results. Across all model permutations, the RD
estimates on the high national institutions index are very small (usually less than 0.01) and
statistically indistinguishable from zero.

5

Sensitivity Analysis on the Heterogeneous Role of National
Institutions

We estimated various specifications (a) illustrating the heterogeneous relationship between
national institutions and subnational development (that is graphically shown in Figures 6a−6b)
and (b) linking this heterogeneity to distance to the capital. In this section we present the main
robustness checks.

5.1

Heterogeneity across and within African Regions
Heterogeneity across African Regions As a first pass of exploring potential het-

erogeneity of the within-ethnicity association between national institutions and regional development, we estimated separate models for each of the five main African regions (using the
classification of Nunn (2008)). Supplementary Appendix Table 16 reports LS estimates in the
two major partitions of split groups examining whether ethnic development is higher in the
country with the relatively better institutional quality. The estimates reveal that for groups
split across countries in Eastern and Western Africa, local economic activity is not systematically linked to the quality of national institutions. In contrast, a positive correlation between
luminosity and institutional quality emerges when we focus on Southern Africa. A positive
association between institutional quality and regional development emerges also for Central
14

African countries (though the estimate is much smaller and not always significant). In contrast, when we look within split groups in North Africa a negative correlation emerges (though
the number of split groups is very small). These findings suggest that the overall weak relationship between national institutions and subnational development masks considerable regional
heterogeneity.
A Closer Look at Regional Heterogeneity Supplementary Appendix Table 17
reports specifications similar to those in Appendix Table 16, but we now estimate separately
the relationship between national institutions and luminosity for pixels close to and pixels far
from the capital cities, respectively. To distinguish between pixels far and close to the capitals
we use the median of the within-country distance to the respective capital city as the cutoff. A
couple of interesting patterns emerge -that are in line with the baseline estimates (in Table 8).
Across all five African regions the estimate on the high rule of law indicator is larger
when we focus on pixels of split groups close to the capital cities. This is consistent with the
findings of Table 8. In Central Africa, Eastern Africa and Western Africa the high rule of law
indicator is positive and large (though not always significant) when we restrict estimation to
areas close to the respective capitals; in contrast, the coefficient is zero for split groups that
are far from the capital. The results from Northern Africa are also in line with our baseline
estimates. Within North Africa, where the overall association between institutional quality and
development was found to be negative (Appendix Table 16) a significantly positive association
emerges for split groups that are close to the respective capitals. Though there are only two
groups, the pattern is in line with the estimates in the full sample of split ethnicities.7 Unlike
the rest of the African regions, in Southern Africa a positive and significant association between
national institutions and regional development obtains also for groups whose partitions are far
from the respective capital cities.

5.2

Heterogeneity and Proximity to the Capital Cities
Proximity to the Capital and National Institution Using All Pixels within

Split Groups In Table 8 we focused separately on split groups that have pixels on both sides
of the border either close to or far from the respective capital city. The reason for splitting the
sample was to illustrate the pattern on the differential importance of national institutions in
areas far and close from the capital in the most transparent manner and motivate the ensuing
RD graphs accordingly (Figures 7A − 7b). However, a limitation of this approach is that we
7

These groups are the Hamama and the Tunisians which are split between Algeria and Tunisia. Luminosity
for these two groups that are close to the respective capitals is much higher in Tunisia, where the rule of law
index equals 0.294 compared to Algeria’s rule of law index which is two standard deviations lower, −0.712.

15

do not use information from the entire sample of split groups (that also includes split groups
where pixels on the one side of the border are close to the capital, while pixels at the other side
of the border are far from the capital).
In Supplementary Appendix 18 we report estimates pooling all observations (pixels)
from split groups allowing the coefficient on national institutions (and all other controls) to
differ for pixels close to the capital city. We use two different thresholds to define the close
(proximity to the capital) indicator (dummy variable). In columns (1)-(4) we use as a cutoff
the median of capital distance computed across all pixels in Africa, whereas in columns (5)-(8)
we calculate the within-country median distance to the capital and use the latter to classify
pixels accordingly. The evidence suggests that the coefficient on national institutions is zero
and insignificant for pixels far from the capital; in contrast the coefficient on the rule of law
index for pixels that are close (or relatively close) to the capital is positive and significant,
illustrating that institutional and regional development do correlate but only in the vicinity of
the capitals.
Dropping Iteratively Each African Region In Supplementary Appendix Table 19
we show that the differential role of national institutions far and close to the capital city is not
driven by a specific region of the continent. We follow the format of Appendix Table 18 and
pool together all pixels from partitioned groups allowing the coefficient on national institutions
(and all control variables) to differ for pixels relatively close to the respective capital city.
Iteratively we drop from the estimation partitioned ethnicities that fall into one of the five
main African regions. The pattern is similar to the one where we used information from all
partitioned African ethnic homelands (reported in Appendix Table 18). The diminishing role
of national institutions for regions far from the capital city is a rather general phenomenon of
the African landscape and is not driven by one particular region.
In Appendix Table 20 instead of pooling all observations (pixels) from all partitioned
ethnic homelands we follow the structure of the baseline results in Table 8 and we estimate
separate specifications for split groups that have pixels on both sides of the border that are close
(far) from the respective capitals. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively comparable
to the ones shown in Appendix Table 19 and Table 8.
Alternative Measures of Institutional Quality

For completeness we re-estimated

all models using the other four composite measures of national institutions from the Governance Indicators, namely bureaucratic quality, regulatory quality, voice and accountability,
and political stability. Supplementary Appendix Table 21 shows that the pattern revealed in
Table 8 (and Appendix Table 18) obtains also with these alternative proxies of national insti16

tutions. The overall association between institutional quality and regional development within
the homelands of partitioned ethnicities is weak and often insignificant (see also Supplementary
Appendix Table 7). Yet for the part (pixels) of partitioned groups that are close to the respective capitals differences in national institutions across the border do translate into significant
differences in regional development. This applies to all institutional quality measures but the
political stability index. For example, the estimate on the bureaucratic (regulatory) quality
suggests that pixel-level luminosity is 0.109 (0.079) higher in the partitions close to the capital
in the country with the better national institutions. In contrast the analogous estimates for
pixels of split groups far from the capitals are close to zero and statistically insignificant (one
exception is the regulatory quality index which although similarly small remains significance
at 10%).
Unbundling Institutions There is a wealth of measures proxying institutional quality
across countries. So far we have employed the most commonly used ones, namely the rule of
law and control of corruption indexes from the World Bank Governance Indicators (Kaufmann,
Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)). This dataset has the advantage that unlike other measures,
provides coverage for all African countries assuaging concerns that the results are biased by the
exclusion of relatively weak states (like Somalia, Liberia, Libya etc.) which are not covered by
other datasets. Moreover, World Bank’s Governance Indicators aggregate various institutional
quality measures across six dimensions (through principal components), accounting effectively
for idiosyncrasies and systematic biases and thus minimizing measurement error. Yet, we also
experimented with alternative measures of national institutions finding a similar pattern. In
Supplementary Appendix Table 22 we report estimates using Polity’s executive constraints
index to capture "property rights institutions" and indicators of legal formalism (from the
work of Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003)) to proxy for "contractual"
institutions. This approach (and exact measures) follows Acemoglu and Johnson (2005), who in
turn attribute it to Douglas North’s distinction of state’s basic functions, i.e., protect investors
from expropriation and facilitate economic activity by establishing a sound legal infrastructure
(North (1981)).
In columns (1)-(3) we measure "property rights" institutions using the average of the
executive constraints index over the period 1991−2006. The coefficient on executive constraints
within all partitioned ethnicities (in column (1)) is small and statistically insignificant. The
coefficient on the property rights proxy is larger (though still statistically insignificant) when
we restrict estimation to areas of partitioned ethnicities close to the capital. In columns (4)(6), we follow Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2008) and proxy "early" property

17

rights institutions using the average value of executive constraints in the first decade after
independence (so for most countries, we use the mean value in the 1960s). These specifications
have the benefit that we use predetermined proxies of national institutions. In line with the
evidence so far there is no systematic association between institutional quality at independence
and subnational development in the full sample of split ethnicities (in (4)). Nevertheless, the
coefficient on executive constraints at independence is seven times larger for regions close to the
capitals (0.0711) compared to regions far from the capital centers (0.01), though both estimates
are statistically insignificant.
In columns (7)-(12) we report estimates using two legal formalism indicators from World
Bank’s Doing Business Project, that are based on Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2003) and Djankov, Mc Liesh, and Shleifer (2007); we use the most recent update
of the Doing Business Database rather than the original measures to increase the sample size
(though still there is no coverage for Somalia, Libya, Ivory Coast, and Liberia). The merit of
looking at these measures of legal quality is that they reflect a specific aspect of the institutional
environment. In columns (7)-(9) we use the log number of days necessary to resolve through
the court system a simple dispute arising from the enforcement of a contract worth twice the
country’s per capita GDP. In columns (10)-(12) we use the log number of procedures needed to
resolve this dispute via courts. The estimate in the full sample of split ethnicities (in columns
(7) and (10)) is negative, implying that dysfunctional, slow, and formalistic legal systems are
associated with a lower level of development; yet the estimates are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. However, unlike areas far from the capitals where dysfunctional legal
institutions have no bearing on regional development, the relationship between local economic
activity and contractual institutions becomes much stronger for partitioned ethnicities close to
the capital cities.
Distance to the Capital, State Presence and Public Good Provision In Appendix Table 23 we provide further evidence on the weak penetration of state’s basic functions
in areas far from the capital cities using micro-level data from the Afrobarometer Surveys covering close to 20, 000 individuals from 17 countries. The within-country specifications show that
proximity to the capital correlates negatively with the provision of public goods by the state
and the easiness of obtaining an identity document. In particular, the estimates in columns
(1)-(4) show that respondents residing in enumeration areas (towns/villages) further from the
capital find it increasingly difficult to obtain an identity document (such as a birth certificate,
driver’s license, passport or a voter card). The same pattern applies when we employ as a
dependent variable an ordered index reflecting the difficulty obtaining basic household services

18

(like piped water, electricity or telephone) from the government in columns (5)-(8). These
results corroborate the pattern shown in Table 10 pointing out the declining state presence in
areas further from the capital centers.

19

6
6.1

Variables’ Definitions
Afrobarometer Sample

Access to an electricity grid: Assessed by the field supervisor "whether in the enumeration
area there is an electricity grid that most houses could access". Source: 2005 Afrobarometer
Surveys; available at
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/nunn/data_nunn
Access to piped water: Assessed by the field supervisor "whether in the enumeration
area there is a piped water system that most houses could access". Source: 2005 Afrobarometer
Surveys.
Access to sewage system: Assessed by the field supervisor "whether in the enumeration area there is a sewage system that most houses could access". Source: 2005 Afrobarometer
Surveys.
Schooling: Average years of schooling across respondents within Afrobarometer’s enumeration areas. Source: 2005 Afrobarometer Surveys.
Difficulty to obtain identity document: Ordered variable based in individual responses to the following question (Question Q71a): "Based on your experience, how easy or
difficult is to obtain the following services? Or do you never try and get these services from
government: An identity document (such as a birth certificate, driver’s license, passport or
voter card)? "Value Labels: 1=Very Difficult, 2=Difficult, 3=Easy, 4=Very Easy, 7=Never
Try. If the answer is "Never Try" then looked at Question Q73a "Why do you never try to get:
An identity document?" if the answer is "3=Govt does not provide it" then we replace those
respondents with "1=Very Difficult" for the Q71a. For the rest that have answered "7=Never
Try" in Q71a we assign them as missing.
Difficulty to obtain household services: Ordered variable based in individual responses to the following question (Question Q71b): "Based on your experience, how easy or
difficult is to obtain the following services? Or do you never try and get these services from
government: Household services (like piped water, electricity or telephone)?" Value Labels:
1=Very Difficult, 2=Difficult, 3=Easy, 4=Very Easy, 7=Never Try. If the answer is "Never
Try" then looked at Question Q73b "Why do you never try to get: Household services?" if
the answer is "3=Govt does not provide it" then we replace those respondents with "1=Very
Difficult" for the Q71b. For the rest that have answered "7=Never Try" in Q71b we assign
them as missing.

20

6.2

Country-Level Institutional Quality Measures

Bureaucratic Quality: The index "captures perceptions of the quality of public services, the
quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political pressures, the quality
of policy formulation and implementation, and the credibility of the government’s commitment
to such policies." The standardized index ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with higher values indicating better functioning institutions. We use the average value over the period 1996 − 2006.
Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)). available at: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp
Regulatory Quality: The index "captures perceptions of the ability of the government
to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote private
sector development." The standardized index ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with higher values
indicating better functioning institutions. We use the average value over the period 1996 −
2006. Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and
Mastruzzi (2008)).
Voice and Accountability: The index "captures perceptions of the extent to which a
country’s citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of
expression, freedom of association, and a free media." The standardized index ranges from −2.5
to +2.5 with higher values indicating better functioning institutions. We use the average value
over the period 1996 − 2006. Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database
(Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)).
Political Stability and Absence of Violence: The index "measures perceptions of
the likelihood that the government will be destabilized or overthrown by unconstitutional or
violent means, including politically-motivated violence and terrorism." The standardized index
ranges from −2.5 to +2.5 with higher values indicating better functioning institutions. We
use the average value over the period 1996 − 2006. Source: World Bank Governance Matters
Indicators Database (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2008)).
Executive Constraints: Standardized (to range 0 − 1) index capturing constraints on
the executive. We take the average over the period 1991 − 2006. Source: Polity IV Project.
(Marshall, Jaggers, and Gurr (2010).
Available at: http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm
Executive Constraints at independence: Standardized (to range 0 − 1) index capturing constraints on the executive in the first ten years after independence. Source: Polity IV
Project (Marshall, Jaggers, and Gurr (2010).
Available at: http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm
Legal Formalism 1 - Days for Contract Enforcement: Log number of days required
21

to resolve a commercial lawsuit between two domestic businesses. The dispute involves the
breach of a sales contract worth twice the income per capita of the economy. The case study
assumes that the court hears arguments on the merits and that an expert provides an opinion
on the quality of the goods in dispute. The time is measured from the perspective of an
entrepreneur (the plaintiff) pursuing the standardized case through local courts. Source Doing
Business Project (based on the methodology developed in Djankov et al. (2003); Djankov et al.
(2007)).
Legal Formalism 2 - Procedures for Contract Enforcement: Log number of
procedures required to resolve a commercial lawsuit between two domestic business. The
dispute involves the breach of a sales contract worth twice the income per capita of the economy.
The case study assumes that the court hears arguments on the merits and that an expert
provides an opinion on the quality of the goods in dispute. The number of procedures is
measured from the perspective of an entrepreneur (the plaintiff) pursuing the standardized
case through local courts. Source Doing Business Project (based on the methodology developed
in Djankov et al. (2003); Djankov et al. (2007)).

6.3

Ethnic-Level Variables from Murdock (1967)

Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 0
to 4 indicating the number of jurisdictional levels (political complexity) in each society above
the local level. A 0 indicates stateless societies, 1 and 2 indicate petty and large paramount
chiefdoms (or their equivalent), 3 and 4 indicate large states. Source: Murdock (1967); variable
code in the Ethnolinguistic Atlas v33; Available at:
http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultures.sav.
Pastoralism - Animal Husbandry: Set of ten indicators (dummy variables) reflecting
the percentage of subsistence coming from animal husbandry for each ethnicity at the time of
colonization. 1: 0%-5% dependence; 2: 6%-15% dependence; 3: 16%-25% dependence; 4: 26%35% dependence; 5: 36%-45% dependence; 6: 46%-55% dependence; 7: 56%-65% dependence;
8: 66%-75% dependence; 9: 76%-85% dependence; and 10: 86%-100% dependence. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v4.
Agriculture Dependence: Set of ten indicators (dummy variables) reflecting the percentage of subsistence coming from agriculture for each ethnicity at the time of colonization. 1:
0%-5% dependence; 2: 6%-15% dependence; 3: 16%-25% dependence; 4: 26%-35% dependence;
5: 36%-45% dependence; 6: 46%-55% dependence; 7: 56%-65% dependence; 8: 66%-75% dependence; 9: 76%-85% dependence; and 10: 86%-100% dependence. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v5.

22

References
A, D.,

 S. J 

(2005): “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political

Economy, 113(5), 949—995.
A, D., S. J  , J. A. R  ,

 P. Y  (2008): “Income and Democ-

racy,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 808—842.
A

, A., W. E ,

 J. M  (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the

European Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.
A

, A., P. G

,

 N. N

(2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women

and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 169—530.
, M. M. (2012): “The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Developmen,” manuscript,

A

Harvard University.
A" #, A. (1985): “The Conceptual Framework,” in Partitioned Africans, pp. 1—18. St.
Martin Press, New York.
D, M. (2010): “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), 839—
857.
D#

$, S., R. L

P , F. L'--S

,

 A. S) (2003): “Courts,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 453—517.
D#

$, S., C. M L,

 A. S) (2007): “Private Credit in 129 Countries,”

Journal of Financial Economics, 84(2), 299—329.
D, C. N., J.-P. M,

 J. G. M (2006): “Mapping Regional Economic

Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery,” Ecological Economics, 57(1), 75—92.
E$, C., K. B , E. K , H. K,

 E. D $ (1997): “Mapping of City

Lights Using DMSP Operational Linescan System data,” Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 63, 727—734.
E , P. (2009): Africa, Unity, Sovereignty and Sorrow. Lynne Rienner Publishers,
Inc., Boulder, Colorado.
F , J. (2012): “African polygamy: Past and present,” mimeo, Oxford University.

23

G

, N.,

 I. R   (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality

in Africa,” in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and
K. Konrad. MIT Press.
(2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.
G

, P.,

(2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to

 N. N

the Nation State,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 86—92.
H  , V. J., A. S ,

 D. N. W (2012): “Measuring Economic Growth

from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 994—1028.
K )

, D., A. K

,

 M. M  (2008): “Governance Matters VIII: Ag-

gregate and Individual Governance Indicators, 1996-2007,” Policy Research Working Paper
Series 4654, The World Bank.
M ', S., A. N  $,

 G. P  (2012): “Trade and Geography in the

Origins and Spread of Islam,” NBER Working Paper No. 18438.
M ', S.,

 E. P ' 

 (2011): “Divide and Rule or the Rule of the

Divided? Evidence from Africa,” NBER Working Paper No. 17184.
(2013a): “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa,” NBER Working Paper
No. 17620.
(2013b): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African Development,”
Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.
M, G. P. (1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. The University of Pittsburgh
Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
N, D. C. (1981): Structure and Change in Economic History. Norton, New York, NY.
N

, N. (2008): “The Long Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 123(1), 139—176.
P $, M. (2013): “Economic Discontinuities at Borders: Evidence from Satellite Data
on Lights at Night,” mimeo MIT.
S$ , J. M. S.,

 S. T  (2006): “The Log of Gravity,” Review o Economics and

Statistics, 88(4), 641—658.
24

W, J. M. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

25

Appendix Table 1: Satellite Light Density at Night and Proxy Measures of Development within Ethnicities across Afrobarometer Enumeration Areas

Access to Piped Water
All
(1)

Split
(2)

Non-Split
(3)

Presence of Sewage System

Presence of Electricity Grid

All
(4)

All
(7)

Split
(5)

Non-Split
(6)

Split
(8)

Non-Split
(9)

Schooling Years
All
(10)

Split
(11)

Non-Split
(12)

Panel A: Using a 10 km radius
Log Light Density

Adjusted R-squared

0.0489*** 0.0436*** 0.0522*** 0.0379*** 0.0416*** 0.0355*** 0.0532*** 0.0575*** 0.0504*** 0.1236*** 0.1177*** 0.1272***
(0.0072) (0.0135) (0.0078)
(0.0066) (0.0121) (0.0111)
(0.0107) (0.0154) (0.0136)
(0.0179) (0.0436) (0.0212)
0.363

0.322

0.380

0.326

0.263

0.343

0.393

0.348

0.397

0.541

0.511

0.543

Panel B: Using a 5 km radius
Log Light Density

0.0433*** 0.0367*** 0.0477*** 0.0356*** 0.0425*** 0.0304*** 0.0491*** 0.0508*** 0.0478*** 0.1028*** 0.0997*** 0.1045***
(0.0066) (0.0124) (0.0070)
(0.0049) (0.0085) (0.0072)
(0.0090) (0.0135) (0.0119)
(0.0156) (0.0330) (0.0190)

Ethnicity FE
Population Density

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Ethnicities
Enumeration Areas
Adjusted R-squared

282
2241
0.365

97
806
0.322

185
1435
0.384

282
2221
0.331

97
799
0.280

185
1422
0.346

282
2249
0.400

97
805
0.356

185
1444
0.403

282
2268
0.540

97
812
0.511

185
1456
0.542

The table reports ethnicity-fixed-effects estimates associating four proxy measures of development (using micro-level data from the Afrobarometer) with log satellite light density at
night, log (0.01 + light density). The unit of analysis is the enumeration area of the Afrobarometer Surveys. As within each enumeration area there are several households, we average
household responses across the enumeration area and use the respective mean values as the dependent variable. In Panel A light density at night is the average light density in a radius of
10 km from the centroid of Afrobarometer’s enumeration area. In Panel B light density at night is the average light density in a radius of 5 km from the centroid of Afrobarometer’s
enumeration area. The dependent variable is columns (1)-(3) reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is a piped water system that most houses could access" as assessed by the
field supervisor.
The dependent variable is columns (4)-(6) reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is a sewage system that most houses could access" as assessed by the field supervisor. The
dependent variable is columns (7)-(9) reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is an electricity grid that most houses could access" as assessed by the field supervisor. In columns
(9)-(12) the dependent variable is the average years of schooling across respondents within each enumeration area. In all specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density in a
radius of 10km or 5km of the enumeration centroid). The regressions in columns (1), (4), (7), and (10) are estimated in the full sample of ethnicities (282 ethnic groups in 17 countries).
The regressions in columns (2), (5), (8) and (11) are estimated in the sub-sample of partitioned by the national border ethnic groups. The regressions in columns (3), (6), (9), and (12) are
estimated in the sub-sample of non-partitioned ethnic groups. All specifications include ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). Below the estimates we report in parentheses
double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the ethnicity dimension. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics in the Full Sample
(Partitioned and Non-Partitioned Ethnic Groups)
variable

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

p25

median

p75

min

max

Panel A: All Country-Ethnic Homelands Sample
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)
Ln (1 + Water Area)
Ln (Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability for Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the Border
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209
1209

0.368
-3.008
2.787
0.265
2.051
0.622
0.410
0.725
0.084
0.093
0.508
0.604
0.107
-0.962
-0.841

1.567
1.721
1.828
0.417
1.552
0.440
0.238
0.339
0.278
0.291
0.367
0.431
0.118
0.587
0.512

0.000
-4.605
1.886
0.003
1.013
0.290
0.255
0.512
0.000
0.000
0.263
0.224
0.020
-1.395
-1.164

0.018
-3.570
3.070
0.097
2.121
0.489
0.424
0.891
0.000
0.000
0.414
0.563
0.061
-1.060
-0.879

0.136
-1.925
4.016
0.327
3.138
0.956
0.572
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.639
0.931
0.159
-0.543
-0.685

0.000
-4.605
-6.673
0.000
-2.212
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.000
0.000
-2.198
-1.664

25.140
3.225
7.432
3.119
6.202
2.181
0.979
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.882
1.739
0.637
0.615
0.814

Panel B: Pixel Level. Full Sample
Light Density
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)
Light Density 0-1
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)
Water Area Indicator
Ln (Area)
Mean Elevation
Land Suitability for Agriculture
Malaria Stability Index
Oil Deposit Indicator
Diamond Mine Indicator
Distance to the Capital City
Distance to the Sea Coast
Distance to the Border
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

120501
120501
120501
120501
120501
120501
120501
119947
116896
120501
120501
120501
120501
120501
120501
120501

0.557
-3.934
0.158
2.244
0.132
4.925
662.516
0.355
0.665
0.029
0.003
0.525
573.221
190.413
-0.927
-0.775

3.466
1.727
0.364
1.828
0.338
0.610
496.491
0.276
0.423
0.168
0.053
0.367
432.284
226.369
0.647
0.585

0.000
-4.605
0.000
0.882
0.000
4.994
294.000
0.100
0.134
0.000
0.000
0.260
193.790
51.240
-1.454
-1.141

0.000
-4.605
0.000
2.325
0.000
5.211
533.111
0.329
0.978
0.000
0.000
0.428
495.168
124.073
-0.864
-0.871

0.000
-4.605
0.000
3.583
0.000
5.246
998.444
0.536
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.700
901.139
243.834
-0.448
-0.464

0.000
62.982
-4.605
4.143
0.000
1.000
-5.198
10.101
0.000
1.000
2.303
5.259
-702.000 4623.750
0.001
0.999
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.001
1.933
0.111
1735.680
0.000
1483.292
-2.198
0.615
-1.664
0.814

The table reports descriptive statistics for all variables employed in the empirical analysis for all ethnic homelands in Africa. Panel A
reports summary statistics at the country-ethnicity level. Panel B reports summary statistics at the pixel level. The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and data sources.

Appendix Table 3: Validity of the Identification Design at the Pixel Level
Dependent variable is:
Area under
Water
Indicator

Mean
Elevation

Land
Suitability

Malaria
Stability

Oil
Indicator

Diamond
Indicator

Distance to
the Capital

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Distance to the Distance to
Sea Coast
the Border

Panel A: Rule of Law
Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0136
(0.0172)

10.5747
(39.5890)

0.0093
(0.0162)

-0.0006
(0.0171)

0.0054
(0.0033)

-0.0005
(0.0010)

-0.1919*
(0.1076)

4.9043
(25.2232)

1.913
(7.5431)

0.150
42710

0.760
42710

0.751
42566

0.871
41149

0.378
42710

0.025
42710

0.607
42710

0.950
42710

0.338
42710

Panel B: Control of Corruption
Control of Corruption
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0038
(0.0219)

6.9204
(45.7242)

-0.0086
(0.0202)

0.150
42710

0.760
42710

0.751
42566

-0.0135
(0.0209)
0.872
41149

0.0064*
(0.0038)

-0.0007
(0.0016)

-0.1419
(0.1263)

7.1719
(27.9690)

1.7353
(9.4991)

0.377
42710

0.025
42710

0.586
42710

0.950
42710

0.338
42710

Panel C: High Rule of Law - Two Major Partitions of Split Groups
High Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.0096
(0.0149)

7.2195
(30.4552)

0.01
(0.0125)

0.0008
(0.0171)

0.0013
(0.0037)

-0.0008
(0.0012)

-0.1186
(0.0777)

1.5385
(16.5715)

7.2374
(6.4173)

0.152
40209

0.766
40209

0.759
40074

0.868
38797

0.380
40209

0.026
40209

0.627
40209

0.954
40209

0.348
40209

Panel D: High Control of Corruption - Two Major Partitions of Split Groups
High Control of Corruption
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects

0.0009
(0.0145)

-26.3412
(32.3645)

0.0034
(0.0132)

0.0087
(0.0178)

0.0031
(0.0036)

0.0006
(0.0010)

0.0327
(0.0889)

-12.9125
(16.6480)

1.947
(6.4677)

0.152
40209
Yes

0.766
40209
Yes

0.758
40074
Yes

0.868
38797
Yes

0.380
40209
Yes

0.026
40209
Yes

0.609
40209
Yes

0.954
40209
Yes

0.346
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating various geographical, ecological, and other characteristics at the pixel level with contemporary national institutions,
as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in Panel A) and control of corruption index (in Panel B) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. In Panels C and
D we focus on the two major partitions of an ethic group. The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value
in the rule of law index (in Panel C) or in the control of corruption index (in Panel D).
The dependent variable in column (1) is an indicator that takes on the value of one for pixels with a water body (lakes, rivers, and other streams)); in column (2) is mean
elevation; in column (3) is the an index of land suitability for agriculture; in column (4) is the average of a malaria stability index; in column (5) is an indicator for pixels with an
oil field; in column (6) is an indicator for pixels with a diamond mine. In columns (7), (8), and (9) the dependent variable is the distance of the centroid of each pixel from the
capital city, the sea coast, and the national border, respectively. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in
parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

Appendix Table 4: Geographic Features between and within Ethnic Groups at the Country-Ethnicity Homeland Level
Dependent variable is:
Ln (Land
Area)

Ln (Area under
Water)

Mean
Elevation

Land
Suitability

Malaria
Stability

Oil
Indicator

Diamond
Indicator

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Distance to the Distance to the Distance to
Capital
Sea Coast
the Border
(8)

(9)

(10)

Panel A: Geographic Features within Groups
Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Ethnicity Fixed Effects

-0.0474
(0.2058)

0.048
(0.0453)

0.0041
(0.0217)

0.0091
(0.0184)

-0.015
(0.0230)

0.0365*
(0.0199)

-0.0161
(0.0433)

-0.1887
(0.1233)

0.0001
(0.0178)

-0.0037
(0.0049)

0.682

0.796

0.964

0.935

0.941

0.753

0.547

0.582

0.986

0.639

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Panel B: Geographic Features across Groups
Rule of Law

0.1217
(0.1962)

0.1011*
(0.0524)

0.0431
(0.0932)

-0.0023
(0.0413)

-0.1216*
(0.0676)

0.0066
(0.0367)

-0.0300
(0.0497)

-0.2110*
(0.1132)

-0.1163
(0.1078)

0.0016
(0.0040)

0.004

0.022

0.005

0.002

0.049

0.002

0.005

0.114

0.026

0.003

Ethnicity Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Observations
Ethnicities

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

507
220

Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared

The table reports OLS estimates associating various geographical, ecological, and other characteristics at the country-ethnicity homeland level with contemporary national institutions, as
reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index. In Panel A we add ethnicity fixed effects whereas in Panel B we report cross-sectional estimates. The dependent variable in
column (1) is the log (land area); in column (2) is the log (1 + land area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)); in column (3) is mean elevation; in column (4) is an index of land
suitability for agriculture; in column (5) is the average of a malaria stability index; in column (6) is an indicator for country-ethnicity areas with an oil field; in column (7) is an indicator for
country-ethnicity areas with a diamond mine. In columns (8)-(10) the dependent variable is the distance of the centroid of each country-ethnic area from the capital city, the sea coast, and the
national border, respectively. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 5: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Border
A Primary Analysis on What the Ethnicity Fixed Effects Capture
Rule of Law

National Institutions

Control of Corruption

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.1149**
(0.0464)

0.0676*
(0.0350)

0.0559
(0.0344)

0.0329
(0.0301)

0.0361
(0.0318)

(6)

(7)

0.1406*** 0.0877*
(0.0545) (0.0470)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0703
(0.0445)

0.0678
(0.0478)

0.0492
(0.0451)

Pre-colonial Political Features
0.0428**
(0.0176)

Jurisdictional Hierarchy
Type of Subsistence Economy
Agriculture & Pastoral Intensity
p -value of joint significance
Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.
Location & Geographic Controls

0.0438**
(0.0172)

0.0402**
(0.0166)

0.0421**
(0.0164)

No

No

No

Yes
[0.00]

Yes
[0.00]

No

No

No

Yes
[0.00]

Yes
[0.00]

0.152
27661

0.212
27661

0.223
27661

0.258
27661

0.252
27661

0.159
27661

0.215
27661

0.224
27661

0.245
27661

0.253
27661

No
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional OLS estimates associating pixel-level luminosity with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of
law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)) across partitioned ethnicities with information on pre-colonial traits as documented in George
Peter Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (1967). The dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero
otherwise.
In columns (2)-(5) and (7)-(10) we control for location and geography, augmenting the specification with distance of the centroid of each pixel from the capital city of each country,
distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border, an indicator that takes on the value one if there is some water body in the pixel, land suitability for
agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator.
In columns (3), (5), (8), and (10) we augment the specification with an index of pre-colonial ethnic institutions from George Peter Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (1967). The
Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond the Local Community index takes on the value of 0 for stateless (acephalous) societies; a score of 1 indicates small (petty) chiefdoms; a score of 2
indicates large (paramount) chiefdoms; and a score of 3 indicates large centralized states.
In columns (4), (5), (9), and (10) we augment the specification with decile dummies reflecting the fraction of pre-colonial subsistence from agriculture and pastoralism, respectively.
The data are from George Peter Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (1967).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethnolinguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 6
Sensitivity Analysis. Luminosity Expressed in Levels
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Control of Corruption
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: LS Estimates - Luminosity in Levels
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations

0.1799**
(0.0902)

0.0492
(0.0898)

0.1365
(0.0931)

0.0634
(0.1065)

0.2148**
(0.1065)

0.0505
(0.1302)

0.1654
(0.1091)

0.0835
(0.1476)

0.104
__
507

0.669
0.046
507

0.252
__
507

0.680
0.057
507

0.106
__
507

0.669
0.046
507

0.253
__
507

0.681
0.057
507

Panel B: Poisson ML Estimates - Luminosity in Levels
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Log Likelihood
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Land Area
Location & Geography

0.8905*** 0.0958
(0.2928) (0.1380)

0.6563**
(0.3155)

0.1934
(0.1572)

1.0270*** 0.1219
(0.2451) (0.1388)

0.7200**
(0.3506)

0.2713
(0.1783)

-235.58
507

-127.51
507

-178.58
507

-126.62
507

-233.66
507

-127.50
507

-178.88
507

-126.57
507

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s
Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned
ethnicities. In both panels the dependent variable is light density at night at the ethnicity-country level. Panel A reports OLS estimates.
Panel B reports Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimates.
Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we
include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000)
and log land area. In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we also control for location and geography, augmenting the specification with
distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, and
distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls includes log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)),
land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. Besides the
overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the
overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 7: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Sensitivity Analysis. Alternative Measures of Institutional Quality from World Bank's Governance Matters Database
Measure of National Institutions (World Bank Governance Matters Database)
Bureaucratic Quality

Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Land Area

Regulatory Quality

Voice and Accountability

Political Stability

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.7789***
(0.1883)

0.2223
(0.1921)

0.4504**
(0.1898)

0.1392
(0.1572)

0.3343
(0.2047)

0.1468
(0.1370)

0.3059**
(0.1267)

0.0346
(0.1341)

0.310
__
507

0.792
0.061
507

0.268
__
507

0.791
0.060
507

0.255
__
507

0.792
0.061
507

0.262
__
507

0.790
0.059
507

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s
Governance Matters bureaucratic quality index (in columns (1)-(2)), regulatory quality index (in columns (3)-(4)), voice and accountability index (in columns (5)-(6)), and
political stability index (in columns (7)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicitycountry level.
Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects
(constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area. Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports
the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix
gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 8: National Institutions and Regional Development
across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Sensitivity Analysis. Measures of Institutional Quality in 2007
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Control of Corruption
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnic Homeland Level
Institutional Quality in 2007 0.6731*** 0.2331 0.5261*** 0.2420
Double-clustered s.e.
(0.1863) (0.1525) (0.1805) (0.1689)
Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations

0.298
__
507

0.794
0.063
507

0.395
__
507

0.799
0.068
507

0.8372*** 0.2415 0.6857*** 0.2301
(0.2204) (0.1711) (0.2100) (0.1891)
0.298
__
507

0.792
0.062
507

0.399
__
507

0.798
0.067
507

Panel B: Pixel Level
Institutional Quality in 2007 0.1083*** 0.0221 0.0850*** 0.0241
Double-clustered s.e.
(0.0413) (0.0160) (0.0287) (0.0156)
Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area
Location Controls
Geographic Controls

0.1511*** 0.0342 0.1264*** 0.0385
(0.0491) (0.0232) (0.0395) (0.0238)

0.153
__
42710

0.331
0.059
42710

0.205
__
41025

0.340
0.066
41025

0.161
__
42710

0.331
0.059
42710

0.214
__
41025

0.340
0.066
41025

No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index
(in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) and at the pixel level (in Panel B). In
Panel A the dependent variable is log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the
dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero
otherwise. Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates,
where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported).
In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) or at
the pixel-level (in Panel B). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for location and geography, augmenting the specification
with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country (in Panel A) or each pixel (in Panel B) from the capital city of each country,
distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls includes log (1 + area
under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)) for the models in Panel A and an indicator that takes on the value one if there is some
water body in the pixel for the models in Panel B, land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared
(defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses doubleclustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 9A
Sensitivity Analysis. Focusing on Artificial Borders. Country-Ethnic Homeland Analysis
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

Control of Corruption

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: All Homelands
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicities

0.6931*** 0.1390
(0.1876) (0.4018)
0.311
__
220
110

0.848
0.045
220
110

0.4204*
(0.2279)

0.0843
(0.2016)

0.423
__
220
110

0.859
0.056
220
110

0.8440*** 0.1037 0.5059**
(0.2578) (0.4488) (0.2415)
0.317
__
220
110

0.847
0.044
220
110

0.424
__
220
110

-0.0103
(0.2241)
0.859
0.056
220
110

Panel B: Local Regressions
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicities
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Land Area
Location & Geography

0.6910*** 0.1410 0.6791*** 0.1847
(0.1878) (0.3643) (0.1746) (0.3498)

0.8608*** 0.0819 0.8594*** 0.2472
(0.2680) (0.3852) (0.2296) (0.3349)

0.302
__
216
108

0.842
0.036
216
108

0.282
__
216
108

0.858
0.052
216
108

0.312
__
216
108

0.841
0.035
216
108

0.293
__
216
108

0.858
0.052
216
108

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s
Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned
ethnicities. Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates,
where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (population
density in 2000) and log land area. In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we also control for location and geography, augmenting the
specification with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, distance from the
closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls includes log (1 + area under water (lakes,
rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil
field indicator. Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the
overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). In Panel B (in local regressions) we
lose two ethnicities, namely, the Barabra and the Bideyat because there is zero population density close to the border. The Data
Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 9B: National Institutions and Regional Development
Sensitivity Analysis. Focusing on Artificial Borders. Pixel-level Analysis
Rule of Law
Sample - Bandwidth

All Pixels
(1)

Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicities
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.

(2)

0.0979*** 0.0131
(0.0380) (0.0158)

Control of Corruption

100 km
(3)
0.0891**
(0.0348)

50 km
(4)

(5)

All Observations
(6)

0.0115 0.0909** 0.0125
(0.0167) (0.0391) (0.0148)

(7)

(8)

0.1303*** 0.0208
(0.0482) (0.0261)

100 km
(9)

50 km
(10)

0.1171** 0.0154
(0.0489) (0.0214)

(11)

(12)

0.1231** 0.0191
(0.0528) (0.0200)

0.172
__
22967
108

0.373
0.068
22967
108

0.151
__
11455
108

0.360
0.065
11455
108

0.143
__
7031
108

0.377
0.056
7031
108

0.182
__
22967
108

0.374
0.067
22967
108

0.159
__
11455
108

0.360
0.065
11455
108

0.154
__
7031
108

0.377
0.056
7031
108

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports regression discontinuity (RD) estimates. Estimation is performed across the two major partitions of each ethnic group. In columns (3), (4), (9), and (10) we focus
on pixels within 50 kilometers on each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers). In columns (5), (6), (11), and (12) we focus on pixels within 25 kilometers of each side of
the national border (total 50 kilometers). The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value in the rule of law
index (in columns (1)-(6)) or in the control of corruption index (in columns (7)-(12)). All specifications include ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported), the log of pixel-level
population density and the log of pixel surface area. Besides the adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared
minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in
parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the ethnolinguistic level dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Appendix Table 10: National Institutions and Regional Population Density
Sensitivity Analysis. Accounting for Migration
Rule of Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Control of Corruption
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Data on Population Density from the United Nations Environmental Program
Institutional Quality

-0.1226
(0.4572)

-0.0043
(0.2586)

-0.1465
(0.3053)

-0.1647
(0.3097)

-0.2874
(0.5247)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.003
__

0.801
0.000

0.819
0.018

0.824
0.023

0.008
__

-0.0585 -0.1656
(0.2867) (0.3411)
0.802
0.000

0.819
0.018

-0.1836
(0.3454)
0.823
0.022

Panel B: Data on Population Density from the Gridded Population of the World Database
Institutional Quality

-0.1963
(0.3577)

-0.1366
(0.2132)

-0.2815
(0.2331)

-0.3255
(0.2394)

-0.3601
(0.3955)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared

0.007
__

0.826
0.001

0.844
0.019

0.854
0.029

0.016
__

0.827
0.002

0.844
0.019

0.852
0.027

No
No
No
507

Yes
No
No
507

Yes
Yes
No
507

Yes
Yes
Yes
507

No
No
No
507

Yes
No
No
507

Yes
Yes
No
507

Yes
Yes
Yes
507

Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Location Controls
Geographic Controls
Observations

-0.2159 -0.3386
(0.2311) (0.2798)

-0.3614
(0.2845)

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional population density with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in
columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is log (0.01 + population density at the ethnicity-country
level). In Panel A we use local population data (estimates) from United Nations Environmental Program
(http://na.unep.net/siouxfalls/datasets/datalist.php). In Panel B we use local population data (estimates) from the Gridded Population of
the World Database (http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/).
Columns (1) and (5) report cross-sectional estimates. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) report within-ethnicity estimates that include a vector
of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) include as controls the distance of the centroid of each
ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the closest sea coast, and the distance from the national
border. Columns (4) and (8) also include as controls the log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), log (surface area),
land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. Besides the
overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the
overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 11: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Pixel Level across and within
Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Sensitivity Analysis. Accounting for Migration and Bleeding in Luminosity by Excluding Areas Close to
the National Border
Rule of Law
Excluding pixels within

50 km
(1)

Control of Corruption
25 km

(2)

(3)

50 km
(4)

(5)

25 km
(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnicity Sample
Institutional Quality

0.7159***
(0.2534)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations

0.282
__
306

0.1346
0.8177*** 0.2434
(0.2495) (0.2163)
(0.4061)
0.813
0.060
306

0.284
__
178

0.775
0.103
178

0.9158*** 0.2296 0.9155***
(0.2974)
(0.3215) (0.2662)
0.300
__
306

0.814
0.061
306

0.282
__
178

0.2923
(0.5777)
0.774
0.103
178

Panel B: Pixel Sample
Institutional Quality

0.1211***
(0.0449)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations

0.186
__
18920

0.401
0.052
18920

0.165
__
26801

0.365
0.056
26801

0.201
__
18920

0.401
0.052
18920

0.178
__
26801

0.366
0.057
26801

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area

0.0432
0.1130*** 0.0321
(0.0272) (0.0425)
(0.0235)

0.1551*** 0.069 0.1453***
(0.0472)
(0.0453) (0.0469)

0.0564
(0.0420)

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in satellite light
density at night, with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in
columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)). In Panel A the unit of analysis is the country-ethnic homeland.
The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite in 2007-2008) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B
the unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy
variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit in 2007-2008 and zero otherwise.
In columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) we exclude from the estimation ethnic areas and pixels within 50 kilometers from each side of the
national border (total 100 kilometers). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we exclude from the estimation ethnic areas and pixels within
25 kilometers from each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers). Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications.
Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported).
In all specifications we control for the log (area) and log (population density) at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) or at the pixellevel (in Panel B). Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the
overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and data sources. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 12: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Sensitivity Analysis. Dropping Each Time a Different African Region
Excluding
North Africa

South Africa

Central Africa

Rule of Law Corruption Rule of Law Corruption
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Rule of Law Corruption
(5)

Eastern Africa

Western Africa

Rule of Law Corruption Rule of Law Corruption

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Panel A: Country-Ethnicity Sample
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations

0.2353
(0.1891)

0.3383*
(0.2018)

0.1105
(0.2964)

0.0846
(0.3911)

0.2531
(0.2801)

0.3344
(0.3158)

0.1635
(0.2552)

0.2675
(0.2783)

0.2502
(0.2152)

0.2744
(0.2655)

0.779
0.068
485

0.780
0.069
485

0.785
0.052
418

0.786
0.052
418

0.811
0.069
376

0.811
0.069
376

0.815
0.062
410

0.816
0.063
410

0.828
0.056
339

0.827
0.056
339

Panel B: Pixel Sample
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area

0.0278
(0.0176)

0.0448
(0.0282)

-0.012
(0.0177)

-0.0282
(0.0207)

0.0087
(0.0274)

0.0254
(0.0426)

0.0335
(0.0231)

0.0558
(0.0354)

0.0340*
(0.0184)

0.0484
(0.0317)

0.271
0.062
38438

0.272
0.063
38438

0.345
0.047
30517

0.345
0.047
30517

0.369
0.069
29692

0.369
0.069
29692

0.356
0.063
31801

0.357
0.064
31801

0.366
0.062
30388

0.366
0.062
30388

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of
law index (in odd-numbered columns) and control of corruption index (in even-numbered columns) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. In Panel A the unit of analysis is the countryethnic homeland. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite in 2007-2008). In Panel B the unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal
degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit in 2007-2008 and zero
otherwise. In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) or at the pixel-level (in Panel B). In
columns (1)-(2) we exclude ethnic groups in North Africa. In columns (3)-(4) we exclude ethnic groups in Southern Africa. In columns (5)-(6) we exclude ethnic groups in Central
Africa. In columns (7)-(8) we exclude ethnic groups in Eastern Africa. In columns (9)-(10) we exclude ethnic groups in Western Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn
(2007). Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a
model simply with ethnicity fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 13: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Pixel Level across and within
African Borders
Sensitivity Analysis. Border-Fixed-Effects Estimates
Rule of Law
Sample

Full
(1)

Control of Corruption

Local - 50 km
(2)

(3)

(4)

Full
(5)

Local - 50 km
(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Country-Ethnicity Sample
Institutional Quality

0.6875***
(0.2048)

0.0995
(0.1305)

0.6635***
(0.2104)

0.0668
(0.1684)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations

0.329
__
440

0.655
0.172
440

0.303
__
436

0.633
0.179
436

0.8590*** 0.1272 0.8454***
(0.2438) (0.1642) (0.2458)
0.339
__
440

0.655
0.172
440

0.316
__
436

0.0964
(0.1946)
0.634
0.180
436

Panel B: Pixel Sample
Institutional Quality

0.1095***
(0.0409)

0.0229
(0.0173)

0.0994*** 0.0192
(0.0384)
(0.0161)

0.1415*** 0.0361 0.1292***
(0.0466)
(0.0272) (0.0471)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations

0.155
__
40209

0.314
0.077
40209

0.134
__
21289

0.280
0.079
21289

0.167
__
40209

0.314
0.077
40209

0.144
__
21289

0.280
0.079
21289

Border Fixed Effects
Number of Borders
Pop. Dens. & Area

No
81
Yes

Yes
81
Yes

No
81
Yes

Yes
81
Yes

No
81
Yes

Yes
81
Yes

No
81
Yes

Yes
81
Yes

0.0294
(0.0247)

The table reports OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s
Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control of corruption index (in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned
ethnicities. In Panel A the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In
Panel B the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. In columns (1), (2),
(5), and (6) we use the entire partitioned homeland. In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we focus on areas and pixels within 25 kilometers
on each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers). Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered
columns report border fixed effects estimates (border constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (population
density) and log land area at the country-ethnicity level (in Panel A) or at the pixel-level (in Panel B). Besides the overall adjusted Rsquared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a
model simply with border fixed effects). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates
we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 14: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development.
Using Micro-Data from the 2005 Afrobarometer Surveys across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Satellite Light Density
(1)

(2)

Electricity Grid
(3)

(4)

Piped Water
(5)

Sewage System

(6)

Schooling Years

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Panel A: Rule of Law Index
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared

1.7514***
(0.6360)

-0.2200
(0.9616)

0.1706
(0.1550)

-0.0234
(0.1808)

0.2034
(0.1326)

-0.0468
(0.1672)

0.1376
(0.1262)

0.0174
(0.1292)

0.5372
(0.4200)

0.1998
(0.9214)

0.355

0.603

0.037

0.252

0.048

0.243

0.037

0.254

0.041

0.354

0.1894
(0.1179)

0.1182
(0.1865)

0.6196
(0.3990)

0.3337
(1.0193)

Panel B: Control of Corruption Index
Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Enumeration Areas (Obs.)
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Population Density

2.3027***
(0.4036)

0.4802
(1.1352)

0.2526**
(0.1236)

0.0629
(0.2157)

0.2666*** -0.0267
(0.0884) (0.1893)

0.440
464

0.604
464

0.093
464

0.253
464

0.099
409

0.243
409

0.081
440

0.258
440

0.063
467

0.356
467

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development, as reflected in satellite images of light density at night (in columns (1)-(2)),
various public goods provision measures (in columns (3)-(8)) and education (in columns (9)-(10)), with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s
Governance Matters rule of law index (in Panel A) and control of corruption index (in Panel B) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The unit of analysis is an enumeration area of the
2005 Afrobarometer Surveys. As within each enumeration area there are several households, we take the average across households within the enumeration area and use the
respective averages as the dependent variable. Odd-numbered specifications report cross-sectional estimates. Even-numbered specifications report within-ethnicity estimates that
include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported).
In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is average light density in a radius of 10 km from the centroid of an Afrobarometer’s enumeration area. In columns (3) and (4) the
dependent variable reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is an electricity grid that most houses could access" as assessed by the field supervisor. In columns (5) and (6)
the dependent variable reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is a piped water system that most houses could access" as assessed by the field supervisor. In columns (7)
and (8) dependent variable reflects "whether in the enumeration area there is a sewage system that most houses could access" as assessed by the field supervisor. In columns (9)
and (10) the dependent variable is the average years of schooling across respondents within each Afrobarometer’s enumeration area. In all specifications we control for ln (0.01 +
population density in a 10km radius of the enumeration area).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the
ethnicity level dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 15: National Institutions and Regional Development at the Border.
Regression Discontinuity (RD) Estimates. RD Polynomial in Latitude and Longitude
Rule of Law
Latitude - Logitude Polynomial

High Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pixel Area & Pop. Dens.

Control of Corruption

Linear

2nd-order

3rd-order

Linear

2nd-order

3rd-order

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0140
(0.0123)

0.0149
(0.0127)

0.015
(0.0127)

0.0087
(0.0129)

0.0095
(0.0131)

0.0098
(0.0127)

0.351
0.068
38680

0.351
0.068
38680

0.351
0.068
38680

0.351
0.068
38680

0.351
0.068
38680

0.351
0.068
38680

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity regression discontinuity (RD) estimates using a two-dimensional RD polynomial in latitude and
longitude (approach follows Dell (2010)). Estimation is performed across the two major partitions of each ethnic group. In columns
(1) and (4) we simply control for each pixel’s latitude and longitude. In columns (2) and (5) we include a second-order RD
polynomial in latitude and longitude. In columns (3) and (6) we include a third-order RD polynomial in latitude and longitude. The
high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value in the rule of law
index (in columns (1)-(3)) or in the control of corruption index (in columns (4)-(6)). All specifications include ethnicity fixed
effects (constants not reported), the log of pixel-level population density and the log of pixel surface area. The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and data sources. Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared
(defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and at the ethnolinguistic level
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 16: Regional Heterogeneity on the Role of Contemporary National Institutions on Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Estimation Restricted to Partitioned Ethnic Homelands within
North Africa
Rule of Law Corruption
(1)
High Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Split Ethnicities
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens & Area

-0.1111**
(0.0524)

(2)
-0.0687
(0.0611)

South Africa

Central Africa

Rule of Law Corruption Rule of Law Corruption
(3)
0.0518**
(0.0226)

Eastern Africa

Western Africa

Rule of Law Corruption Rule of Law Corruption

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0738**
(0.0352)

0.0307**
(0.0156)

0.0340***
(0.0129)

-0.0074
(0.0131)

-0.0075
(0.0130)

-0.0083
(0.0240)

-0.0324
(0.0228)

0.517
1637

0.511
1637

0.342
7297

0.345
7297

0.126
7665

0.127
7665

0.151
6046

0.151
6046

0.269
9286

0.270
9286

9
Yes
Yes

9
Yes
Yes

28
Yes
Yes

28
Yes
Yes

36
Yes
Yes

36
Yes
Yes

30
Yes
Yes

30
Yes
Yes

64
Yes
Yes

64
Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions in areas of partitioned ethnicities. Estimation is performed
across the two major partitions of each group. The high institutional quality indicator takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value in the rule of law
index (in odd-numbered columns) or in the control of corruption index (in even-numbered columns). The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12
kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit in 2007-2008 and zero otherwise. In all specifications
we control for log (population density) and log land (pixel) area. All specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (1)-(2) we restrict
estimation to split ethnic groups in North Africa; in columns (3)-(4) to split ethnic groups in Southern Africa; in columns (5)-(6) to split ethnic groups in Central Africa; in columns (7)(8) to split ethnic groups in Eastern Africa; and in columns (9)-(10) to split ethnic groups in Western Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2007). The Data Appendix
gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 17: Regional Heterogeneity on the Role of Contemporary National Institutions on Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnic Groups in Areas Far and Close to the Capital Cities
Estimation Restricted to Partitioned Ethnic Homelands within
North Africa

High Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Split Ethnicities
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens & Area

South Africa

Central Africa

Eastern Africa

Western Africa

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.1628***
(0.0153)

-0.0987***
(0.0357)

0.0906*
(0.0540)

0.0595**
(0.0301)

0.0372**
(0.0182)

0.0161
(0.0153)

0.0153
(0.0253)

-0.0156
(0.0154)

0.0549
(0.0744)

-0.0479
(0.0316)

0.140
383

0.330
908

0.376
3048

0.150
1673

0.158
3764

0.047
2790

0.192
1555

0.120
3592

0.338
2265

0.220
4909

2
Yes
Yes

7
Yes
Yes

14
Yes
Yes

11
Yes
Yes

15
Yes
Yes

15
Yes
Yes

9
Yes
Yes

21
Yes
Yes

24
Yes
Yes

38
Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions in areas of partitioned ethnicities. Estimation is performed
across the two major partitions of each group. The high institutional quality indicator (dummy variable) takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country with the higher value
in the rule of law index. The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy
variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit in 2007-2008 and zero otherwise. In odd-numbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are close
to the capital city. In even-numbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are far from the capital city, using as a cut-off for each country the
respective median value of relative distance to the capital. In all specifications we control for log (population density) and log land (pixel) area. All specifications include a vector of
ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (1)-(2) we restrict estimation to split ethnic groups in North Africa; in columns (3)-(4) to split ethnic groups in Southern
Africa; in columns (5)-(6) to split ethnic groups in Central Africa; in columns (7)-(8) to split ethnic groups in Eastern Africa; and in columns (9)-(10) to split ethnic groups in Western
Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2007). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses
double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 18 - Heterogeneity: National Institutions and Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnicities Close and Far from the Capital Cities
Absolute Distance to the Capital
Rule of Law
(1)
(2)
Institutional Quality

Relative Distance to the Capital

Control of Corruption
(3)
(4)

Rule of Law
(5)
(6)

Control of Corruption
(7)
(8)

0.0063
(0.0184)

0.0155
(0.0212)

0.0127
(0.0291)

0.0173
(0.0292)

0.0026
(0.0188)

0.0169
(0.0212)

0.0093
(0.0278)

0.0201
(0.0277)

-0.1433***
(0.0515)

-0.0893
(0.0803)

-0.1450***
(0.0508)

-0.1138
(0.0813)

-0.0534
(0.0552)

-0.0136
(0.0670)

-0.0545
(0.0562)

-0.0297
(0.0682)

Double-clustered s.e.

0.0446**
(0.0213)

0.0467**
(0.0214)

0.0520**
(0.0245)

0.0561**
(0.0245)

0.0508**
(0.0242)

0.0483**
(0.0202)

0.0581**
(0.0283)

0.0545**
(0.0253)

Adjusted R-squared
within R-squared
Observations
Number of Ethnicities

0.347
0.064
40209
220

0.355
0.072
38680
220

0.347
0.064
40209
220

0.355
0.072
38680
220

0.346
0.063
40209
220

0.355
0.072
38680
220

0.346
0.063
40209
220

0.355
0.072
38680
220

Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area
Location & Geography

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Double-clustered s.e.

Close
Double-clustered s.e.

Institutional Quality x Close

The table reports ethnicity fixed effects OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance
Matters rule of law index (in columns (1),(2), (5) and (6)) and control of corruption index (in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities at the pixel level.
The dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees) is lit and zero otherwise. Close is an indicator that takes on the
value of one for pixels that are close (in columns (1)-(4) or relatively close (in columns (5)-(8)) to the respective capital city. All specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed
effects (constants not reported). For absolute distance the median refers to the median across all African pixels. With respect to the relative distance the median refers to the
respective within-country median.
In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the pixel-level. The set of location and geographic controls in columns (2), (4), (6), and
(8) include distance of the centroid of each pixel from the capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border, an indicator that
takes on the value one if there is some water body in the pixel, land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field
indicator. Besides the overall adjusted R-squared, the table also reports the within R-squared (defined as the difference of the overall R-squared minus the overall R-squared of a
model simply with ethnicity fixed effects).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethnolinguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 19 - Heterogeneity: National Institutions and Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnicities
Sensitivity Analysis: Dropping Each Time a Different African Region
Excluding
North Africa

Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Close
Double-clustered s.e.

Rule of Law x Close
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens. & Area
Location & Geography

South Africa

Central Africa

Eastern Africa

Western Africa

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.0621
(0.0528)

-0.0476
(0.0593)

-0.018
(0.0656)

0.0489
(0.0879)

-0.0971
(0.0637)

-0.0321
(0.0804)

-0.0084
(0.0623)

0.0187
(0.0961)

-0.0689
(0.0657)

-0.0082
(0.0759)

0.0126
(0.0167)

0.0239
(0.0209)

-0.0383*
(0.0231)

-0.0248
(0.0234)

-0.0161
(0.0298)

-0.0026
(0.0298)

0.0128
(0.0242)

0.0186
(0.0265)

0.0125
(0.0195)

0.0372*
(0.0213)

0.0411*
(0.0239)

0.0422**
(0.0205)

0.0513*
(0.0288)

0.0510**
(0.0233)

0.0520* 0.0719***
(0.0291) (0.0266)

0.0684**
(0.0267)

0.0515*
(0.0268)

0.0599**
(0.0276)

0.0533**
(0.0252)

0.276
38438

0.283
36971

0.348
30517

0.357
29312

0.373
29692

0.381
28549

0.361
31801

0.371
30549

0.373
30388

0.385
29339

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

The table reports ethnicity fixed effects OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters
rule of law index in areas of partitioned ethnicities at the pixel level. The dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if the pixel (of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal
degrees) is lit and zero otherwise.
Close is an indicator that takes on the value of one for pixels that are relatively close to the respective capital city using as a cut-off the median value of within-country distance to
the capital. All specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported).
In all specifications we control for log (population density in 2000) and log land area at the pixel-level. The set of location and geographic controls in columns (2), (4), (6), (8), and
(10) include distance of the centroid of each pixel from the capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border, an indicator that
takes on the value one if there is some water body in the pixel, land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field
indicator. In columns (1)-(2) we exclude ethnic groups from North Africa; in columns (3)-(4) groups from Southern Africa; in columns (5)-(6) groups from Central Africa; in
columns (7)-(8) groups from Eastern Africa; and in columns (9)-(10) groups from Western Africa. The regional classification follows Nunn (2007).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethnolinguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 20: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
Sensitivity Analysis. Dropping Each Time a Different African Region
Estimation Excluding Partitioned Ethnic Homelands in
North Africa

High Rule of Law
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens & Area

South Africa

Central Africa

Eastern Africa

Western Africa

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

Close

Far

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0617**
(0.0241)

-0.0088
(0.0154)

0.0502**
(0.0231)

-0.0260
(0.0159)

0.0569*
(0.0339)

-0.0218
(0.0180)

0.0744***
(0.0266)

-0.0147
(0.0199)

0.0579**
(0.0258)

0.0162
(0.0140)

0.350
10655

0.181
19122

0.456
7990

0.260
16752

0.460
7267

0.260
15064

0.446
9483

0.246
14664

0.466
8757

0.231
15022

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions in areas of partitioned ethnicities. Estimation is
performed across the two major partitions of each ethnic group. The high institutional quality indicator (dummy variable) takes on the value of one for pixels falling in the country
with the higher value in the rule of law index. In odd-numbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are close to the capital city. In evennumbered columns we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are far from the capital city, using as a cut-off the median value of within-country distance to the
capital. The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that
takes the value one if the pixel is lit in 2007-2008 and zero otherwise. In all specifications we control for log (population density) and log land (pixel) area. All specifications
include a vector of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (1)-(2) we exclude ethnic groups from North Africa; in columns (3)-(4) groups from Southern Africa;
in columns (5)-(6) groups from Central Africa; in columns (7)-(8) groups from Eastern Africa; and in columns (9)-(10) groups from Western Africa. The regional classification
follows Nunn (2007). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the
country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 21: Heterogeneity - National Institutions and Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnicities Close and Far from the Capital Cities
Alternative Measures of National Institutions from World Bank's Governance Indicators
Bureaucratic Quality

Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens and Area

Regulatory Quality

Voice and Accountability

Political Stability

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.0368 0.1094** 0.0232
(0.0244) (0.0494) (0.0165)

0.0250* 0.0793**
(0.0149) (0.0374)

0.0184*
(0.0110)

0.0301* 0.0771** 0.0152
(0.0175) (0.0379) (0.0148)

0.0011 0.0226 -0.0051
(0.0094) (0.0244) (0.0117)

0.342
40209

0.438
11038

0.236
20156

0.342
40209

0.437
11038

0.236
20156

0.342
40209

0.437
11038

0.235
20156

0.341
40209

0.434
11038

0.235
20156

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters
bureaucratic quality index (in columns (1)- (3)), regulatory quality index (in columns (4)-(6)), voice and accountability index (in columns (7)-(9)), and political stability index (in
columns (10)-(12)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The
dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. In columns (1), (4), (7), and (10) we estimate the empirical model across all
partitioned ethnic homelands. In columns (2), (5), (8), and (11) we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas close to the capital city. In columns (3), (6), (9), and (12)
we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas far from the capital city using as a cut-off the median value of within-country distance to the respective capital. All
specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log population density and log land area. Below the estimates
we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 22: Property Rights, Contractual Institutions and Regional Development
within Partitioned Ethnicities Close and Far from the Capital Cities

Property Rights Institutions
Executive Constraints
1991-2006

Institutional Quality
Double-clustered s.e.

Adjusted R-squared
Observations
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
Pop. Dens & Area

Contractual Institutions

Executive Constraints
at Independence

Legal Formalism - Contract
Log Number of Days

Legal Formalism - Contract
Log Number of Procedures

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

All

Close

Far

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.0974
(0.0621)

0.2187
(0.1510)

0.058
(0.0526)

0.0496
(0.0341)

0.0711
(0.0766)

0.0100
(0.0327)

0.0072
(0.0231)

-0.0169
(0.0716)

0.0023
(0.0342)

0.344
39037

0.434
10618

0.238
19472

0.342
40209

0.434
11038

0.235
20156

0.334
37968

0.432
10471

0.239
18899

0.334
37968

0.434
10471

0.240
18899

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.1419 -0.4430*** -0.0966
(0.0917) (0.1531) (0.0804)

The table reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with pxoxies of “property rights” institutions and “contractual” institutions in areas of
partitioned ethnicities. In columns (1)-(3) we proxy property rights institutions with Polity’s executive constraints index, averaged over the period 1991-2006. In columns (4)-(6)
we proxy property rights institutions with Polity’s executive constraints index, averaged over the initial ten year period after independence. In columns (7)-(9) and columns (10)(12) we proxy contractual institutions with measures of legal formalism (from the work of Djankov et al. (2003), Djankov et al. (2007) and World Bank’s Doing Business
Project) that measure the (log) number of days and the log number of procedures needed to resolve through courts a simple dispute.
The unit of analysis is pixels of 0.125 x 0.125 decimal degrees (around 12 x 12 kilometers) within partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes
the value one if the pixel is lit and zero otherwise. In columns (1), (4), (7), and (10) we estimate the empirical model across all partitioned ethnic homelands. In columns (2), (5),
(8), and (11) we restrict estimation to pixels of partitioned ethnic areas that are close to the capital city. In columns (3), (6), (9), and (12) we restrict estimation to pixels of
partitioned ethnic areas far from the capital city using as a cut-off the median value of within-country distance to the respective capital city.
All specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log population density and log land area. Below the
estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Appendix Table 23: Access to Government Services and Distance to the Capital
Afrobarometer Sample. Country-Fixed-Effects Estimates
Easiness of Obtaining Identity Document
(1)
Absolute Distance
Double-clustered s.e.

(2)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.3638*** -0.2483***
(0.0782)
(0.0646)
-0.0882 -0.0782
(0.0659) (0.0585)

Double-clustered s.e.

Individual Controls
Country Fixed Effects

(4)

-0.1349** -0.1269**
(0.0646) (0.0591)

Relative Distance

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

(3)

Easiness of Obtaining Household Services

-0.3636*** -0.2486***
(0.0684)
(0.0586)

0.135
18795

0.157
18266

0.135
18795

0.157
18266

0.094
16577

0.148
16091

0.095
16577

0.149
16091

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports country-fixed-effects OLS estimates, associating various measures of the reach of government services, as reflected
by individual responses at the Afrobarometer Surveys (3rd round) at the individual level, with distance to the capital.
The dependent variable is columns (1)-(4) is an ordered index (range from 1 to 4) based on individual responses on how easy it is to
obtain an identity document. The dependent variable is columns (5)-(8) is an ordered (range from 1 to 4) index based on individual
responses on how easy it is to obtain basic household services (like piped water, electricity or telephone). For both measures a score of
1 indicates “very difficult”, a score of 2 indicates “difficult”, a score of 3 indicates “easy” and a score of 4 indicates “very easy”.
Even-numbered columns include a rich set of individual controls. The individual-level conditioning set includes age, age squared, a
gender indicator variable, an urban indicator, 22 religion fixed effects, 25 occupation fixed effects, 5 living conditions fixed effects,
and 9 education fixed effects. All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the enumeration area and at the ethnicity level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

