                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHAT WAS NEW ABOUT THE NEW DEAL?

                                           Price V. Fishback
                                          John Joseph Wallis

                                         Working Paper 18271
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18271


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




Price Fishback received research support for this paper from National Science Foundation Grants SES-1061927
and SES- 0921732. The opinions expressed in this paper are our own and do not in any way represent
the opinions and attitudes of the National Science Foundation. We would like to thank Charles Calomiris,
Peter Fearon, and Alex Field for reading earlier drafts and providing valuable comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Price V. Fishback and John Joseph Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Was New About the New Deal?
Price V. Fishback and John Joseph Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 18271
August 2012
JEL No. H11,H7,N12,N42,N9

                                          ABSTRACT

During the presidential election of 1932 Franklin Roosevelt promised a New Deal for the American
people. Our goal is to describe the changes wrought by the New Deal. To what extent did the New
Deal expand existing programs? What new programs were created at all levels of government? How
did the Federal government take over programs that had previously been the responsibility of state
and local governments? We then survey the recent research that examines the impact of the programs.
Finally, why did some programs persist and others fail?


Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu

John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu
                             What Was New About the New Deal?


       During the presidential election of 1932 Franklin Roosevelt promised a New Deal for the

American people. By November 1932 unemployment rates had risen to more than 20 percent

and annual production of final goods and services had fallen nearly 28 percent from the 1929

peak. The Hoover administration and Republican Congress had expanded federal outlays, added

lending programs, and called for voluntarism to combat the economic decline. Roosevelt won

the election in a landslide and the Democrats took over both Houses of Congress. Meanwhile,

the economy slid further. In the First Hundred Days after Roosevelt took office in March 1933

the Democrats delivered a New Deal for the American economy. Over the next eight years the

Roosevelt administration and Democratic Congresses continuously modified New Deal

programs and regulations. Some were eliminated, others ran for the length of the Depression and

then disappeared, and still others established permanent programs and precedents that remain in

place today.


       Scholars have sought in vain for an overarching unifying framework for the New Deal

because the New Deal was not the implementation of an economic or political plan. The

economics of the New Deal were not a Keynesian attempt to stimulate the economy. Keynes

himself examined the fiscal structure in depth and argued that the spending increases were not

examples of a Keynesian stimulus because taxes rose nearly as fast as spending; therefore, the

deficits were nowhere near the size required to offset the economic decline. Federal budget

outlays in real dollars rose 88 percent under Hoover between 1929 and 1932, faster than the

growth in the first three years under Roosevelt (although starting from a lower base). Budget

deficits under Hoover look more Keynesian than Roosevelt’s deficits, although likely not by
Hoover’s design.1 Others argue that the New Deal was designed to raise prices to stimulate

production and raising wages to help pay for the higher prices. The move off of the gold

standard, the National Recovery Administration, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration,

and the National Labor Relations Boards seemed to have this focus, but there were other areas of

the New Deal that ran counter to these policies.


       Roosevelt and the members of the New Deal coalition were pragmatists. Roosevelt

certainly was not bothered by theoretical inconsistency. The focus was on solving specific

problems and there were plenty of problems to solve with the depressed economy. Raymond

Moley (1966, xviii), one of Roosevelt’s original Brains Trust, wrote:


       “For the New Deal was not of one piece. Nor was it the product of a single

       integrated plan. It was…a loose collection of many ideas—some new, most

       borrowed from the past—with plenty of improvisations and compromises. Those

       of us who participated were too busy for mature reflection or to create a system or

       an overall pattern.”


       In this paper we hope to accomplish two goals. Raw experimentation does not offer a

compelling or satisfying explanation for why the New Deal developed as it did, but any adequate

explanation has to build from the reality that the early days of the New Deal were dominated by

expediency and experiment. Experiment rarely proceeds de novo and one goal is to document

which parts of the New Deal programs picked up ideas that were being proposed and considered

within the Hoover administration, which had been discussed in the 1910s and 1920s, and which

programs had a long tradition stretching back into the 19th century. The second goal is to


       1
           See Keynes (1964 reprint), Brown (1956), Peppers (1973), and Fishback (2010).
understand why some programs persisted and other programs failed. In other words, we seek to

provide the outline of an overarching explanation for the New Deal by looking at what lasted and

what did not. This, admittedly, is not a very sophisticated approach, but it has the virtues of

identifying the political constraints operating within the American political system and being a

transparent explanatory technique.


       Two distinctions are important to keep in mind. First, is the difference between fiscal

and regulatory aspects of government programs. Some programs involved significant

expenditures of funds, while others significantly affected the economy without involving large

expenditures. Some programs did both. Second is the difference between national and federal

programs. National programs were the distinct province of the national government which, in a

historical irony, Americans still call the “federal” government. Federal programs were jointly

funded and administered by national, state, and local governments. There was a marked

tendency for regulatory programs to be national programs, while programs with significant fiscal

impacts were either federal programs from the beginning or moved towards federal programs if

they persisted. The one big exception was the Old Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI)

program, which is the pension program commonly known as Social Security today. When

Roosevelt and the New Dealers wanted to spend lots of money, they had to operate in

conjunction with state and local governments.


       The New Deal programs that built on existing national government programs included

providing funds for highways and roads; reclamation and irrigation; flood control and improved

navigation; benefits to veterans; building of post offices and federal buildings; mortgage loans

and emergency crop and feed loans for farmers; education; agricultural experimentation,

extension, and advanced education; and national defense spending. Some of the activities went
back to the 1790s. More funds were distributed in many of these programs under both Hoover

and Roosevelt. However, Hoover tended to do it within existing programs, while Roosevelt

often created new programs or reorganized old ones in ways that emphasized that a New Deal

program was distributing a significant share of the funds. The federal government continued to

regulate commercial banks and financial markets, but with a heavier hand than before. Some

financial legislation gave new powers to the Treasury, which were sought as a means of

undermining the monetary authority of the Federal Reserve System; as a result, the Fed lost

power over monetary policy after 1933 and did not regain it until 1951 (Calomiris and Wheelock

1998).


         The New Deal programs that built on the existing responsibilities of state and local

governments were largest in the areas of relief of the unemployed and the poor. The New Deal

created emergency programs in which the federal government provided grants to state and local

government to provide relief payments with and without work relief obligations. Under the

Social Security Act of 1935 permanent matching grant programs were established for three types

of programs that many states had already established and administrative grants for state run

unemployment insurance pools. To help the unemployed find work, the U.S. created a National

Employment Service that complemented or replaced state employment services in a number of

states. In housing the federal government built public housing projects, which a few cities had

already done. As part of its emergency work relief and public works programs, the federal

government also began providing loans and grants for state and local public projects, like

schools, parks, airports, and streets, in which it generally had not invested before. The

Tennessee Valley Authority originally started out building dams on the Tennessee River in line

with the Army Corps of Engineers’ emphasis on flood and navigation control but eventually
gained the authority to own and operate electric utilities, as some states and cities had done with

gas and electric utilities. The federal government set up deposit insurance nationwide even

though the states that had experimented with deposit insurance in the 1920s had generally

abandoned their programs because they had been costly failures.


        The truly de novo features of the New Deal came in several areas. The Agricultural

Adjustment Administration began making rental and benefit payments to farmers to take land out

of production after Hoover tried some minimal experimentation. The Commodity Credit

Corporation created nonrecourse loans that put a floor on farm prices for some commodities.

The National Recovery Administration created a framework for producers with some input from

consumers and workers to set prices, quality, and wages in a large number of industries. The

Home Owners’ Loan Corporation bought over 1 million troubled mortgages and then modified

the loans with new interest rates and repayment terms for the borrowers. The Farm Credit

Administration began offering production loans and the Rural Electrification Administration

offered loans to create cooperatives and build electricity lines in rural areas. The Social Security

Administration provided administrative funds for state run unemployment insurance programs

and created a national program for old-age pensions based on contributions from workers.


       The first section lays out the overall picture of fiscal developments during the New Deal,

including the relationships between the national, state, and local governments. The sections that

follow describe specific programs in various areas of the New Deal. A lessons section and the

conclusion draw together our views about what was new in the New Deal and why some of it

survived.
I: The structure of New Deal federalism


       The New Deal effected a political transformation of the structure of American

government, changing its structure, function, and size. What stands out most prominently both

in historical and contemporary debates over the New Deal is the growth of the national

government, something Americans had steadfastly resisted for almost a century and a half. But

fascination with the national government should not overshadow equally dramatic changes in the

federal system of government. Fiscal and functional responsibilities were shuffled between

national, state, and local governments in a way that set a new pattern for the structure of

government that has persisted to the present. Part of what the New Deal did was truly new and

parts built on precedents from earlier in the century or even from the Hoover administration.

Understanding these patterns helps explain why Americans were willing to allow the national

government to grow bigger.

       Understanding how the New Deal patterns worked also provides an important lesson for

the current economic and political crisis. After four years of attempting to deal with an

unprecedented economic crisis through policies consistent with the existing framework of

intergovernmental arrangements with some innovations by Hoover, the New Deal fundamentally

altered those arrangements in a way that was both credible and durable. Europe, four years after

the onset of a serious economic crisis, now faces a comparable political crisis involving precisely

the same set of questions that faced the United States in 1933. How can the central government

of a fiscal and monetary union expand its governance role to deal with the adverse consequences

of an economic downturn without significantly, and perhaps unsustainably, reducing the

sovereign independence of the member governments? While we neither suggest that the four

year timing is determinative nor that the parallels between the United States in 1933 and Europe
in 2012 are exact, there are interesting lessons to learn from the way that the New Deal dealt

with the structure of America’s federal union.

        What was new about the New Deal mattered, because old patterns of relations between

national, state, and local governments were politically much easier to work with and expand than

completely new patterns. It is useful to distinguish national programs, like defense, funded and

administered solely by the national government, from federal programs, like social welfare,

funded and administered jointly by some combination of national, state, and local governments.

Federal programs had precedents going back before the federal highway program began in 1916.

The New Deal programs with the largest fiscal impact in the 1930s were all federal programs,

funded and administered by a combination of national and state governments.2 National

programs, in contrast, tended to be regulatory programs with significant impacts on the economy

and society, banking and financial reform for example, but much smaller fiscal impact on the

national budget. This also followed an earlier pattern in which the national government

developed responsibilities for important regulatory functions – railroads, anti-trust, national

banks, and food quality – that did not have large fiscal burdens.

        The New Deal’s impact on fiscal federalism in the U.S. can be summarized by three

important trends seen in Table 1. First, while total government grew during the New Deal, it did

not grow faster relative to GDP in the 1930s than it had grown earlier in the 20th century. The

ratio of total government spending at all levels to GDP nearly doubled between 1902 and 1927,




        2
          Old Age and Survivors Insurance appears to be an exception because it was a purely national program, but
pensions were not distributed until 1940. Further, the large fiscal implications of OASI, which originally was to be
funded largely by specific taxes, were not really foreseen until the late 1930s.
and nearly doubled again between 1927 and 1940.3 The public sector continued to grow in the

1930s, but not at an accelerating rate.



         [Table 1 placed here.]

         Second, the sharp increases in the national and state shares of government expenditure

seen in Table 1 were new in the 1930s. Accepting that 1922, 1942, 1948, and 1952 are

exceptional war or postwar years, the national share of public expenditure prior to 1934 was

below 35 percent, while after 1952 it had risen to above 53 percent. The local share, which had

been above 50 before the 1930s, fell to 30 percent or less, while the state share rose from less

than 10 percent in 1913 to 16 percent in 1932 and to above 17 percent after 1967.

         National expenditures on cooperatively administered programs accounted for more than

the total increase in the Roosevelt administrations expenditures over the level of expenditures in

the last year of the Hoover administration. These expenditures largely went to states, who

passed some of the money on to local governments and spent the rest directly themselves.

Although the national government increased its share of total government activity during the

New Deal, by no measure was the state share of government activity reduced. The state

government share of total government revenues from own sources rose from 16.4 percent in

1927, to 21.7 percent in 1934, to 28.2 percent in 1940. The state share of total government

expenditures rose from 13 percent in 1927, to 16.8 percent in 1934, and to 17.5 percent in 1940

(the own expenditure shares are even higher). 4 All of the growth in the national shares came at


         3
           We use 1927 because data for 1922 include relatively large interest expenditures incurred from the World
War I debt that raised the national share that year. Even so, if we take the period from 1913 to 1922 and compare it
to the period from 1922 to 1940, we get roughly the same effect.
         4
          The reporting of intergovernmental grants differs in government reports of expenditures and revenues to
avoid double counting the money. When the national government makes a grant to the local government, which
then spends the money, the spending is reflected in the local government’s spending but not in the national
the expense of local governments. The reason for this is clear. National grants were given

primarily to the states. Most of these grants offered incentives for state government to increase

their own spending. Whether these incentives were explicit, like the strict matching provisions

in the Social Security Act categorical relief programs, or implicit as in Harry Hopkins’ use of

relief grants, they were real. Wallis (1984) found that, in the late 1930s, every dollar of national

grants increased state expenditures from own revenues by $0.31. At the same time combined

state and national grants actually reduced local government expenditures.

        Where did these state revenues come from? In 1930, 16 states had individual income

taxes, 17 had corporate income taxes, and none had a general sales tax. During the 1930s, 16

states added personal income taxes, 15 added corporate income taxes, and 24 created a sales tax.

It is impossible to say whether these taxes were the result of New Deal grant programs, since the

majority of new state taxes were put in place in 1933 at the same time that the New Deal grant

programs were just getting under way. But one of the legacies of the New Deal was a much

stronger state government sector with new and more flexible tax instruments.

        Another way to see this is in the structure of state government programs. In 1932, before

New Deal relief programs started up, only 7 states had spent money for unemployment relief and

had state relief agencies. By the end of 1933 all 48 states did. By 1939 all the states had

approved unemployment insurance schemes, and almost all had approved OAA, ADC, and Aid

to the Blind programs in place. State highway boards were the result of the 1916 grants, but they

too were still in place and would expand dramatically with the onset of the interstate highway


government’s expenditures. On the revenue side, the grant money is assigned to the level of government that
collects the taxes; therefore, when the national government provides a grant to a local government, the national
government revenues reflect the size of the grant, while the grant is not included in revenues for the local
government. Thus, when the New Deal provided more intergovernmental grants, the national share of expenditures
shown in Table 1 is smaller than the national share of revenues, while the local governments’ share of expenditures
were larger than their share of revenues.
program in 1956. There is, then, no doubt that the programs with the largest fiscal impact were

federal programs. Over time, the old age insurance part of Social Security would become an

extremely important fiscal program, but that was in the future in 1939.

       Finally, the New Deal led to a dramatic expansion in the use of intergovernmental grants

that became a fundamental feature of the fiscal structure of the country. Between 1902 and 1932

state and local governments’ reliance on grants from the national government was minuscule, as

the ratio of national grants to state and local revenues was between 0.01 and 0.03 in column 5 of

Table 1. States and their local governments provided their own funding for the bulk of public

services including public education, police protection, roads and sanitation, public welfare, and

health and hospitals. Between 1932 and 1934 the shift to New Deal financing of relief spending

sharply raised the ratio from 0.03 to 0.10. After World War II, national grants to lower level

governments became an even stronger feature of the long run federal fiscal system, as the ratio

has been 0.10 or above since 1962.

       The New Deal programs with the largest effect on state and local governments, as well as

the economy, were the relief programs. This was not only the result of the large amount of funds

expended for relief, but also because work relief programs like the WPA made a significant

contribution to a number of state and local functions through construction activity on schools,

highways, parks, streets, sanitation, and natural resources. Understanding the relief programs is

central to understanding intergovernmental relations during the 1930s. These programs had both

major economic and psychological impacts. In fiscal 1934, the national government made over

$2 billion in grants to state and local governments for relief, which in turn made more than $2
billion in relief grants to needy individuals and families. In 1933, $2 billion was 4 percent of

GNP.5



II. Relief and Poverty Programs


        During the 1930s the federal government’s relief efforts were new in two ways: the

federal government for the first time actively distributed relief funds to people outside the

military, and the work relief programs built many public works projects--schools, sanitation

facilities, local roads—that would be run by state and local governments. Federal relief built on

local relief activity that had been in place since colonial times and the state programs that had

developed during the Progressive Era. County, city, and town governments had provided for a

mix of almshouses, poor farms, and “outdoor” relief during the colonial period following the

English structure. The practice evolved and continued into the 1930s. During the late 19th

century there were periods when private nonprofit groups like the Charitable Organizations

Societies took over the operation of relief in some cities, and charitable donations expanded.

The organizations later stepped out of operations and collected data on the provision of relief and

the shares of private and public spending on relief shifted back and forth for the next few

decades. In the peak year of 1929 estimates from the state of Massachusetts suggest that public

relief spending was roughly 1 percent of Massachusetts state income and private relief spending

approximately 2 percent of income (Livingston, 2011).




5
 Cross-country comparisons can be dicey, but Amenta (1998, 5) suggests that by 1938 the U.S. governments were
spending about 6.5 percent of GDP on social welfare, a percentage substantially higher than in other major
western countries. See Lindert (2004) to put these figures in long run historical perspective.
        Between 1929 and 1932 per capita spending on relief by state and local governments and

private charities more than quadrupled in 114 cities, as the Depression drove increasing numbers

of people onto relief. In 1932 the Hoover administration authorized $300 million in loans from

the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) to cities around the country to help finance relief

spending. Governors who to applied for relief loans had to demonstrate that hey had exhausted

all means of raising revenue and propose worthy relief projects that would not otherwise be

undertaken. The RFC loans were a bold move historically because the U.S. federal system had

long treated relief and labor issues as exclusively state and local issues. Originally, these loans

were meant to be repaid at three percent interest through reductions in future highway

apportionments, but the RFC was allowed to write them off in 1938.6 The RFC loans led several

states to establish new relief administrations to organize relief at the state level.


        With unemployment rates continued at 25 percent, the Roosevelt administration argued

that America faced a national peacetime emergency and established the Federal Emergency

Relief Administration (FERA) during the First Hundred Days. The FERA distributed federal

money to the states, which in turn, distributed the funds to local officials, who administered

payments to households “in need.” The FERA program offered either “direct relief” which was

straight cash payments, or “work relief,” which required a family member to work for the funds.

The relief payment to a household was determined using a “budgetary deficiency” principle.

FERA relief workers and field agents measured the deficit between the family’s actual income

and a hypothetical minimum budget for a given family size. Actual relief benefits often did not

fully cover the family’s deficit because relief officials, faced with large case loads and limited

funds, reduced benefits per household in order to provide relief for more families. The payments

        6
            For discussion of the RFC relief loans see Jones (1951, 178) and Fearon (2007, 39-49).
for FERA work relief jobs were designed to be income maintenance payments; therefore, the

FERA hourly “earnings” were roughly half of the level paid for jobs on Public Roads

Administration (PRA) and Public Works Administration (PWA) projects.


       To provide work relief for young people entering the workforce, the Civilian

Conservation Corps (CCCR) provided work relief for young men and some young women

between the ages of 16 and 24 from families eligible for relief. Most worked on natural resource

conservation projects while living in camps run in a semi-military fashion by veterans. The pay

was $1 per day, most of which was sent home to the workers’ family. The CCCR had some

problems with dropouts who did not like the semi-military organization but a large share of the

alumni of the camps considered them to be a life-changing experience that helped them develop

the skills and attitudes necessary to become successful (Maher 2008).


       In November 1933 in the face of an expected onset of a rough winter with continuing

high unemployment, the national government created the Civil Works Administration (CWA) to

put people to work on public jobs immediately. By mid-December the CWA employed 3.6

million people. The CWA hourly earnings matched public works earning but limited the number

of hours per week that could be worked. About half of all CWA recipients were from existing

relief programs, and after the CWA closed in March 1934, most of the workers were transferred

back to FERA work relief programs. Between July 1933 and July 1934, Table 2 shows that the

FERA and the CWA distributed roughly $23.37 per person in 1930 dollars, or about 3.5 percent

of the 1929 peak in GDP per capita of $820 in 1930 dollars.


       Table 2 placed here.
        In 1935 the Roosevelt administration and Congress negotiated a redesigned relief

program that included an emergency relief component as well as a permanent national role in the

welfare system. The Roosevelt administration gained much tighter control of the operation of

emergency work relief by replacing the FERA with the Works Progress Administration (WPA).

State and local officials proposed projects and continued to identify who was eligible for relief

based on household budget deficits. Then the federal WPA hired people from the certification

rolls and paid them hourly earnings for a restricted number of hours per month. As with the

FERA, the payments were for income maintenance and hourly earnings were roughly half those

on PWA and PRA projects. To combat fears that private jobs would end quickly, the WPA

assured people in many areas that they would be accepted back on work relief if they lost their

private job. Even so, a significant percentage of workers stayed on work relief jobs for periods

as long as a year and in some cases several years (Howard 1941; Margo, 1991, 1993). The

FERA and WPA were temporary “emergency” programs that would end. Even though some

members of the administration wished to make them a permanent feature of the economy, the

WPA was phased out by the end of 1942.7 Between fiscal years 1936 and 1939, the WPA

spending in Table 2 averaged $16.52 per capita, roughly 2 percent of 1929 per capita GDP.


        The permanent components of the 1935 reforms were the most important. Care of the

“unemployable” poor was returned to local governments and termed “general relief.” The Social

Security Act created five big programs, four of them were federal programs administered and




        7
           Howard (1943) describes WPA operation. For a good description of relief activity within a state, see
Fearon (2007) for the state of Kansas. A large number of statistical studies analyze the political economy of the
distribution of the New Deal relief funds, including most recently Fleck (1999a, 1999b, 2001a, 2008), Wallis (1987,
1991, 1998, and 2001) and Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003), which summarizes results for a large number of
studies of all New Deal programs. See also Wright (1974).
funded jointly by the national and state governments and one funded and administered solely by

the national government.


       The Act created three categories of needs-based public assistance that had been

established in several states prior to 1935. The “categorical” relief programs – Aid to the Blind,

Old Age Assistance, and Aid to Dependent Children – were financed through closed end

matching grants. States determined how much they would spend per case based on the budget

deficiency principal, and the national government matched state spending up to a maximum

amount per case. Matching grants were available to all states that passed enabling legislation

that met certain administrative requirements. The state set the benefit levels and ran the

program. The matching grants generally increased the amount of aid available in the categories

in states that already had programs and led states without programs to add them. Aid to

Dependent Children (ADC) essentially took over from mothers’ pension programs that provided

payments to widows with children and were present in 40 of 48 states in 1920 and 46 of 48 states

by 1931. Old Age Assistance (OAA) replaced means-tested old-age programs that were present

in 10 of 48 states by 1929 and 28 of 48 states in 1934. OAA and the earlier state elderly

programs were truly means tested. Many states took liens on or ownership of the homes owned

by recipients and then collected the amounts paid out in benefits when the person died before the

heirs could receive their share of the home. Aid to the Blind replaced similar programs in 28 of

48 states as of August 1935 (Fishback and Thomasson, 2006). Within 3 years most states had

adopted the enabling legislation. The Old Age Assistance programs distributed about 80 percent

of the funds under the three public assistance programs, as a large number of elderly were

transferred off of the general relief rolls and new elderly enrolled. In 1939 the states paid out

about 0.65 percent of 1929 GDP in public assistance benefits. Federal government grants for
this purpose in Table 2 averaged about $1.91 per capita in benefit payments and $1.44 in

administrative payments.8


        Another permanent element of the Social Security Act was national support for

unemployment insurance. The national government collected a 3 percent payroll tax from all

workers in covered employment. Ninety percent of the payroll taxes were paid into a separate

reserve fund for each state. States could draw on their funds to pay benefits to unemployed

workers. Prior to 1935, Wisconsin was the only state with an unemployment insurance program,

but it was still building up a reserve fund and had not yet started paying benefits. In order to

participate in the program, states had to pass the enabling legislation and then build their reserve

fund for two years. By the end of 1938, 30 of 48 states were paying benefits totaling 0.36

percent of 1929 peak GDP. The U.S. unemployment insurance programs differ from programs

in nearly all other countries in that they incorporate experience rating, which requires employers

to make larger payments when their share of laid off workers is higher.9


        The final component of the Social Security Act was a purely national program, Old Age

and Survivors Insurance (OASI). There was a loose precedent for the federal government’s

involvement in old-age retirement pensions. The Civil War disability pension had expanded its

eligibility requirements so broadly that the infirmities of old age were largely covered, so that a

substantial share of the elderly in the North in the early 1900s were receiving federal military

pensions. In the late 1930s the OASI program called for employers and workers to each pay


        8
           Information on the public assistance programs is based on the payouts in the months of January, February
of March from Social Security Board. Social Security Bulletin (May 1939): 51. These were compared to an
estimate of GDP in 1929 dollars in 1929 of 103.7 billion (series Ca10 from Carter, et. al.) and then adjusted for
inflation by the Consumer Price Index (1967=100) (series E-135, p. 210-11, U.S. Census Bureau, 1975).
        9
            This discussion is based on work by Baicker, Goldin, and Katz (1998).
taxes of 1 percent on the worker’s income up to a specified maximum each year. At retirement

age the person then received monthly pension payments. Over the past seventy years monthly

pension payments have averaged about 40 percent of the typical monthly earnings of workers at

the time the pension was being paid. There were extensive debates over whether the system

should run like an actuarially sound pension program or insure a basic level of benefits. The

original act split the difference but by 1940 it became a pay-as-you-go program. The long term

impact of social security has been enormous but its effects in the 1930s were limited to the

impact of the new tax payments, which accounted for 5.6 percent of internal federal tax revenue

in fiscal year 1937. Benefits were not paid until 1940 (Commissioner of Internal Revenue 1937,

75).


       The final area of relief was veterans’ benefits for disability relief and pensions, which had

been the national government’s responsibility since the nation’s founding. Essentially, these

were employment benefits for veterans who had worked in national defense. As seen in Table

2, annual payments for relief to state soldier and sailors homes and veterans’ administration

payments in the 1930s had fallen from their peaks during the Hoover administration. The

decline occurred in part because of drops in rehabilitation and retraining programs for veterans

who had fought in World War I.


       The major exception came in the form of the Veterans’ Bonus of 1936. In 1924 Congress

provided for adjusted-service certificates for World War I veterans that could be redeemed at

face value twenty years after receipt. The amount to be paid was $1 for each day served in

World War I inside the U.S. and $1.25 for each day overseas, and then the amount was

multiplied by 1.25 to take into account the delay in payment. By the late 1920s living veterans

could borrow from the Veterans’ Bureau against the certificates by accepting a lien on the value
of the certificate. They could pay back the loan and receive the full certificate value upon

maturity of the certificate in the 1940s or accept the amount left after interest was deducted.

After Congress lowered the maximum interest on the loans to 4.5 percent (and soon after to 3.5)

and increased the amount that could be borrowed to half of the value of the adjusted service

certificate on February 27, 1931, World War I veterans took out 2 million loans valued at $795

million within the next few months. Demanding that the full value of the certificates be paid

without delay, groups of veterans marched on Washington in the summer of 1931 and again in

the summer of 1932 when they set up camp near the Potomac. The bloodshed that occurred

when the army tried to clear the camp harmed President Hoover’s re-election bid. Yet, Hoover

and the Republic Congress refused to redeem the certificates early on the grounds that it would

lead to higher taxes.


         Veterans continued to lobby for early payment on the certificates and Congress passed

the Veterans’ Bonus Bill over President Roosevelt’s veto in January 1936. The Veterans

Administration received 3.3 million applications seeking cash settlements of $3.2 billion for

settlement by June 30, 1936. The VA payout per person in the U.S.in Table 2 was $33.84 with

$16.14 going to pay off the veterans’ loans, and the remaining $17.70 in cash.10


         A number of recent studies have addressed the impact of federal relief spending at the

state and local level while controlling for a wide range of correlates, long-term features of each

location, nation-wide shocks that vary by year, and endogeneity bias. Relief spending had a


         10
            See Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs (1931, pp. 10, 42-44; 1936, pp. 1, 22-24). When the certificates
were first issued if the amount came to less than $50, they were paid in cash immediately, and the cash value of the
certificate was paid out to heirs at the time of the veterans’ death. Under the Bonus Bill of 1936 If veterans held the
certificates for more than one year they could receive the face value plus 3 percent interest per year until maturity on
June 15, 1945. The three percent interest rate was higher than the 2.5 returns on long term government bonds during
that period.
number of salutary effects on measures of socio-economic welfare. An injection of about $2

million in relief spending was associated with a reduction of one infant death, one suicide, 2.4

deaths from infectious disease, and one death from diarrhea, while contributing to a rise in birth

rates that returned to the long term trend. A ten percent increase in work relief spending was

associated with a 1.5 percent reduction in property crime, although this is smaller than the 10

percent reduction in crime associated with a 10 percent rise in private employment. The

expansion of benefits under the old age assistance program allowed a larger share of elderly

women to live on their own, while accounting for about half of the decline in the elderly

workforce between 1930 and 1950, although it had no effect on reducing elderly mortality rates.

Relief jobs and spending appear to have had little or no positive impact on private employment

and in some settings appears to have crowded out some private employment even when

unemployment rates remained above 14 percent. Such crowding out also appears to have

extended to private charitable spending. An additional dollar of New Deal spending reduced

church charitable spending by about 29 percent of the maximum it might have reduced it.11


III. National Versus State and Local Discretion Over Relief Spending

         Granting 2 to 4 percent of GDP in relief funds each year during the New Deal was an

unprecedented act of national government largesse, particularly because the grants created the

possibility of unprecedented political patronage for the politicians in control of the money. How

the political system evolved to both allocate and control the administration of relief funds was a

central element of the New Deal. Before the New Deal relief was funded and administered


         11
            For the effects on birth and death rates see Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007), the effects of old-age
assistance are measured in Balaan Cohen (2009), Costa (1999), Friedberg (1999), Parsons (1991), and Stoian and
Fishback (2010). The crime effects are measured in Johnson, Fishback, and Kantor (2010). The impact on private
employment is measured in Fleck (1999b), Wallis and Benjamin (1981), Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010),
and Benjamin and Mathews (1992). The charitable crowding out is from Hungerman and Gruber (2008).
largely by local governments with some aid from state governments. The original FERA

legislation made it clear that FERA was to restrict itself to making grants to state governments.

Half of the original $500 million appropriation was to be allocated at the discretion of the

national relief administrator on the basis of need and half on a matching grant basis. By

November of 1933 FERA head Harry Hopkins had convinced Congress to drop the matching

feature. 12 FERA promulgated an extensive set of regulations covering how the states were to

administer relief programs and all FERA grants were conditional on states meeting the

regulations. Hopkins was able to enforce several simple and important regulations; for example,

all relief funds had to be spent through public agencies. But FERA’s ability to affect personnel

policies and recipient selection criteria was limited. The agency's power was much greater in

states where it played a larger fiscal role. As Williams (1939) noted, “the ability to enforce these

policies was much greater in states where the national contribution was larger.”13 In extreme

cases, the FERA legislation gave Hopkins the authority to “federalize” relief and take over the

administration of relief in a state. Hopkins federalized relief on seven occasions. 14 State

governors were glad to get the national grants but were not happy to have Hopkins announce that

grants would be reduced if the state government did not come up with a larger relief

appropriation. State officials expressed their displeasure actively. Governor Davey of Ohio

went to the extreme of swearing out an arrest warrant for Hopkins after he had charged Davey

with using relief for political purposes.


         12
            See Williams (1939, 181-190, 203-221). In the final analysis, it is clear that the original matching
program was relatively unimportant. Williams shows (Table 6, p. 217) that the federal government’s share of relief
spending varied dramatically across states from a low of 39 percent in Rhode Island to a high of 98 percent in South
Carolina.
         13
            Quote is from Williams (1939). For a discussion of the rules and regulations, and their enforceability, see
Williams (1939) and Wallis (1981).
         14
            The logic of how Hopkins could use discretionary grants to pry more funds out of state governments is
developed in Wallis (1988).
       The control Roosevelt and Hopkins had over the distribution of relief grants to the states

strongly influenced the negotiations over which level of government would have discretion and

control when the relief programs were restructured for the long run in 1935. The compromise

that emerged from the negotiations included the replacement of the FERA with the WPA to

continue emergency relief and the long run programs established by the Social Security Act of

1935. Aware that the FERA was an emergency program designed to end after the emergency

was over, Roosevelt and Hopkins established the Committee on Economic Security to work on a

more permanent solution to the relief problem. In his state of the union address in January of

1935, Roosevelt announced that the national government “must and will quit this business of

relief” and sent the Committee Report and proposed legislation to Congress. The proposal called

for OAA, ADC, AB, and UI to be administered by a FERA-like agency in which the national

relief administrator used discretion rather than matching grants to distribute fund.

       The national relief administrator’s discretionary control did not even make it through the

first committee hearings in the House. In the Social Security bill that emerged from Congress,

strong state control over OAA, ADC, AB, and UI was accomplished by tying the national

government’s fiscal hands through strict matching grant provisions. National grants were open

ended, but grants per relief case were capped. The independent Social Security Board created by

the Act had to approve each state’s categorical program, but there were strict limits on the

Board’s ability to interfere with the actual administration of the programs. For example, the

Board was explicitly forbidden from withholding grants because of personnel decisions at the

state level. Given that general relief for the needy who did not fit these categories was left

completely to state and local governments, control of the welfare system became as much a

matter of state policy as of national policy. This return to more state control was instituted
despite the protests of social welfare professionals who feared that returning control of relief to

the states was just returning to the old system of political patronage and cronyism.15

         In the negotiations over relief the national government retained control over two

programs, the Old Age Survivors’ Insurance pensions and the WPA emergency work relief

agency that replaced the FERA. These programs also contained important limits. The national

government had very limited discretionary power over the OASI program because individuals

paid payroll taxes into the system and their benefits were fixed by formula. No matter where

people lived during their working life or during retirement, their contributions and benefits were

set by formula with no discretion on the part of the national government.

         The one large relief program where the national government still had a great deal of

discretionary control was the WPA, which replaced the FERA as the emergency work relief

program. Hopkins did not have to work through the states to distribute funds and the national

government paid WPA workers directly on the projects. The state and local governments had

some role in proposing projects, identifying the eligibility of the relief workers, and in providing

some funding. But there was no explicit matching formula and the amounts contributed by states

varied widely (Howard 1943, 734-735). It is clear from the Congressional debates, however,

that Congressmen were willing to give the national government such discretionary power only

because the WPA was an emergency agency that was expected to close down (Wallis 1981

dissertation and Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor 2006). In contrast, the permanent relief programs

created by the Social Security actally limited the national government’s discretion.




         15
             This story is told in a number of places. Brock (1988) and Bremer (1984) are very good on the details.
The notion that returning relief to the states was an attempt to return control of the relief programs to local economic
elites is elaborated in Piven and Cloward (1971) and Block, et. al. (1987). For a reformulation of this hypothesis
based on the interest of southern legislators, see Alston and Ferrie (1985).
       Understanding why the Social Security system was structured this way is critical to

understanding the New Deal’s legacy and position in the political and economic history of the

century. With the addition of Medicaid and Medicare in 1967, the Social Security system

remains in place in an expanded form today. In 1992, outlays for social insurance,

unemployment insurance, and public assistance were one quarter of total government outlays at

all levels. Medicaid was set up as a categorical assistance program, with matching grants and

state administration. Medicare was set up like old age insurance, with national administration

and standards, but has gradually become a more federal program as well.

       The New Deal relief programs initiated a pattern of cooperative intergovernmental

activity with a distinctive bent: fiscal centralization and administrative decentralization. They

continued the long running administrative decentralization of relief policies from colonial times

but added national government funding. Not only were New Deal programs administered at the

state level, but state governments possessed real decision-making power. The states’ decision

making power in the long run increased closer to the pre-New Deal levels with the passage of the

Social Security Act. The use of allocation formulas and matching provisions effectively

eliminated the possibility that the national government would be able to use the discretionary

allocation of funds across states to influence the administration of the OAA, AB, ADC, and UI

programs at the state level. Limitations on national administrative discretion were a necessary

part of making the relief system politically sustainable over the long haul. The New Deal

experience gives us strong confirmation of this conclusion. The crisis character of the early New

Deal programs resulted in the national government being granted extensive discretionary power.

But that power was closely watched and eventually drastically curtailed. Further, this was not
the outcome desired by social welfare advocates who were the most vocal and well organized

promoters of an expanded welfare system. They clearly wanted a more centralized program.

       The pattern of centralized finance and decentralized administration persists today. It is a

central element in the interstate highway system, the structure of Medicare, the essential

elements of welfare reform in the 1990s which gave states greater control over relief

administration, and in the recent health care reforms embodied in the Affordable Care Act. The

pattern of centralized finance and decentralized administration, particularly under a regime in

which the discretionary control of the centralized government is strictly limited, affords one of

the most important lessons for the current economic and political crises. The United States was

unable to move very far away from the pattern. The Affordable Care act is markedly “federal.”

The outcry over national government bailouts of private businesses, which involved a large

amount of discretion on the part of national actors, far exceeds the outcry about the short run

stimulus money that was transferred to the states. Opposition remains to deficit spending, not

the allocation of spending to state and local governments. As the European crisis extends and

deepens, however, it appears from some distance to involve precisely the opposite pattern. The

EU is seeking to impose more inflexible fiscal and administrative rules on the member states

while maintaining flexibility and discretion at the center. At least this is how negotiations over

the recurring fiscal crises seem to be proceeding.

       Harry Hopkins was a gifted administrator. Winston Churchill dubbed him “Lord Root of

the Matter” for his ability in negotiating and facilitating alliance arrangements during World War

II. Undoubtedly he could have devised and administered a national welfare system that would

have provided more assistance to the poor, unemployed, and needy at a lower fiscal cost than the

system that emerged from the Social Security Act. But in a fiscal and political union such as the
United States, locating excessive discretionary control at the center is politically unsustainable,

no matter what its policy effectiveness. This is a lesson of great importance for current crisis.




IV. Public Works


       Public works grants differed from relief grants in the operation and administration of the

projects. About two thirds of the funds distributed went to the types of projects that had long

been run by the national government. The projects hired workers at full market wages, often

through contractors who ran the projects. Administrators were not required to hire people

eligible for relief, although it was encouraged. Under the Hoover Presidency the annual

distribution of funds to state highways under the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) rose

167 percent, rivers and harbors funds under the Army Corps of Engineers rose 152 percent, and

loans to the Reclamation Bureau for dams and irrigation projects rose 71 percent. The reports at

the time show that the increases were meant to be forms of stimulus.


       The amounts distributed rose sharply again under the Roosevelt administration. But there

was a difference in style. Where Hoover usually increased spending within existing programs,

Roosevelt had a flair for publicizing New Deal programs that were renamed, reorganized, or

new. The Public Roads Administration (PRA) took over the USDA highway program. The

Public Works Administration (PWA) and the work relief projects provided grants for many river

and harbor projects that were built under the direction of the Army Corps of Engineers. The

Public Building Administration (PBA) took over the building of national buildings around the

country. By the end of the 1930s, the PWA, PRA, PBA, U.S. Housing Authority (USHA), and

the WPA relief program had been rolled into the Federal Works Agency (FWA). In 1942 the
PWA and WPA emergency programs were terminated and the PBA, USHA, and PRA duties

were distributed to new agencies.16


       There were three new features of the public works grants. The first was explicit grant

and loan funding of state and local projects under the non-federal program. The PWA was

relatively slow to get started because its leader Harold Ickes wanted to focus on projects of high

quality, but Table 2 shows that it distributed an annual per capita average of $1.04 for federal

projects and $1.66 in grants and $0.83 in loans for the nonfederal programs. Second, during its

first three years the PWA spent an annual average of $0.41 per capita on a series of local public

housing projects. In 1937, the U.S. Housing Authority began providing loans for public housing

projects. The third was the creation of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). In most ways the

TVA was not new. It was a corporation set in motion to build dams along the Tennessee River,

but these dams had been designed by the Army Corps of Engineers for flood control and to

improve navigation of the rivers, and the Corps likely would have built the dams relatively soon.

The dams also produced hydro-electric power, and electric power became the primary emphasis

of the TVA after 1935. The TVA became a new feature of federal activity when it began buying

up distribution lines and electric utilities, including many generating electricity with coal, and

became the primary producer and distributor of electricity in the mid-South region. Some states

and local governments had taken control of gas and electric utilities in the Progressive Era, but

this was the first time the national government had stepped into the process.


       In the Roosevelt administration’s view the public works and work relief programs were

not revolutionary. They were explicitly designed not to go beyond public sector functions. The



       16
            See Clarke (1996, pp. 62-68) and Schlesinger (1958, pp. 263-96).
projects were traditional government projects, building and maintaining public buildings,

schools, parks, roads, sanitation facilities, dams, airports, and a variety of other public projects.

Production of manufactured goods, creations of stores, and other private sector activities were

off limits. The simultaneous goals were to put people back to work and build social overhead

capital with hopes of stimulating the economy.


         As with relief programs, studies have examined the impact of combined spending on

public works and relief on various aspects of the economy at the local level using similar sets of

controls. The studies have generally combined public works and relief grants because they have

found it difficult to find effective instrumental variables that can be used to identify the separate

effects of the two programs. The studies suggest that an additional dollar per capita of public

works and relief spending during the period 1933 to 1939 in a county was associated with a rise

in retail sales per capita of about 43 cents, which might have translated into a rise in per capita

income of about 80 cents.     A study of a panel of state information from 1930 through 1940

suggests that a dollar increase in per capita public works and relief grants increased per capita

income in the state by amounts ranging from $0.9 to $1.7, although none of the effects is

statistically significantly different from one. This rise in income did not translate into increases

in private employment in the states, as the coefficients on public works and relief grants were all

negative. Higher public works and relief grants in a county served to stimulate in-migration into

that county, even though there were a number of residency requirements that limited access to

relief. One simulation suggests that the amount of internal migration in the U.S. would have

been lower by 15 percent had the public works and relief grants not been distributed. In-

migration to cities, in turn, led to reductions in the number of weeks worked by the typical

worker, greater difficulty in getting access to relief jobs, and out-migration by some workers.
        Even though the TVA is credited with lowering the costs of electricity in the area, private

firms had long been expanding electrification as well. A careful study of electric rates shows

that the monthly bills for most TVA customers were the same as the bills for private utility

customers. Only larger manufacturing operations received lower bills. Estimates of the TVA’s

impact suggest only small positive impacts on farm electrification and retail sales per capita.

There may have been stronger effects on manufacturing activity.17


V. Farm Programs


        Farmers faced a dire situation in the early 1930s. The farm sector experienced a “Golden

Era” of farm prices in the early 1900s, followed by an expansion in demand during World War I.

When Europe began producing again in the early 1920s, demand for American farm products

declined, and the farm sector went through a difficult shakeout in the early 1920s. By the time

the Depression hit, the farm sector had been in the doldrums for roughly a decade. The New

Deal worked to aid farmers by continuing and expanding the national government’s role in farm

lending and by seeking to raise farm prices by paying farmers to take land out of production and

providing nonrecourse loans that put a floor on farm prices.


        Well before 1933 the national government had been heavily involved in providing

networks of farm credit. Just before entering World War I, the national government passed

legislation to fund farm mortgages through a Federal Land Bank program. The national

government organized and provided starting capital to twelve Federal Land Banks. They were

        17
           The impact of public works and relief grants on retail sales and migration is estimated in Fishback,
Horrace, and Kantor (2005 and 2006). The state level measures of the impact on per capita income and private
employment are found in Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2011). The migration simulations are from Sorensen,
Fishback, Kantor, and Allen (2009). The effects of internal migration are from Boustan, Fishback, and Kantor
(2011). The effects of the TVA on farm electrification, retail sales and manufacturing are estimated by Kitchens
(2011); for a study of manufacturing productivity see Kline and Moretti (2011).
authorized to extend loans with 5 to 40 year lengths through national farm loan association

cooperative corporations organized by farmers. The membership of the cooperatives was made

up exclusively of borrowers from the Federal land banks. Each bank was liable for its own bond

issues and the bond issues of the 11 other Federal land banks. As of 1930, the Federal Land

Banks held about 12 percent of the farm mortgage indebtedness in the U.S. The government also

helped organized a series of privately owned joint stock land banks that could make direct

mortgage loans to farmers, while also providing capital to start intermediate credit banks to

provide short run capital to farm lenders and cooperatives that faced short term liquidity

constraints.18


        By the early 1930s a sizeable share of farmers had fallen behind on loan payments and

become delinquent. In January 1932, the national government injected an additional $125

million into the federal land banks to expand credit availability. Even so, the real annual value

of Federal Land bank loans declined from the 1920s into the early 1930s, as seen in Table 2.

Meanwhile, loans from joint stock land banks declined to a trickle. In 1933, the Farm Credit

Administration took over the administration of the federal land banks and the federal

intermediate farm credit banks, and also gained authority to make direct loans to farmers, while

the joint stock land banks were closed. The amount of annual mortgage lending to farmers

thereafter more than quadrupled the amounts loaned in the early 1930s. Consequently, the

national government was involved in more than half of farm mortgages by the mid-1930s.19


        During the 1920s, Congress passed a series of acts to fund loans in specific areas where

severe weather led to considerable crop damage. In 1933, the Farm Credit Administration took

        18
             Federal Farm Loan Board (1930, 2 and 12; 1932, 1-50).
        19
             The paragraph is based on Halcrow 1953, 342-3.
over the decision making and administration of these emergency credit loans. For the first time

it oversaw the development of a Production Credit Division, which authorized and provided

initial capital stock to 12 production credit corporations, which made loans to production credit

associations, each organized by 10 or more farmers in a mutual organization designed to make

production loans for seed and machinery and production needs for farm animals. The credit

associations could borrow from the Production Credit Corporation and had access to the

Intermediate Farm Credit Banks.


        The truly new farm programs during the 1930s were the ones specifically designed to

limit supply to the market and thus raise the farm/nonfarm ratio of prices to levels seen during

the Golden Era just prior to World War I. Farmers had protested their plight since the late 1800s

and sought ways to limit output and raise prices. In both 1927 and 1928, their lobbying led

Congress to pass versions of the McNary-Haugen bill designed to raise farm prices without

supply controls, but each was vetoed by the President Calvin Coolidge. In 1929, the Agricultural

Marketing Act established the Federal Farm Board, with a revolving capital of $500 million, to

work with cooperatives to market crops and limit the amount of surpluses that might have driven

crop prices downward.20 The New Deal response in 1933 was to create two new programs: the

Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) grant program to pay farmers to take land out of

production and the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCCF) nonrecourse loan program to provide

a floor on the prices received for certain farm commodities.


        The centerpiece of the New Deal farm program was the rental and benefit program

administered by the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA). For specific crops AAA


        20
          Libecap (1998, pp. 188-9) describes the development of farm programs from 1870 to the present. For a
long-term view of the farm programs see Chapter 16.
offered production agreements to farmers that paid them to take land out of production. The

funds for the program originally came from a processing tax on farm output at the location where

it was first processed, for example, a tax on ginned cotton. Farmers were not required to accept

the agreements, but the AAA set attractive terms and actively marketed the programs through

county agents and local boards of farmers. In the tobacco and cotton programs national decision-

makers added a degree of coercion to the system by levying heavy taxes on any production

beyond designated limits. As a result, the sign-up rates ranged between 70 and 95 percent for

most types of crops. In 1935, the Supreme Court found in United States v. Butler that the

processing tax used to fund the AAA program was unconstitutional. Farm interests who had

warmed to the AAA pressed the Roosevelt Administration to re-enact a similar program that

overcame the constitutional objections. Soon thereafter, a new AAA was established that made

payments to curtail land use, adjust production, and conserve the soil under the Soil

Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act of 1935 or 1936. The new AAA tried to add

restrictions on output for nonparticipants.21


       The other major New Deal attempt to raises farm prices was the Commodity Credit

Corporation (CCCF). The CCCF loaned funds to farmers for crops at prices set at high target

levels. If crop prices exceeded the target level when the time came to repay the loan, the farmer

would sell the crop on the market and repay the government loan. If crop prices were below the

target, the farmer gave the crop to the government as payment on the loan. From the beginning

the CCCF set the target prices above market prices, so the CCCF program operated as a price

support program.



       21
            For a detailed description of the first three years of the AAA, see Nourse et. al., (1937).
         The AAA and most loan programs were primarily oriented toward large farmers, but also

distributed smaller amounts of funds in programs designed to eliminate areas of persistent rural

poverty. The original FERA legislation called for aid to low-income farmers in the form of

relief, the Resettlement Administration moved some farmers to better land, and loans and grants

from other programs were provided to aid small family farms. These farm programs were later

transferred to the Farm Security Administration formed in 1937. Other smaller programs were

designed to aid farmers hit by droughts and hard hard times.22


         The AAA and the CCCF were administered at multiple levels of governments. The basic

benefit payments per acre taken out of production, the acreage allocations, rules for restrictions,

and target prices were set for each crop at the national level. This made sense because the prices

of AAA crops were largely determined in national markets with some variation around the prices

due to transportation costs. Meanwhile, the allocation of acreage reductions within states and the

negotiations with individual farmers were administered by state and local boards of farmers with

help from county extension agents. Under the initial law the program was funded by a

processing tax on the commodity itself, tying overall funding to production throughout the

country. After the AAA was declared unconstitutional in 1935, the program was funded out of

the general revenues. The AAA operations in the long run fit a picture of limited national

discretion in the sense that the national rules were set for everybody producing the same crop,

while deviations from the rules for specific groups were decided at a much lower administrative

level.

         Observers of the short term impact in mid-1930s were unsure whether the AAA

payments to take land out of production were effective in raising prices. Several studies suggest

         22
              For more discussion of these types of programs, see Alston and Ferrie (1999) and Fearon (2007).
that farmers took the lowest quality land out of production first and then found ways to raise the

productivity on other acreage by using more fertilizers and adopting new technologies like

tractors as labor-saving devices.       Efforts to determine the AAA’s impact have been confounded

by the series of major climatic disasters, including droughts in some areas, floods in others, and

the Dust Bowl, that coincided with the AAA’s introduction and also contributed to drops in

production and higher prices.23


        Given that the programs were mostly voluntary, the AAA likely benefited the farmers

who accepted the production agreements. However, the AAA appears to have had adverse effect

on the incomes of farm laborers, tenants, and sharecroppers because it led to declines in the

demand for labor. Narratives and recent quantitative studies show that in cotton counties with

more AAA cotton spending, the number of black and white croppers declined by similar

amounts, while the number of black managing share tenants declined more sharply than the

number of white tenants. Infant mortality rates, which tend to be highest among low income

people, were higher for both blacks and whites in southern counties with more AAA spending.

Studies of per capita income at the state level and retail sales and in-migration at the county level

show slight negative effects of AAA spending, consistent with a view that the positive benefits to

the recipients of AAA funds were offset by losses among other members of rural society.24




        23
           See Libecap (1998, footnotes on p. 193) for discussion of weather versus AAA as a cause of reduced
output. Some very preliminary examinations of cotton output at the county level suggest that he may be right.
Whatley (1983), and Clarke (1994) discuss and Sorensen, Fishback, Kantor, and Rhode (2011) measure the positive
impact of the AAA on tractor diffusion.
        24
           Alston (1981) describes a reduction in the demand for farm labor. The negative effects of the AAA on
tenancy have been discussed by Alston and Ferrie (1999), Biles (1994, 39-43), Saloutos (1982) and Whatley (1983)
and measured at the county level by Depew, Fishback, and Rhode (2012). The infant mortality effects of the AAA
are found in Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2001). The slight negative effects of the AAA on state income are
shown in Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2011) and the negative effects on in-migration and retail sales per capita are
measured in Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006).
       On the positive side, the AAA’s stimulus of out-migration of low income croppers and

workers from poor areas appears to have had the side benefit of reducing malaria death rates

(Barreca, Fishback, and Kantor 2011). Over the long term the AAA had the positive effect of

preventing later recurrences of the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. The dust storms developed in part

because small farmers settled the areas and had little incentive to use farming techniques

designed to prevent soil erosion because their farms were too small to get the benefits of erosion

prevention. High winds and drought in the 1930s blew the loose soils into the sky. The post-

1935 AAA encouraged the development of large farms and gave farmers incentives to prevent

soil erosion, so that no Dust Bowl developed when wind and drought hit the area in the 1970s

(Hansen and Libecap 2004).




VI. The National Recovery Administration and President’ Reemployment Agreement


       Just as the New Deal sought to raise farm prices, it established a set of policies designed

to raise industrial prices and wages. Since the early 1920s, industry associations facing declining

demand and excess capacity, like coal mining, had lobbied Congress to develop institutions that

would protect them from “cutthroat competition.” During the Depression the problems of excess

capacity and falling demand hit most industries as the price level fell by 30 percent and lobbying

for some government action accelerated. Meanwhile, both the Hoover and Roosevelt

administrations sought to maintain demand by keeping wages high. Hoover met with industry

leaders and asked them to voluntarily maintain hourly wage rates at a higher level (Rose 2010).


       The Roosevelt Administration established the National Recovery Administration (NRA)

in June of 1933. The NRA was intended to foster the collaboration of industrialists, workers,
and consumers in each industry to establish “fair codes of competition” governing minimum

prices, quality standards, trade practices, wages, hours limits, and working conditions. Once an

industry code was approved by the NRA, it legally bound all firms in the industry, even those not

involved in writing the code. While waiting for the codes to be written, a large number of firms

signed President’s Reemployment Agreements (PRAs) in the summer of 1933 that required them

to raise wages and cut weekly hours and try to increase the number of their employees. The

administration advertised the NRA and PRAs by sponsoring parades, advertisements, and

sending 1.5 million volunteers door-to-door with a goal of getting 20 million people to sign

pledges that they would support NRA firms (Taylor 2010). Within a year most industries had

established codes. In many sectors, codes were largely written by the leaders of trade

associations with some influence by consumers, because relatively few industries had a strong

union presence. Many small firms complained that the codes favored the large firms that were

so prominent in writing them (Bellush 1975).


       Microeconomists who study the NRA bluntly describe the codes as cartel arrangements

enforced by the national government. The codes violated nearly every canon of standard

antitrust law and could only be put in place because the national government shut down antitrust

enforcement in the period. Cartel theory suggests that the effectiveness of a cartel agreement

often is reduced because firms have incentives to ignore the rules by lowering price and selling

more output. In fact, industries with more diverse firms and products had trouble coming to

agreement on the codes and then trying to enforce them, even with government backing.

Industries had more success with more complex codes that established restrictions on capacity,

production quotas, and provided for data collection for monitoring. The extent to which cartels

raised prices and lowered output depended heavily on these rules. Firms signaled that they were
following the codes by displaying the Blue Eagle symbol of the NRA, but town gossip suggested

that a number of violators were displaying the symbol just as prominently. The Supreme Court

struck down the NRA as unconstitutional in the Schechter Poultry Case in 1935. Unlike the

AAA, there was little support for re-enacting the NRA from many quarters and the Roosevelt

administration let it die.25 A few industries, however, were able to re-implement some

provisions of their codes through separate legislation.


        Macroeconomists have split on the impact of the National Recovery Act and high wage

policies. Several studies suggest that Hoover’s jawboning to maintain hourly wage rates at 1929

levels contributed to higher unemployment in the early 1930s, although they differ on the size of

the impact. Simulations from a structural model built to measure the impact of cartels and high

wage policies and the absence of antitrust enforcement suggests that the recovery from 1933 to

1939 was slowed substantially by the NRA and New Deal labor policies. In contrast, other

macroeconomists see the NRA and high wage labor policies as part of a package of policies that

included the move off of the gold standard, increases in national spending, and looser Federal

Reserve policy designed to abruptly change expectations about future deflation. Their

simulations suggest that the policy package’s success in reversing deflation was the key to

keeping GDP from declining even more after 1933. These studies, however, do not isolate the

impact of the NRA alone.26




        25
            Bellush (1975) offers a good administrative history of the NRA. Alexander (1997) and Klein and Taylor
(2008) show the effect of diversity on difficulties in agreeing on and enforcing codes. Klein and Taylor (2008) and
Taylor (2007, 2010) analyze the impact of NRA codes and PRA agreements on prices and quantity in various
industries.
         26
            For discussions of Hoover’s high wage policies, see Ohanian (2011) and Rose (2010). Ohanian and Cole
(2004) developed the simulations that show a negative effect of the NRA. Building on work by Temin and
Wigmore(1990), Eggerttson (2008) and (2012) developed the simulations for the package of programs that included
the NRA.
       One goal of the PRA and NRA was for labor to share in the economic profits generated

by the codes. An industry-fixed effects analysis of monthly data by industry from 1927 through

1937 shows that hourly wage rates were substantially higher and employment somewhat higher

when the labor-oriented PRAs were in place, but hourly wages were only slightly higher and

total employment lower during the periods covered by NRA codes. These benefits were offset

by weekly hours worked that were low enough that weekly wages were lower (Taylor, 2011).


VII. Union Policy and Minimum Wages


       The NRA and other laws passed in the 1930s dramatically changed the landscape for

unionization. Various states had passed laws outlawing yellow dog (nonunion) contracts,

stopping injunctions against union activity, and providing antitrust protection for unions,

although other states had laws that made it more difficult to unionize. The Clayton Act of 1914

had exempted unions from antitrust laws. In 1932, Hoover and the Republican Congress

approved the Norris-LaGuardia Act that stopped injunctions against peaceful union activity by

federal courts, outlawed yellow dog contracts, and allowed workers to form unions without

employer interference. Section 7a of the NIRA established standard language for the codes that

gave workers the right to bargain collectively through the agent of their choice. After the NRA

was declared unconstitutional, The National Labor Relations (Wagner) Act of 1935 reconstituted

the right of workers to collective bargain through their own representatives from section 7a of

the NIRA. Up to that time, the “at will” doctrine of employment followed by the courts allowed

either the employer or the worker to terminate the employment relationship. Employers had the

right to refuse to negotiate with union representatives and the right to refuse to recognize a union

even in cases where the vast majority of workers had unionized. Under New Deal legislation

workers acquired the right to vote on union representation. When a majority of workers voted in
favor, the employer was required to recognize the union and enter into a collective bargaining

agreement. In addition, employers could no longer establish company unions as alternatives to

independent organizations. The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) was established to

oversee union elections and the collective bargaining process. Union membership expanded

rapidly through a mixture of union recognition strikes and union elections, particularly after the

law was declared constitutional in 1937. In some cases both before and during the 1930s, when

the press for union recognition met staunch resistance from employers, strikes could turn violent.

One of the benefits of the NLRB policies was to regularize the union recognition process and the

incidence of violent strikes has diminished sharply since.27


        The Fair Labor Standards Act (FSLA) of 1938 established the national government’s role

in setting a national minimum wage, overtime requirements, and child labor restrictions. By this

time many states had limited child labor with specific child-labor laws and school attendance

laws and provided laws to limit work hours for women. During the Progressive Era, proponents

of wage and hour limits for male workers had long been frustrated by court decisions preventing

limits on male labor contracts. The FLSA was passed when a significant subset of employers

joined with union leaders and reformers to set a minimum that was most often binding only in

low wage industries in the South while agricultural workers, domestic workers, and employers

not involved in interstate commerce were exempted from the act. In the aftermath of the act,

northern firms expanded employment while southern firms reduced employment in the textile

industry, as southern firms shifted toward new mechanized production processes. In the lumber

industry war-related government purchases of lumber fueled a large boom in lumber output, but

employment grew much faster in the North than in the South, even though a majority of southern

        27
         For descriptions of the state laws see Fishback, Holmes, and Allen (2010). Freeman (1998) describes the
New Deal Labor Legislation.
lumber firms dropped out of interstate commerce to become exempt from the FLSA (Seltzer,

1997).


VIII. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation


         As the Federal Reserve System allowed the money supply to decline in the early 1930s,

the Hoover Administration sought other ways to inject liquidity into the economy by forming the

Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) in February 1932. The RFC was modeled after the

War Finance Corporation of World War I. Its first moves included making loans to 4,000 banks,

railroads, credit unions and mortgage loan companies to provide assets that would jumpstart

commercial lending. Among the most important programs was the provision of loans to troubled

banks to seek to provide them with enough liquidity to survive bank runs. Recent studies

suggest that these initial loans were not successful because the RFC loans were given first

priority over depositors and other lenders in situations where the bank failed. As a result, banks

had to hold the assets that they could sell most easily to insure repayment of the RFC loans.

These assets could not then be used to repay depositors when the bank failed. When the RFC

began to accept more risk by purchasing preferred stock in the troubled banks, it was more

successful at staving off bank failures.


         The RFC gave the Roosevelt administration enormous flexibility. It retained control of a

large supply of funds that could be loaned out and had the authority to borrow still more funds

without having to constantly return to Congress for new appropriations. As the loans were

repaid, the RFC continually had new funds to loan out again. “By the mid-1930s, the RFC was

making loans to banks, savings banks, building and loan associations, credit unions, railroads,

industrial banks, farmers, commercial businesses, federal land banks, production credit
associations, farm cooperative, mortgage loan companies, insurance companies, school districts,

and livestock credit corporations.” Perhaps even more importantly, the RFC became the banker

to many of the New Deal programs, providing loans and/or startup working capital to the FERA,

PWA, Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC), FCA, the Federal Housing Administration

(FHA), REA, and the WPA.28


        The RFC’s record at stimulating recovery is somewhat mixed. Hoover’s original goal for

the RFC to expand commercial credit to 1929 levels was not met until the end of the 1930s. For

example, RFC loans to railroads and industries helped delay bankruptcies for businesses and

railroads with conflicting effects. The delays gave financial institutions more time to dump their

railroad bonds. However, the railroads receiving RFC support delayed expenditures on

maintenance and capital improvements, while the ones who went through bankruptcy made these

investments because they were necessary to attract the necessary capital for reorganization.


IX. Nonfarm Housing Finance


        Between the late 1920s and early 1930s the housing and mortgage markets fell apart after

a large-scale boom in housing following World War I. Between 1930 and 1934 housing prices

in a group of representative communities had fallen an average of 33 percent, 20 percent more

than non-housing prices fell during the period (Wickens, 1941). The number of nonfarm

housing starts fell from levels above 750,000 in most years in the 1920s to around 100,000 in

1933 (Grebler, Blank, and Winnick, 1956, Table L-6). As incomes declined, hundreds of

thousands of families fell behind on their mortgage payments. Many mortgages were interest-

        28
           The descriptions in this section on the RFC are based on Olson (1988) and Jones (1939, 1951), who was
the director of the RFC. The quote is from Olson (1988, 43-4). The discussion of the RFC’s impact on railroad
investments is based on Mason and Schiffman 2004. The impact of the RFC on bank failures is discussed in Mason
(2001) and Mason and Mitchener (2011)
only 3-year to 5-year mortgages with a balloon payment of the principal, which was typically

about 50 to 60 percent of the value of the house at the end. Many balloon payments came due in

1932, 1933, and 1934. In normal times the mortgages were routinely renewed, but in the early

1930s most mortgage lenders had seen sharp drops in the funds available to loan and thus sought

full repayment. Many lenders modified the loans in hopes of future repayment but each new

wave of mortgages coming due and drops in loan funds led to sharp increases in the number of

foreclosures.29


        Between 1932 and 1933, 28 states passed foreclosure moratoria to give borrowers more

time to repay and/or to make foreclosures more costly, but the moratoria was only a stop-gap

solution that made the situation worse for lenders. In 1932, Hoover and the Republican

Congress set up a Federal Home Loan Board of 12 regional banks to make short-term discount

loans to lenders who were in good shape and needed short-term loans to fix temporary

mismatches between their loan funds and borrowers demands for mortgages. But the banks

focused on building and loan associations and largely ignored other mortgage lenders. Further,

they only offered discount loans that were backed by mortgages that were in good shape and thus

did little to meet the problems of frozen credit for lenders with a large number of loans where the

principal came due.


        During the First Hundred Days the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC) was

created to help nonfarm mortgage borrowers who were in trouble through “no fault of their

own.” The HOLC purchased over 1 million loans with an average value of $3,000 from lenders

using HOLC bonds that were fully guaranteed by the national government after the first year. In


        29
           The information on the HOLC comes from Rose (2011), Courtemanche and Snowden (2011), and
Fishback, et. al. (2011) and Fishback, Rose and Snowden (2012).
more than half the purchases the HOLC paid a bond value for the loans equal to the entire debt

owed to the lender, including principal, interest, and any insurance and tax payments made by

the lender. The rest typically covered principal, insurance and tax payments and part of the

interest owed. In essence, the HOLC replaced the toxic assets on the lenders books with bonds

that had a highly liquid market.


       The HOLC then restructured the loans for the borrowers. Most had to repay the full

value of their debt, but they received generous loan terms. The HOLC interest rate nationwide

was 5 percent when most of the original loans and most market rates on good loans were 6 to 8

percent. The original loans were replaced by amortized 15-year loans with equal payments that

fully retired the debt at the end. Thus, the borrowers with short interest-only balloon loans

could spread their payments over an extended period of time. Borrowers with longer-term

hybrid loans from building and loan associations no longer faced the problem that the number of

their loan payments required to pay off the loan might increase if others in the building and loan

failed to repay their loans. The HOLC also offered an option where the borrowers could pay

only interest for the first three years and then switch to the long term amortized loan. In 1939 the

interest rate was lowered to 4.5 percent.


       Even though the original loans had been high quality loans with borrowers borrowing at

most 60 percent of the value of the home--75 percent if they took out a second mortgage with

double the normal interest rate--the drops in income and housing prices during the Depression

had turned them into troubled loans. The typical HOLC borrower was over two years behind on

principal and tax payments at the time the HOLC refinanced. As a result, the HOLC ended up

foreclosing on nearly 20 percent of the refinanced loans by 1940.
       Estimates suggest the HOLC had significant effects on home ownership and housing

prices in the roughly 2500 counties (out of 3060) with fewer than 50,000 people. With the

HOLC in place nonfarm home ownership rates in these counties fell from 45 to 40 percent

between 1930 and 1940. Had the HOLC not been in operation they likely would have fallen to

37 percent. Nonfarm housing price in these counties fell by 37 percent with the HOLC in place,

but likely would have fallen by 47 percent without the HOLC.       The same studies find weaker

effects for larger counties, but the methods used for identification of the effects in the smaller

counties were not as effective in larger counties (Courtemanche and Snowden 2011 and

Fishback, et. al., 2011).


       When the HOLC was created, Congress expected it to be a money losing proposition.

Official government estimates suggest that after the HOLC was wound down in 1951 that the

mortgage purchase and refinance program lost about $53 million, or 2.7 percent of the $3 billion

in loans made. This likely understates the true size of the subsidy given to housing markets

because the HOLC’s interest costs were lower because HOLC bonds were guaranteed by the

national government. Had the HOLC been created without the government bond guarantee the

interest costs would likely have been at least one percent higher. Adding one percent to the

interest rates on HOLC bonds would have increased the HOLC’s subsidy to housing markets to

$353 million or 12.7 percent of the loans made. Each additional 1 percent in interest costs would

have raised the subsidy by $300 million more.


       The New Deal created a variety of other housing finance programs that had much longer-

term rather than shorter term effects on the economy. The Federal Housing Administration in

1934 began providing mortgage guarantees to lenders for Repair and Reconstruction loans for

one to four unit family housing. In 1935 the guarantees were expanded to cover Mortgage loans.
After they were both in operation, they were guaranteeing values of new loans each year equal to

about 0.74 percent of 1929 peak GDP. The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation

was created to guarantee deposits at Savings and Loans, which became the dominant lenders for

nonfarm real estate in the 1930s. In 1938 Fannie Mae (Federal National Mortgage Association)

was created to create a secondary market for mortgages by purchasing mortgages from lenders

and giving them more loan funds to make more mortgage loans. Originally backed by the

national government, Fannie was supposed to have become an independent corporation with no

government guarantees in 1968. In the fall of 2008, however, Fannie was taken over by the

government when it sunk into financial trouble.


X. Financial Regulations


       Large numbers of banks failed during the early 1930s as Federal Reserve policy makers

focused on helping maintain the Gold Standard and considered their reductions in the discount

rate to be stimulative, even as deflation led to extraordinarily high real interest rates. Difficulties

in the banking sector erupted again in January and February of 1933. President Hoover and

President-Elect Roosevelt jockeyed over how to deal with these issues, while most states

declared Bank Holidays to ease the financial pressures on commercial banks. The day after

Roosevelt was inaugurated he declared a National Bank Holiday and government auditors set to

work to determine the soundness of the banks. Once declared sound, banks reopened, while

negotiations began to improve the soundness of weaker banks. Within a month the pressure of

the Federal Reserve to maintain the gold standard was eliminated when the U.S. moved off of the

gold standard and the dollar was devaluad.
        Roosevelt’s Bank Holiday and the RFC bank loans were temporary methods for solving

problems with bank panics. However, the stock market crash and problems in the banking and

construction industries led to pressures for more permanent solutions, including a wide variety of

regulations and the development of new financial institutions that are still with us today. The

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was established to monitor the stock markets,

reporting requirements for firms issuing stock, insider trading, and enforce imposing rules on

market trades. In commercial banking the Banking Act of 1933 restricted interest payments on

demand deposits with Regulation Q and created the “Glass-Steagall” wall between commercial

banks and investment banks by prohibiting depository institutions from serving as underwriters

for securities.


        The New Deal banking legislation did little to resolve the problems with bank failures

caused by bans on branch banking by a large number of states. This emphasis on unit banks led

quite a few to suspend payments during the 1920s and 1930s when their communities hit hard

times because they did not have a diversified range of assets. Experiments with deposit

insurance by state governments to stem the tide of bank failures in the early 1900s had proved

largely unsuccessful. Even so, the Roosevelt Administration established the Federal Deposit

Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC)

to provide national government insurance of deposits up to a set limit. Through the late 1970s,

the stability of the banking system was often credited to deposit insurance, but problems that

arose with savings and loans in the 1980s and the recent financial struggles in 2007 and 2008

have raised more doubts.30



        30
          White (1998), Mitchener and Mason (2010) and Calomiris (2010) provide summaries of New Deal
banking policies. The studies of state deposit insurance and problems in the banking industry were performed by
IX. The New Deal and Lessons for the Present for Federal Systems

        The New Deal developed a wide range of programs and regulations designed to solve a

multitude of perceived problems in the economy. The tinkering extended to many smaller

programs and regulations not discussed in our survey. What was truly new about the New Deal

was the creation of the AAA farm programs to pay farmers to take land out of production, the

nationwide Social Security program for American workers, the NRA’s codes of competition, the

HOLC’s purchase and refinance of mortgage loans, and federal financing of farm production

loans. The NRA was eliminated by Supreme Court decree and the HOLC ended by design, but

the other programs continue today. A significant share of New Deal activity involved the federal

government becoming involved in regulations and spending programs that had long been

handled by state and local governments. Another significant share of New Deal spending and

regulation continued activities in which the federal government was already involved. The

latest innovations in New Deal research have included a significant number of quantitative

assessments of the local impacts of the various programs that offer insights into which programs

were successful and which were not.


        The New Deal also had significant impact on the location of government activity within

the federal structure of U.S. governments in four ways. First, the New Deal largely strengthened

the role of the federal and state governments at the expense of local governments. Second, the

national government began to give grants to state and local governments to aid them in dealing

with poverty and unemployment and the building of local public works. In nearly all of these

cases involving large fiscal expenditures, the programs tended to be administered and funded



Alston, Grove, and Wheelock (1994), Wheelock (1992), White (1983), Calomiris and White (2000), and Richardson
and Chung (2003).
jointly by the national and state governments. Third, regulatory programs that strongly

influenced economic activity but had little fiscal impact were more likely to be nationally

administered. Fourth, the spending programs that persisted and became permanent tended to

limit the discretion of national program administrators in ways that reduced the ability of the

national administrator to treat states differently. If a program did not limit national discretion at

its inception, as in the relief programs, the program either evolved limits or it was eliminated.

Giving national administrators’ long run discretion over the distribution of funds across states

was a power that was deeply resisted in the 1930s, as it had been deeply resisted in American

political history since the revolution of the 1770s. 31

         Rules rather than discretion were the order of the day in both the fiscal and regulatory

programs. Regulatory programs were not just national in being administered by the national

government, they were national in the sense of applying equally to everyone. This need not have

been the case, as was amply shown in the early days of the New Deal when emergency programs

did not treat everyone the same.

         What lessons do we draw from this part of the New Deal experience for the current

economic and political crises? Americans already know these lessons and they were reflected in

the response to the crisis in 2008. Europeans are just now going through the pressures and

conflicts that a major economic downturn creates for a federal fiscal, monetary, and political

union. So far they seem to be largely ignoring the New Deal lessons. The fiscal crisis of

member states has been transmitted throughout the EU through the banking system, the currency

union, and the extensive holdings of national member government debts in the private banks of

         31
            It is interesting to note that the Great Society programs of the 1960s in which the national government
dealt directly with local governments were quickly eliminated after Reagan and the Republicans captured the
Presidency and the Senate, but the Great Society programs that were jointly administered with the states, particularly
Medicare, have persisted.
other EU countries. Rescuing the finances of member states has raised a whole host of

unresolved political issues about fiscal relations between the center and the members. As of

early 2012, it appears that the EU is attempting to move towards changing their political union in

a manner that creates rules for the member states and discretion for the center. This is exactly

the opposite of the long run American experience where rules for the center and discretion within

the rules for the member states have been the common pattern.
                                               Table 1
                     Shares of Government Expenditure by Level of Government
                          Total Government Expenditures as Share of GDO
               National Grants to State & Local Governments as share of S&L Revenue


                          Share                                   Expenditures/      Grants/
       Year              National       State          Local         GDP            S&L Rev
                            (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)

        1902                0.34           0.08            0.58             0.07            0.01

        1913                0.30           0.09            0.61             0.08            0.01

        1922                0.39           0.12            0.49             0.13            0.02

        1927                0.30           0.13            0.57             0.12            0.01



        1932                0.32           0.16            0.51             0.21            0.03

        1934                0.39           0.17            0.44             0.19            0.10

        1936                0.49           0.15            0.36             0.20            0.09

        1938                0.43           0.17            0.39             0.21            0.06

        1940                0.45           0.17            0.38             0.20            0.07

        1942                0.76           0.08            0.16             0.28            0.06



        1948                0.61           0.14            0.24             0.20            0.07

        1952                0.69           0.11            0.20             0.28            0.07

        1957                0.62           0.13            0.25             0.27            0.07

        1962                0.60           0.14            0.26             0.30            0.10

        1967                0.59           0.15            0.26             0.31            0.12

        1972                0.52           0.18            0.30             0.32            0.14

        1977                0.53           0.19            0.28             0.34            0.16

        1982                0.58           0.17            0.25             0.38            0.14

        1987                0.57           0.17            0.25             0.38            0.12

        1992                0.54           0.20            0.26             0.39            0.13

Source: Calculated from information in Census of Governments, State and Local Financial Data, various
years.
                                              Table 2
Average Annual Funds Distributed by the Federal Government Across States by Program in Fiscal Years
                        of Operation in 1930 Dollars per 1930 population.



                                                                        Annual Spending per 1930 Person
                                                                           in 1930$ during Years in
                                                                                  Operation

Category                       Fiscal Years     New        Level of      Roosevelt    Hoover    Harding/
                               for Program      Deal      Government     1934-1939    1930-     Coolidge
                                 between      Acronym      Pre-New                     1933      1923-
                                1923-1939     Used in        Deal                                1929
                                                Text

RELIEF GRANTS

Civilian Conservation Corps     1934-1939      CCCR      State and             3.44      0.04         0.00
                                                         Local

Civil Works Administration         1934        CWA       State and             8.18      0.00         0.00
Work Grants                                              Local

Federal Emergency Relief        1934-1935a     FERA      State and            15.19      0.00         0.00
Administration Grant                                     Local

Social Security                 1936-1939     SSAPA      State and             1.91      0.00         0.00
Administration Public                                    Local
Assistance Grants

Social Security                 1936-1939     SSAAD      State and             1.44      0.00         0.00
Administration                                           Local
Administrative Assistance
Grants

Works Progress                  1936-1939      WPA       State and            16.52      0.00         0.00
Administration Work Relief                               Local
Grants

U.S. Employment Service         1934-1939      USES      State and             0.13      0.00         0.00
                                                         Local

Vocational Education            1930-1939b      VE       Federal               0.13      0.08         n.a.s

AID TO VETERANS

Soldiers and Sailors Homes      1923-1939       SSH      Federal               0.01      0.01         0.01

Veterans Administration         1923-1939       VA       Federal               5.20      6.67         4.64
Grants

Adjusted Service Certificate      1936c        ASCG      Federal              33.84      0.00         0.00
Grants (Veterans' Bonus)

Adjusted Service Certificate    1927-1935d   ASCL    Federal      -1.35 in   3.74       0.22
Loans                                                            1934 and
                                                                   0.64 in
                                                                     1935

Adjusted Service Certificate      1936e              Federal       -16.14    0.00       0.00
Loans Repayments

Veterans Rehab Spending         1923-1930f    VR     Federal        n.a.s.   n.a.s      0.39

PUBLIC WORKS GRANTS

Public Works Administration     1934-1939    PWAF    Federal         1.04    0.00       0.00
Federal Project Grants

Public Works Administration     1934-1939    PWANF   State and       1.66    0.00       0.00
Nonfederal Project Grants                            Local

Tennessee Valley Authority      1934-1939     TVA    Federal         0.36    0.00       0.00
Spending

State Highway Federal Aid       1923-1939     PRA    Federal         2.56    1.50       0.56
(Public Roads Administration
after 1933)

Public Housing Grants under     1935-1939    PWAH    Local           0.41    0.00       0.00
the PWA

River and Harbor Grants         1923-1939     RH     Federal         1.21    1.01       0.59
Reported by the Army Corps
of Engineers (not Relief or
Public Works)

Bureau of Reclamation Loans     1923-1939     REC    Federal         0.51    0.15       0.06
Reported by Bureau of
Reclamation

Public Building                 1930-1939     PBA    Federal         0.40    0.84    #VALUE
Administration Grants                                                                     !

PUBLIC WORKS LOANS

Public Works Administration     1934-1939    PWANF   State and       0.83    0.00       0.00
Loans for Nonfederal Projects                        Local

U.S. Housing Authority            1939       USHA    Local           0.54    0.00       0.00
Public Housing Loans

AGRICULTURAL GRANTS

Agricultural Adjustment         1934-1939    AAA     None            4.66    0.00       0.00
Administration Grants

Farm Security Administration   1935-1939     FSA    None             0.52   0.00   0.00
Grants

Federal Surplus Commodity      1938-1939    FSCC    None             1.00   0.00   0.00
Corporation Grants

Soil Conservation Service      1934-1939     SCS    None             0.16   0.00   0.00
Grants

Agricultural Experiment        1923-1939     AES    Federal          0.05   0.04   0.07
Station Grants

Agricultural Extension Works   1923-1939    AEW     Federal          0.14   0.08   0.00
Grants

Colleges of Agricultural and   1923-1939    CAM     Federal          0.03   0.02   n.a.s
Mechanical Grants

AGRICULTURAL LOANS

Commodity Credit               1934-1939f   CCCA    None             1.94   0.00   0.00
Corporation Loans

Disaster Loan Corporation      1937-1939    DLC     Federal          0.05   0.00   0.00
Loans

Farm Credit Administration     1923-1939g   FCAEC   Federal          0.29   0.44   0.01
Emergency Crop and Feed
Loans

Farm Credit Administration     1923-1939g   FCALB   Federal          3.62   0.80   1.02
Federal Land Bank Loans

Farm Credit Administration     1934-1939g   FCAPC   None             2.29   0.00   0.00
Production Credit Loans

Joint-Stock Bank Farm          1923-1932g    JSB    Federal          0.00   0.03   1.00
Mortgage Loans

Farm Security Administration   1936-1939    FSAL    None             0.82   0.00   0.00
Loans

Farm Tenant Purchase Loans     1938-1939     FTP    None             0.16   0.00   0.00

Rural Electrification          1936-1939    REA     None             0.30   0.00   0.00
Administration Loans

MISCELLANEOUS

Education Grants to States     1923-1939     ED     Federal, State   0.17   0.10   0.09
                                                    and Local
 National Guard Grants             1923-1939        NG        Federal                 0.30      0.30          0.23

 Home Owners' Loan                 1934-1936       HOLC       None                   10.56      0.00          0.00
 Corporation Loans

 Reconstruction Finance            1932-1939        RFC       Federal                 3.50      9.84          0.00
 Corporation Loans

 HOLC and Treasury Loans           1934-1939      HOLCT       Federal                 0.43      0.00          0.00

 Federal Housing                   1935-1939       FHAR       None                    1.62      0.00          0.00
 Administration: Value of
 Title 1 Repair and
 Reconstruction Loans
 Guaranteed by

 Federal Housing                   1935-1939       FHAM       None                    3.58      0.00          0.00
 Administration: Value of
 Title II Nonfarm Home
 Mortgage Loans Guaranteed



         Source: Based on data from Office of Government Reports, U.S. Census. Bureau, State
Financial Statistics, U.S. Treasury Department, Annual Reports. For details on the construction of the
data see Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2011, Data Appendix). This is built up from a data set on grants
and loans in each state and likely understates total federal spending on each program to the extent that
there was no record of the state kept for that type of spending. Annual per capita Income in 1930 dollars
in 1929 was $820 based on series CA-11 and CA13 in Carter, et. al. (2006). There had always been some
central aid to state and local governments, beginning with the national assumption of state debts in the
1790s. But intergovernmental grants in existence by 1900 were a small part of the public sector. They
included textbooks for the blind (1879), agricultural experiment stations (1887), state soldiers homes
(1888), resident instruction in land-grant colleges (1890), and irrigation (1894). These were followed by
grants to state marine schools (1911), state and forestry operations (1911), the agricultural extension
service (1914), vocational education (1917), and vocational rehabilitation (1920). But these programs
were, by 1920, overshadowed in fiscal terms by the highway construction grants begun in 1916. By
1922, $92 million of the $118 million in federal grants, or 78 percent, were for highways. A maternity
and infancy health plan was begun in 1921, which gave rise to the famous decision in Massachusetts vs.
Mellon (262 U.S. 447 (1923)) that conditional grants did not impinge on state sovereignty, since states
were free to forgo the grants (Moehling and Thomasson 2012). By 1930 there were 15 federal grant
programs to state and local government in operation, dominated by the highway construction grants. But
they were still small in the aggregate; state grants to local governments were about five times as large as
federal grants to state and local governments combined.

n.a.s. means not available separately.
a
  The FERA spent a small share of its funds between July 1935 and March 1937 as programs wound
down.
b
  Vocational education information not available separately in 1920s so far.
c
  The ASC cash payments were distributed in June and July of 1936 and thus straddled the fiscal year.
d
  Loans for 1934 and 1935 reported separately because repayments of ASC loans outweighed new loans
significantly nationwide. In 1935 new loans made outweighed repayments.
e
  When the ASC cash payments were made in June and July 1936, this amount per capita went to repaying
ASC loans.
f
  CCC loans included loans not listed by state, so this understates amounts.
g
  These loans are reported for the calendar year.
                                         REFERENCES

References
Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. (Various years). Annual Report. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

Alexander, B. (1997) ’Failed Cooperation in Heterogeneous Industries under the National
Recovery Administration’, Journal of Economic History , 57 (June): 322-44

Alexander, B. and Libecap, G. (2000) ’The Effect of Cost Heterogeneity in the Success and
Failure of the New Deal's Agricultural and Industrial Programs’, Explorations in Economic
History, 37 (October): 370-400.

Alston (1981) “Tenure Choice in Southern Agriculture.” Explorations in Economic History 18
       (1981): 211-232.
Alston, L. J. and Ferrie J. (1999) Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare State. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Alston, Lee J., Wayne Grove and David Wheelock. 1994. “Why Do Banks Fail: Evidence from
       the 1920s.” Explorations in Economic History 31 (October): 409-431.
Amenta, Edwin. (1998). Bold Relief: Institutional Politics and the Origins of Modern
      American Social Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Anderson, G. M., and Tollison, R. D. (1991) ’Congressional Influence and Patterns of New Deal
Spending, 1933-1939’, Journal of Law and Economics, 34 (April): 161-75.

Arrington, L. J. (1970) ’Western Agriculture and the New Deal’, Agricultural History 49
(October): 337-316.

Baicker, Katherine, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz. 1998. “A Distinctive System: Origins
       and Impact of U.S. Unemployment Compensation” in The Defining Moment: The Great
       Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by Bordo,
       Michael, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Balan-Cohen, A. (2008) ‘The effect on elderly mortality: evidence from the old age assistance
programs in the United States’, Unpublished working paper. Tufts University.

Barreca, A., Fishback, P., and Kantor, S. (2011) ’Agricultural Policy, Migration, and Malaria in
the U.S. in the 1930s’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17526.

Bellush, B. (1975) The Failure of the NRA. New York: Norton.

Benjamin, D. and Mathews, K.G.P. (1992) U.S. and U.K. Unemployment Between the Wars: A
Doleful Story. Institute for Economic Affairs, London.
Biles, R. (1994) The South and the New Deal. Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press.


Boustan, L., Fishback, P., and Kantor, S. (2010). “The Effect of Internal Migration on Local
Labor Markets: American Cities During the Great Depression.” Journal of Labor Economics 28
(October 2010): 719-746

Block, F., Cloward, R. A., Ehrenrich, B., and Piven, F. F. The Mean Season: The Attack on the
       Welfare State. New York: Pantheon Books, 1987.

Bremer, William W. Depression Winters: New York Social Workers and the New Deal.
      Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984.

Brock, William Ranulf. Welfare, Democracy, and the New Deal. New York: Cambridge
       University Press, 1988.

Brown, E. C. 1956, ’Fiscal Policy in the ’Thirties: A Reappraisal’, American Economic Review,
46 (December): 857-79.

Calomiris Charles. (2010). “The political lessons of Depression-era banking reform.” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy. 26 (Autumn): 540-560.

Calomiris, Charles and Eugene N. White. 2000. “The Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance.” In
      Charles Calomiris. U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
Calomiris, Charles and David Wheelock. 1998. “Was the Great Depression a Watershed for
      American Monetary Policy?” in The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
      American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by Michael Bordo, Claudia Goldin,
      and Eugene White. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 23-66.
Carter, S. et. al. Millennial Edition of the Historical Statistics of the United States, edited by
Susan Carter, et. al., New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.


Clarke, Jeanne Nienaber. 1996. Roosevelt’s Warrior: Harold L. Ickes and the New Deal.
       Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Clarke, S. (1994) Regulation and the Revolution in United States Farm Productivity.
Cambridge University Press, New York.

Cole, H. and Ohanian, L. (2004) “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (August):
779-816.
Commissioner of Internal Revenue. (1937). Annual Report of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue for the Fiscal Year ended June 30, 1937. Washington: D.C.: Government Printing
Office.
Costa, D.L. (1999) “A house of her own: old age assistance and the living arrangements of older
nonmarried women.” Journal of Public Economics 72: 39-59.

Couch, J. and Shughart II, W. (1998) The Political Economy of the New Deal. New York:
Edward Elgar.

Courtemanche, C. and Snowden, K. (2011). “Repairing a Mortgage Crisis: HOLC Lending and
Its Impact on Local Housing Markets.” Journal of Economic History 71 (June): 307-337.

Depew, B., Fishback, P. and Rhode, P. (2012) “New Deal or No Deal in the Cotton South: The
Effect of the AAA on the Labor Structure in Agriculture.” Working paper, University of
Arizona.

Eggertsson, G. (2008) “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression.” American
Economic Review 98 (4): 1476-1516.

Eggertsson, G. (2012) “Was the New Deal Contractionary.” American Economic Review 102
(February): 524-555..

Fearon, Peter. (2007). Kansas in the Great Depression: Work Relief, the Dole, and
Rehabilitation. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

Federal Farm Loan Board. Various years. Annual Report of the Federal Farm Loan Board. .
     Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Fishback, P. (2010) “Monetary and Fiscal Policy During the Great Depression.” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy. 26 (Autumn): 385-413.

Fishback, P., Flores-Lagunes, A., Horrace, W., Kantor, S., and Treber, J. (2011) “The Influence
of the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation on Housing Markets During the 1930s.“ Review of
Financial Studies, 24 (July): 1782-1813.

Fishback, P.V., Haines. M.R., and Kantor, S. (2001) “The Impact of the New Deal on Black and
White Infant Mortality in the South.” Explorations in Economic History 38 (January): 93-122.

Fishback, P.V., Haines. M.R., and Kantor, S. “Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief During the Great
Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February 2007): 1-14 .


Fishback, P., Higgs, R., Libecap, G., Wallis, J., Engerman, S., Hummel, J., LaCroix,S., Margo,
R., McGuire, R., Sylla, R., Alston, L., Ferrie, J., Guglielmo, M., Pasour, E.C. Jr., Rucker,R. and
Troesken, W. 2007. Government and the American Economy: A New History. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Fishback, P., Holmes, R., and Allen, S. (2009). “Lifting the Curse of Dimensionality: Measures
of the Labor Legislation Climate in the States During the Progressive Era,” Labor History 50
(August 2009): 313-346.


Fishback, P., Horrace, W. and Kantor, S. 2005. “Did New Deal grant programs stimulate local
economies? A study of Federal grants and retail sales during the Great Depression,” The Journal
of Economic History 65 (March): 36-71.


_______. 2004. “Did New Deal grant programs stimulate local economies? A study of Federal
grants and retail sales during the Great Depression,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper W8108


________. (2006) “The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility During the Great
Depression,” Explorations in Economic History,” 43 (April 2006): 179-222


Fishback, P. and Kachanovskaya, V. (2011) “In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending in
the States During the Great Depression.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 16561.

Fishback, P., Kantor, S., and Wallis, J. (2003). “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be
Rehabilitated? A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis.” Explorations in Economic
History (October): 278-307.

Fishback, P., Rose, J., and Snowden, K. (2012) “HOLC: Fending off Foreclosures in the Great
Depression.” Unpublished Book Manuscript.

Fleck, R. (1999a) “Electoral Incentives, Public Policy, and the New Deal Realignment.”
Southern Economic Journal 63 (January): 377-404.

_____. (2001a) “Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and distributive Policy: A
Model and Test using New Deal Data.” Public Choice 108 (July): 77-100.

_____. (1999b) “The Marginal Effect of New Deal Relief Work on County-Level
Unemployment Statistics.” Journal of Economic History 59 (September): 659-87.

_____. (2001b) “Population, Land, Economic Conditions, and the Allocation of New Deal
Spending.” Explorations in Economic History 38 (April): 296-304.

_____. (1999c) “The Value of the Vote: A Model and Test of the Effects of Turnout on
Distributive Policy,” Economic Inquiry 37 (October): 609-23.
______. (2008) “Voter Influence and Big Policy Change: The Positive Political Economy of the
New Deal.” Journal of Political Economy : 1-37.

Freeman, Richard. 1998. “Spurts In Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social Processes.”
      The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth
      Century. Edited by Michael Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White. Chicago, IL:
      University of Chicago Press, pp. 265-296.
Friedberg, L. (1999) The effect of old age assistance on retirement. Journal of Public Economics.
71:,213-232.

Grebler, Leo, David M. Blank, and Louis Winnick. 1956. Capital formation in residential real
     estate: Trends and prospects. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gruber, J. and Hungerman, D. (2007). “Faith-Based Charity and Crowd Out During the Great
Depression.” Journal of Public Economics 91: 1043-1069.

Halcrow, H. G. (1953) Agricultural Policy of the United States. New York: Prentice-Hall Inc..

Hansen, Z. and Libecap, G. (2004) “Small Farms, Externalities, and the Dust Bowl of the
1930s.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (June): 665-694.

Howard, D. S. (1943). The WPA and Federal Relief Policy. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.


Johnson, R., Fishback, P., and Kantor, S. (2010) "Striking at the Roots of Crime: The Impact of
Social Welfare Spending on Crime During the Great Depression," Journal of Law and Economics
53 (November): 715-740.


Jones, Jesse H. with Edward Angly. 1951. Fifty Billion Dollars: My Thirteen Years with the
        RFC (1932-1945). New York: The MacMillan Company.
Jones, Jesse H. 1939. Reconstruction Finance Corporation Seven-Year Report to the President
        and the Congress of the United States, February 2, 1932 to February 2, 1939,
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation pamphlet.
Keynes, J.M. (1964). The General Theory of Money, Interest, and Prices. New York: A
Harbinger Book, Harcourt, Brace and World Inc..

Kitchens, C. (2011a) “A Dam Problem: TVA’s Fight Against Malaria 1926-1951.” Working
Paper, University of Arizona.

Kitchens, C. (2011b) “The Role of Publicly Provided Electricity in Economic Development:
The Experience of the Tennessee Valley Authority, 1929-1955.” Working Paper, University of
Arizona.
Kline, P. and Taylor, J. (2008) “Anatomy of a Cartel: The National Industrial Recovery Act of
1933 and the Compliance Crisis of 1934.” Research in Economic History 26: 235-271.

Kline, Patrick and Moretti, Enrico. (2011). “Can Public Investment Shift Regional Growth
Equilibria? 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” Unpublished
Working Paper. University of California, Berkeley.

Kollmann, T. and Fishback. P. (2011) “The New Deal, Race, and Home Ownership in the 1920s
and 1930s.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 101 (May 2011): 366-70.

Libecap, Gary. 1998. “The Great Depression and the Regulating State: Federal Government
       Regulation of Agriculture, 1884-1970.” Bordo, Michael, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N.
       White, editors. The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American
       Economy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lindert, Peter. (2004). Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth Since the
       Eighteenth Century. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Livingston, B. (2011). “Interactions Between Private and Public Relief.” Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Arizona.

Maher, Neil H. 2008. Nature’s New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corp and the Roots of the
American Environmental Movement. New York: Oxford.

Mason, Joseph. (2001). “Do Lenders of Last Resort Policies Matter? The Effects of the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression.” Journal
of Financial Services Research 20 (September): 77-95.

Margo, Robert. 1991. “The Microeconomics of Depression Unemployment.” Journal of
      Economic History 51 (June): 333-341.
Margo, R. (1993) “Employment and Unemployment in the 1930s.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7 (Spring): 41-59.

Mason and Mitchener. (2010) “Blood and treasure’: Exiting the great depression and lessons for
today.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 26 (Autumn): 510-539.
Mason, Joseph and Daniel Schiffman. 2004. “Too-Big-to-Fail, Government Bailouts, and
      Managerial Incentives: The Case of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to
      the Railroad Industry During the Great Depression.” Working paper presented at the
      ASSA meetings in San Diego, CA, January.
Moley, R. (1966). The First New Deal. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World.

Neumann, T., Fishback, P. and Kantor, S. (2010) “The Dynamics of Relief Spending and the
Private Urban Labor Market During the New Deal.” Journal of Economic History 70 (March):
195-220.
Nourse, Edwin G., Joseph S. Davis, and John D. Black. Three Years of the Agricultural
      Adjustment Administration. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1937.

Olson, James S. 1998. Saving Capitalism: The Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the
       New Deal. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Parsons, D. O. (1991) Male retirement behavior in the United States, 1930-1950. Journal of
Economic History 51: 657-674.

Peppers, L. (1973) “Full Employment Surplus Analysis and Structural Change: The 1930s,”
Explorations in Economic History 10 (Winter), 197-210.

Piven, F. F. and Cloward, R. A. Regulating the Poor: The Functions of Public Welfare, New
       York: Pantheon Books, 1971.

Reading, D. C. (1973) “New Deal Activity and the States, 1933 to 1939,” Journal of Economic
History 33 (December): 792-810.

Richardson, Gary and Ching-Yi Chung. 2003. “Deposit Insurance in Developing Economies:
       Lessons from the Archives of the Board of Governors and the 1920s State Deposit-
       Insurance Experiments.” Paper presented at Cliometrics Conference in Raleigh, NC,
       May.
Rose, J. (2010). “Hoover’s Truce: Wage Rigidity in the Onset of the Great Depression.”
Journal of Economic History 70 (December): 843-870.

Rose, J. (2011) “The Incredible HOLC: Mortgage Relief During the Great Depression.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43 (September): 1073-1107.

Saloutos, T. (1982) The American Farmer and the New Deal. Ames, IO: Iowa State University
Press.

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. 1958. The Age of Roosevelt: The Coming of the New Deal. Boston:
       Houghton-Mifflin.
Seltzer, A.J. ( 1997). “The Effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 on the Southern
Seamless Hosiery and Lumber Industries.” Journal of Economic History 57 (June): 396-415.

Social Security Board. Social Security Bulletin. Various issues.

Sorensen, T., Fishback, P., Kantor, S., and Rhode, P. (2011) “The New Deal and the Diffusion
of Tractors in the 1930s.” Working paper, University of Arizona.

Stecker, M. L. (1937) “Intercity Differences in Cost of Living in March 1935, 59 Cities.” Works
Progress Administration Research Monography XII. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Stoian, A. and Fishback, P. (2010) “Welfare spending and mortality rates for the elderly before
the Social Security era.” Explorations in Economic History (January): 1-27.

Stromberg, D. (2004). “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
119 (February): 189-221.

Taylor, J. (2007) “Cartel Codes Attributes and Cartel Performance: An Industry-Level Analysis
of the National Industrial Recovery Act. Journal of Law and Economics 50 (August): 597-624.

Taylor, J. (2010) "The Welfare Impact Of Collusion Under Various Industry Characteristics: A
Panel Examination Of Efficient Cartel Theory" The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy:
Vol. 10: Issue 1 Article 97.

Taylor, J. (2011) “Work-Sharing During the Great Depression: Did the ‘President’s
Reemployment Agreement’ Promote Reemployment?” Economica 78: 133-158.

Temin, Peter and Barry Wigmore. 1990. “The End of One Big Deflation.” Explorations in
       Economic History 27 (October): 483-502.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1975). Historical Statistics of the United States: From Colonial Times to
1970. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Wallis, J. J. (1981). Work Relief and Unemployment in the 1930s. Unpublished PhD.
  dissertation, University of Washington.

________. “The Birth of the Old Federalism: Financing the New Deal, 1932-1940,” Journal of
Economic History 44 (March): 139-59.

_____. (1985) “Why 1933? The Origins and Timing of National Government Growth, 1933-
1940,” Research in Economic History 4: 1-51.

_____. (1987) “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery During the Great Depression,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (August): 516-20.

_____. (1991) “The Political Economy of New Deal Fiscal Federalism.” Economic Inquiry 39
(July): 510-524.

_____. (1998) “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending Revisited, Again: With and
Without Nevada.” Explorations in Economic History 35 (April), 140-70.

_____. (2001) “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending, Yet Again: A Reply to Fleck.”
Explorations in Economic History 38 (April): 305-14.

Wallis, J. J., and Benjamin, D. K. (1981) “Public Relief and Private Employment in the Great
Depression,” Journal of Economic History 41 (March): 97-102.
Wallis, J.J., Fishback, P.V. and Kantor, S.E., 2006. “Politics, Relief, and Reform: Roosevelt’s
Efforts to Control Corruption and Manipulation During the New Deal” in Corruption and Reform
edited by Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. NBER Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Whatley, W. C. (1983). “Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South,” Journal of
Economic History 43 (December): 905-29.

Whatley, W.C. (1985) “A History of Mechanization in the Cotton South: The
Institutional Hypothesis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (November): 1191-1215.

White, Eugene Nelson. 1983. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System:
       1900-1929. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
White, Eugene Nelson. 1998. “The Legacy of Deposit Insurance: The Growth, Spread, and
       Cost of Insuring Financial Intermediaries.” In The Defining Moment: The Great
       Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by Michael D.
       Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       pp. 87-121.
Wickens, D.. Residential Real Estate: Its Economic Position As Shown by Values, Rents,
      Family Incomes, Financing and Construction, Together with Estimates for All Real
      Estate. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1941.

Williams, E.A. (1939). Federal Aid for Relief. New York: AMS Press.
Wright, Gavin. (1974). “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric
       Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics 56 (February): 30-38.
