                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AIRPORTS AND URBAN GROWTH:
              EVIDENCE FROM A QUASI-NATURAL POLICY EXPERIMENT

                                         Bruce A. Blonigen
                                          Anca D. Cristea

                                        Working Paper 18278
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18278


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We thank James Harrigan, David Hummels, Jason Lindo, Alex Vrtiska, Glen Waddell and Wes Wilson
for helpful discussions, and Mitchell Johnson for excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Anca D. Cristea. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Airports and Urban Growth: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Policy Experiment
Bruce A. Blonigen and Anca D. Cristea
NBER Working Paper No. 18278
August 2012
JEL No. O18,R11,R4

                                               ABSTRACT

While significant work has been done to examine the determinants of regional development, there
is little evidence on the contribution of air services toward this outcome. This paper exploits the unexpected
market changes induced by the 1978 Airline Deregulation Act to bring new evidence on the link between
airline traffic and local economic growth. Using data for almost 300 Metropolitan Statistical Areas
(MSAs) over a two decade time period centered around the policy change, we exploit time variation
in long-run growth rates to identify the effects of airline traffic on population, income and employment
growth. Our results suggest that air service has a significant positive effect on regional growth, with
the magnitude of the effects differing by MSA size and industrial specialization.


Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

Anca D. Cristea
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
cristea@uoregon.edu
1       Introduction
Almost since the invention of the airplane, policymakers at all levels of government have
spent considerable resources to promote air services for their constituents. Currently in
the United States, local airports and communities are quite active in providing subsidies
and pledging future travel tickets in order to deter airlines from terminating strategic
routes (e.g., Portland1 ), or from downgrading a city from its hub status (e.g., Cleve-
land2 ), or to encourage airlines to add new routes for their region (e.g., Tampa3 ). A
2009 survey by Airports Council International North America found that of the 52 re-
sponding airports, 33 had incentive agreements involving domestic air service, and 23
airports had incentive agreements for international air service.4
      The universal justification for these government policies is the stated belief that
air transport is crucial for regional economic growth. In support of this belief, there is
certainly anecdotal evidence suggesting that air transport improves business operations
by providing quick access to input supplies, stimulates innovative activities by facilitating
face-to-face meetings, and represents an essential input for certain industries.5 On the
other hand, it is not clear how much economic activity significantly relies on air service,
nor the extent to which other modes of transportation and communication can easily
substitute for air services. In the end, a positive correlation between air services and
economic growth may make policymakers erroneously believe that there is a causal
    1
      See “Port’s gamble on Delta pays off” from 06/11/2010 on www.oregonlive.com.
    2
      See “Pittsburgh could foreshadow future of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport” from
11/22/2009 on www.cleveland.com
    3
      See “Intense competition boosts airport incentives to airlines” at:
http://www.tampabay.com/news/business/airlines/intense-competition-boosts-airport-incentives-to-
airlines/1042035
    4
      McAllister, Brad, ”Regaining stability,” Airport Business Magazine, september 15, 2011 at:
http://www.airportbusiness.com/print/Airport-Business-Magazine/Regaining-stability/137314
    5
      Several channels could explain the productivity effect of air transport. First, air travel facilitates
face-to-face communication, which is essential for innovation, technology diffusion, and for coordination
and efficient allocation of resources (see, among others, Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998; Autretsch and
Feldman, 1996; Hovhannisyan and Keller, 2011). Second, the availability of air transport reduces
transaction costs, increasing the openness of a region to trade (Poole, 2010; Cristea, 2011). This in turn
fosters labor and industrial specialization at micro level, as well as product diversification at regional
level, leading to increased aggregate productivity (Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman and Schleifer, 1992;
Feenstra and Kee, 2006). Finally, air traffic could raise regional productivity via agglomeration effects
and the associated positive externalities (see, among others, Rosenthal and Strange, 2004). The location
decision of exporters and multinational firm headquarters is influenced by the quality of air services
(Lovely, Rosenthal, and Sharma, 2005; Bel and Fageda, 2008). At the same time, both types of firms
are shown to exert positive spillovers on local businesses, further affecting productivity (Blomstrom
and Kokko, 1998; Arnold, Javorcik and Mattoo, 2011). Our intention in this study is to identify
an aggregate net effect of air traffic on urban development, working in part through either of these
productivity effects.



                                                     2
relationship that they can affect, when other factors out of their control may be driving
the positive correlation.
       Estimating the economic benefits of infrastructure projects in general, and of air
transport in particular, is difficult because there is a strong interdependence between
infrastructure investments and regional development. Communities that benefit from
more rapid economic growth tend to also invest more in infrastructure, and in turn
the stock of infrastructure further stimulates regional development. Thus, disentangling
the causal effect of transportation on economic growth from the natural tendency of
infrastructure to increase with the growth of a region is not easy.
       Perhaps due to the difficulty of identification, there are only a couple prior studies
examining the effect of air transport on regional growth. Brueckner (2003) estimates the
effect of airline traffic on employment using cross-sectional data at the Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Area (MSA) level and finds that a 10 percent increase in passenger enplanements
leads to approximately 1 percent increase in MSA employment, with service sectors re-
sponsible for most of the effect. Brueckner uses hub status of an airport, as well as the
MSAs centrality within the U.S. and proximity to the nearest large metropolitan area, to
instrument for the endogeneity of the level of air transport services. However, hub status
may be endogenous with current and expected growth of an MSA, while geographic fac-
tors may affect general economic growth of a region just as much as air service.6 Green
(2007) exploits time series rather than cross-sectional data variation to estimate the ef-
fect of air transport infrastructure on regional growth. Using information on 83 MSAs,
he regresses passenger air traffic levels in 1990 on subsequent decennial population and
employment growth, and finds that a 10 percent increase in boardings per capita gener-
ate a 3.9 percent higher population growth and 2.8 percent higher employment growth
for the period 1990-2000. However, economic outcomes such as population, employment,
and even air service are persistent processes. This too makes identification difficult in
the absence of any major exogenous and long-lasting shock to the airline service.
       To overcome these challenges in identifying the relationship between air services
and regional economic growth, we employ a quasi-natural experiment that stems from
the dramatic changes in the aviation network following the U.S. Deregulation Act of
1978. This policy change marked the switch of the U.S. aviation industry from tight
government regulation to free market. Importantly, it saw the swift dissolution of a
regulatory environment that implicitly subsidized (and hence oversupplied) air service
   6
     There is a significant economic geography literature showing how spatial location influences regional
development and income growth via market access or market potential effects. Among others, see for
example Redding and Venables (2004) for a cross-country analysis, or Hanson (2005) and Head and
Mayer (2006) for a regional analysis.


                                                    3
to small and medium communities in the U.S., at the expense of larger cities.7 As we
show below, deregulation led to a swift reversal of this distortion, with dramatic average
declines in air service to small and medium communities, while it increased for large
cities. Interestingly, an unanticipated yet permanent response of air carriers to industry
deregulation was a complete reconfiguration of their aviation networks into hub-and-
spoke systems. This endogenous response of airlines led to even further disproportionate
increases in routes at large airports, which were often chosen to serve as hubs in the post-
deregulation period, and accentuated the systematic effects of deregulation on air service
to large cities versus other communities in the U.S.. Thus, we exploit the systematic
heterogeneous changes in air service to communities from the exogenous deregulation
shock to infer the effect of air service on regional growth.
       In particular, using historical data on economic and aviation indicators for 296
metropolitan areas in three distinct years spanning the period 1969-1991, we exploit
differential changes in long-run growth rates before and after the quasi-natural policy
experiment to identify any systematic changes in the rate of economic growth that can
be directly attributed to the exogenous changes in air traffic post-deregulation. By
exploiting time series variation within each metropolitan area, our econometric strategy
is able to appropriately control for unobservable location specific factors, as well as for
differences in the natural rate of development for communities of all sizes. This way
we can contrast the relative economic performance of regions that experience abnormal
(high or low) changes in their aviation network with regions that are identical in all
other respects.
       Our analysis brings robust evidence for a direct effect of air service on regional
development. We find that, for a given MSA, increasing the growth rate of air passenger
traffic from the 25th to the 75th percentile level leads on average to a 0.14 percent
increase in the annual population growth rate. To put this result in perspective, the
estimate accounts for 11.7 percent of the average annual rate of population growth
observed across the sampled MSAs over the period 1969-1991. In the same manner, we
find that increasing air traffic from the 25th to the 75th percentile leads on average to
a 0.20 percent increase in the annual growth rate of income (representing 13.2 percent
of the observed average income growth rate for the same 23-year period), and a 0.31
percent increase in the annual employment growth rate (which represents 11 percent of
the observed average employment growth rate) for a given MSA. Some differences can
   7
     The only major form of regulation in the industry that remained was the Essential Air Service
program which mandated service to very small communities. This program has been quite limited in
the communities it covers, and currently provides services to approximately 3000 passengers a day



                                                4
be observed across communities based on their average size, with medium size MSAs
benefiting to a lesser degree from air traffic growth. When estimating the employment
effects by sector, we find that wholesale and retail industries are the ones experiencing
significant growth effects.
       This paper contributes to a recent literature evaluating the economic impact of
transport infrastructure projects. A prior literature examines the more aggregate re-
lationship between public spending and economic growth, finding mixed results (see,
for example, Aschauer (1989), Munnell (1992), and Evans and Karras (1994)).8 The
availability of historical data on road or railroad construction at detailed geographical
level has spurred a number of new recent studies on the impact of infrastructure, though
almost all of these papers are focused on how infrastructure affects trade between re-
gions, not regional growth, which is the focus of our paper. Michaels (2008) provides
evidence that rural counties with access to interstate highways experience an increase
in trade-related activities such as trucking and retail sales. He also shows that through
increased trade, highways lead to a significant increase in the demand for skilled la-
bor in skill abundant counties, contributing to the increasing skill premium. Duranton
Morrow and Turner (2011) bring additional evidence for the role of interstate highways
in determining the specialization of urban locations in sectors producing and trading
heavy goods. Sheard (2012) uses the 1944 Civil Aeronautics Administration national
airport plan as an instrument for current day airport sizes to examine its impact on the
composition of industrial activity.9 Donaldson (2010) examines how the introduction of
railroads in India differentially affected incomes and prices across regions.
       Our paper also relates to the broader literature on the determinants of urban
growth. In two related papers, Glaeser, Kallal, Sheinkman and Shleifer (1992) and
Glaeser, Sheinkman and Shleifer (1995) set the theoretical framework for analyzing the
determinants of urban growth. While we build our model from the same set-up, they
employ it to examine the effect of agglomeration economies and human capital as de-
terminants of growth. A study closer to ours is Duranton and Turner (2012), which
examines the causal relation between road transportation and city growth. The study
finds large and significant effects of highway kilometers on employment and population
growth, focusing particularly on intra-city transportation investments as main determi-
   8
     Notable exceptions are Fernald (1999), who shows that when the stock of transportation infrastruc-
ture increases, productivity growth tends to rise relative to the average in vehicle-intensive industries,
and fall in non-vehicle intensive sectors, and Chandra and Thompson (2000), who find that counties
crossed by the interstate highway gain in output and earnings at the expense of adjacent counties.
   9
     Note that Sheard’s instrument is appropriately exogenous to long-run changes in industrial com-
position of U.S. communities (the focus of his study), but would not likely be exogenous to long-run
growth in population and incomes of U.S. communities, which is the focus of our paper.


                                                    5
nants of growth.
     The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the
context and consequences of the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978. Section 3 lays out the
theoretical framework and estimation methodology. Section 4 presents the data sources
and discusses the results, while section 5 concludes.


2    The 1978 Aviation Deregulation and Its Appro-
     priateness as a Quasi-Natural Experiment
The 1978 Aviation Deregulation in the United States was a significant policy change that
led to swift and dramatic changes in the aviation industry. Important for our purposes,
the evidence suggests that it had a number of features, which make it an appropriate
quasi-natural experiment.
      First, the regulatory regime had clearly and systematically distorted air service
patterns from what one would see in a free market after deregulation. Before the 1978
aviation deregulation, the development and activity of the airline industry was closely
overseen by the Civil Aeronautic Board (CAB). The CAB was in charge of certifying and
approving new entrant carriers, and assigning them precise point-to-point routes that
they had to operate at predetermined airfares. Except for aircraft capacity and flight
frequency, all operation decisions, such as entry and exit, route allocations, intensity of
market competition, and price levels, were centrally determined by the CAB (Morrison
and Winston, 1986). Entry was tightly controlled, certification being awarded on a per-
case basis and only for operating specific routes (Bailey et al., 1985). Rather than aim
for industry efficiency, CAB regulations strived to preserve the well-being of all existing
airlines. It did so by suppressing market competition and favoring route subsidization
(Dempsey, 1987; GAO, 1996). At the peak of the government intervention, in the early
1970s, CAB ceased to certify new carriers entirely, and even rejected requests by existing
carriers to enter new city-routes (Borenstein, 1992).
      A second important feature of the deregulation was how quickly significant trans-
formations were taking place, as “policy changes followed one another with dazzling
rapidity” (Bailey et al., 1985, p. 37). Facing an economic recession, the Ford admin-
istration had an economic summit in 1974, where a consensus was reached to tackle
federal deregulation. The CAB became an immediate focus and a Senate hearing in
1975 brought much economic evidence to bear that regulation had restricted pricing
and entry to the detriment of consumers. When the Carter administration came in


                                            6
1976 supporting deregulation, there was virtually full political support and the Airline
Deregulation Act (ADA) was passed in 1978. In fact, the CAB began significant reforms
already by 1977, allowing “pro forma approval of discount fares” and granting “permis-
sive route authority, which would allow a carrier to enter and exit from a route without
CAB intervention” (Bailey et al., 1985, p. 33). The ADA specified full deregulation by
January 1, 1983, but the CAB already had granted airlines complete route flexibility
within a year of the act and new airlines were entering the market.
       A third important feature is that the ultimate effects of the deregulation were
uncertain and the industry responded in a number of unexpected ways. The rapidity
of the deregulation process, as described above, made the effects unlikely to be antic-
ipated and, therefore, exogenous to regional development. The expectation was that
the aviation industry would become much more competitive after deregulation, leading
to greater efficiencies and lower prices for air travel. The contestable market theory,
combined with the lack of evidence in support of economies of scale in the aviation in-
dustry, diminished any concerns about anti-competitive effects in markets dominated by
single carriers (Borenstein, 1992). While there is significant evidence of lower general
prices and competition after deregulation, in many ways, the actual transformations
that swept the aviation industry since the deregulation had been surprising, both be-
cause of “mistaken expectation and unforeseen outcomes” (Kahn, 1988). For example,
one unanticipated response by airlines was the switch from point-to-point service to a
hub-and-spoke operation network. This transformation increased industry efficiency be-
cause of better capacity utilization, i.e., higher load factors per flight (Borenstein and
Rose, 2011).
       A final feature of deregulation that is fundamental to our identification strategy
in examining the impact on regional growth is that there was systematic heterogeneity
in the shocks to air service across local communities in the United States. The CAB
undertook many efforts to ensure service to smaller communities under regulation. In
fact, the Board deliberately set fares above costs in markets of more than 400 miles and
less than the costs in shorter markets (Bailey et al., 1985, p. 20). The loss of this cross-
subsidization of markets was a primary concern of legislators considering deregulation,
as there were real fears that many small (and even medium-sized) communities would
face substantial loss of air service. Ultimately, arguments that commuter air services
would likely take the place of traditional airline service to these communities, as well as
the institution of the Essential Air Service program to directly subsidize air service to
the smallest communities, allowed legislators to back deregulation.10
 10
      Several very small communities did lose air traffic entirely after deregulation. However, the Essential


                                                      7
      In summary, it was well known that the price levels and route allocations set by
the CAB favored small communities, such that they benefited from more airline traffic
than what the market mechanism would have optimally supplied. The reverse is true for
large metropolitan areas: here, the high fares and the suppressed competition hindered
the growth and development of air transport services. What was not anticipated, yet
contributed further to the systematic changes in air service by city size, was the develop-
ment of the hub and spoke system. This new pattern of networking air services allowed
more frequent departures and more flexibility in flight schedules from hub airports, at
the cost of an increase in the average number of connections and travel distance for
itineraries originating in smaller airports. Thus, the development of the hub-and-spoke
network led to a decrease in the number of flights and nonstop destinations in small
and some medium size communities (Dempsey, 1987), but to a much larger increase
in service at large metropolitan areas, many of which being selected as hub locations.
(GAO, 1996)
      The evidence for this systematic change in air traffic patterns across city sizes is
quite clear in the data. Figure 1 provides a histogram capturing the absolute difference
in the annualized growth rate of air traffic in the period after deregulation (1977-1991)
relative to the decade before (1969-1977), averaged across metropolitan areas of different
size categories. The histogram suggests that small communities witnessed the largest
slowdown in the growth of traffic after deregulation, evidence that the CAB strategy of
route cross-subsidization led to an overproduction of air services in small communities
prior to 1978, and that any measures to mitigate the deregulation reversal of this trend
were not significant. At the same time, large metropolitan areas benefited from an
increase in the rate of air passenger growth following the aviation deregulation, consistent
with the restricted capacity and high price mark-ups imposed by the CAB prior to 1978.
      A similar take-away message is depicted in Figure 2, which provides a detailed
view of the average annual changes in air passenger flows in the years before and after
the deregulation. Even when expressing air passenger traffic in levels, it is clear from
the trend lines how prior to 1978 small MSAs benefited from regulatory support at
the expense of large MSAs, but suffered a bigger shock to air service after the full
implementation of free market conditions. Our main focus in this paper is to investigate
the extent to which these systematic changes in air traffic across city sizes following
deregulation contribute to differential changes in population, income, and employment
Air Service (EAS) program allowed many others to keep air connectivity with the nearest hub airport.
For more information on costs and benefits of the EAS Program, see the General Accounting Office
(GAO, 2000) report, among others.



                                                 8
across regions.
       Finally, there are two major events that happened about the same time as the
deregulation of the aviation market, and that one may be concerned would confound
our ability to identify the effects of airline deregulation on regional growth.
       The first is the 1978-9 oil price shocks in the aftermath of the deregulation of
the aviation market. If anything, we believe that the oil price shocks strengthen our
identification strategy as it also contributed to the greater loss of air service by smaller
cities. With the development of jet planes in the 1950s and 1960s, the U.S. government
offered high subsidies towards the purchase of larger aircraft (Bailey et al., 1985, p. 112).
This stimulus led to the wide spread adoption of larger jet aircraft in the industry, even
for servicing smaller cities. In fact, the percent of aircraft in local fleets that were turbo
prop or piston powered dropped from 99 percent to just 35 percent by 1976 (Bailey et
al., 1985, p. 113). On a time line starting in 1950, alongside the price trend for crude
oil, Figure 3 marks the date of the first flight for the most common jet aircraft models.
It is clear from the trends that the commercialization of jet aircrafts overlapped with a
period of persistently low oil prices, and the development of ever-larger jets tailed off for
a significant period after the oil price shocks of the mid- and late-1970s.
       Most importantly for our analysis, the timing of the 1978-9 oil price shock hit
the small communities especially hard, where the high cost of jet service could not be
supported by the local demand for air travel. And local air carriers could now freely
exit unsustainable routes and relocate equipment to larger, denser markets. Thus, the
interaction between aircraft innovations and oil price shocks at the time of the industry
deregulation provides additional motivation to view the policy change as an appealing
quasi-natural experiment.
       A second series of events that may be of concern for our estimation strategy is the
full or partial deregulation of other industries during the same period – most notably
the trucking and railroad industries.11 However, unlike the airline industry, we are
not aware of any evidence that suggests these deregulation events led to systematic
heterogeneous changes in activity across regions of different population sizes. While
increased competition and improved cost efficiency in the absence of regulation have
favored industry expansion and a rapid output growth, these trends have been observed
nationwide. This point is essential for our identification strategy. It implies that any
systematic deviations from national trends in local economic growth rates pre- versus
post- the 1978 aviation deregulation that we find across different-sized communities
  11
    Winston (1993) porvides a comprehensive survey of the regulatory reforms implemented in the U.S.
at the end of 1970s and beginning of 1980s, including the deregulation of the transport sector.



                                                 9
cannot be attributed to regulatory initiatives happening simultaneously in other sectors.


3      Framework and Empirical Strategy
This section presents a simple framework that formalizes the process of urban growth.
We follow the set-up in Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer (1995), which we amend by
allowing air services to enter both as a productivity shifter and as a local amenity. The
main aim here is to provide guidance for the empirical analysis. We use the derived
structural equation to obtain an estimation equation and then discuss its virtues in
terms of econometric identification.

      3.1. Set-up
Each metropolitan area is viewed as a separate open economy that shares a common
(national) stock of capital and labor endowments. Free factor mobility ensures that
capital and labor will be distributed across MSAs in equilibrium such that the rental rate
and per-capita income, adjusted for local amenities, are equalized. A direct implication
of this equilibrium outcome is that neither exogenous changes in labor supply, nor in
saving rates, can be used as explanations for differences in urban growth. Instead, factors
rooted in local fundamentals should be considered. In that respect, a common view in
the regional development literature is to assume that MSAs differ only in the level of
productivity and the quality of life determined by local amenities.
      Let the total output in a metropolitan area be given by:

                                          Yit = Ait f (Lit )                                     (1)

where Ait represents the level of productivity in the metropolitan area i at time t, and Lit
measures the population of the MSA i at time t.12 f (.) is assumed to be a Cobb-Douglas
production function that is common across urban communities:

                                           f (Lit ) = Lαit                                       (2)

       Individuals derive utility Uit from the labor income they earn, denoted Wit , and
  12
    The production function can be extended to include other factors of production as long as they
are local and immobile, such as non-tradeable capital or government spending on local infrastructure,
urban transportation, etc. This extension is straightforward but is not necessary for our empirical
work, so we prefer to keep the framework simple. Given that our identification strategy accounts for
location specific time trends, under a constant rate of capital accumulation over time, the impact of
non-tradeable capital and local infrastructure is implicitly controlled for.


                                                 10
the quality of life they enjoy in their community, labeled Λit .13 The two components are
assumed to enter the utility function multiplicatively:

                                                Uit = Wit Λit                                               (3)

     Workers get paid the value of their marginal product (with output price normalized
to one), which implies that labor income is given by:

                                              Wit = αAit Lα−1
                                                          it                                                (4)

     The quality of life term, Λit , captures a host of location specific factors. It is
assumed to decrease in the population size of the metropolitan area, mainly because of
the impact of size on housing prices, traffic congestion, criminality, etc. It also varies
with several other factors that are exogenous to the production technology such as, for
example, local amenities. We summarize these factors, for now, by the vector Qit . That
is:
                                      Λit = L−δ
                                              it Qit                                   (5)

where δ > 0.
      Free mobility of individuals ensures that in equilibrium utility is constant across
space at a given point in time, i.e., Uit = Ut , ∀i. This also implies that changes in utility
over time happen at the same rate across MSAs. Using equations (3)-(5), the following
must hold for each metropolitan area:
                 U                 W                    Λ          
                   t+1                   it+1                    it+1
           log               = log                  + log
                   Ut                  Wit                   Λit
                                     A                                    L                 Q      
                                        it+1                                 it+1                it+1
                             = log                  + (α − δ − 1) log                   + log               (6)
                                        Ait                                  Lit                 Qit

where the left hand side of equation (6) is identical across all MSAs. For this identity
to hold for all i, it must be the case that population growth in every metropolitan area
adjusts each period such that, given the productivity growth and any changes in local
amenities, utility grows at a rate that is common nationwide. Therefore, from equation
  13
     It is possible to extend the utility function to include consumption of intra-city transport (i.e., com-
muting) and consumption of land. Doing so would introduce congestion effects and rising rental rates
for communities that witness a rapid growth in population and per-capita income. These disutility ef-
fects associated with economic growth provide additional counter-balance against regional expansionary
forces.




                                                        11
(6) we can express the rate of population growth as:
                        L                    1   h     A             Q     i
                             it+1                           it+1           it+1
                  log                   =            log           + log           + κt                (7)
                            Lit              1−α+δ         Ait             Qit

with κt a constant.14
      Re-writing the labor income in equation (4) as an annual growth rate and substi-
tuting for population growth using equation (7), we can derive the following expression
for the income growth at the MSA level:
                  W                 1   h      A                     Q     i
                     it+1                           it+1                   it+1
            log                 =          δ log           + (α − 1) log           + ωt                (8)
                   Wit              1−α+δ          Ait                     Qit

with ωt ≡ (α − 1)κt a constant.
       Most empirical studies on regional development and urban growth focus on iden-
tifying the determinants of population and income growth. For equations (7) and (8)
to serve such a purpose, one needs to specify the stochastic process of productivity as
well as the exogenous factors that define the appealing characteristics of an urban area.
It is customary to include the initial (base year) conditions as the main determinants
of the subsequent growth in productivity and quality of life, respectively. Of particular
interest to this paper is the provision of air transport services, which we expect to have a
direct effect on both the local productivity growth, as well as on the valuation consumers
attach to that location.15 Thus, we assume that:
                          A                                         AIR      
                                  it+1                                   it+1
                    log                      = (Xit )0 γ1 + β1 log+ νit+1                              (9)
                          Ait                            AIRit
                        Q                            AIR     
                          it+1           0                 it+1
                    log          = (Xit ) γ2 + β2 log             + υit+1                             (10)
                          Qit                            AIRit

where Xit is a vector of characteristics for MSA i observed in the base year t 16 , and
AIRit denotes the volume of airline traffic in the metropolitan area i at time t (a proxy
for the local aviation network).
      Substituting equations (9) and (10) into (7) and (8) respectively, replacing the
structural coefficients with reduced form ones, and relabeling the variables’ growth rates
  14
                                   
      Formally, κt ≡ log Ut+1 /Ut /(α − δ − 1).
   15
      While counting air services as part of a location’s amenities seems obvious, their impact on regional
productivity may be less transparent. The discussion in footnote 5 suggests several channels that
could explain the productivity effect of air transport. They include technology diffusion, trade and
agglomeration effects.
   16
      The fact that the same vector Xit determines both the productivity and life quality growth rates
is not restrictive as long as coefficients in both β and γ vectors are allowed to take zero values.



                                                            12
with the corresponding small letters for notational simplicity, we get:

                           log lit+1 = (Xit )0 γ + β log(airit+1 ) + εit+1                           (11)
                          log wit+1 = (Xit )0 γ̃ + β̃ log(airit+1 ) + ξit+1                          (12)

where yit+1 ≡ Yit+1 /Yit denotes the growth rate of variable Y, with Y ∈ {L, W, AIR};
and β, γ, β̃, γ̃ are parameters derived from the structure of the model.17

       3.2. Estimation Strategy
Our interest lies in estimating the net effect of air services on regional growth by taking
equations (11) and (12) to the data. The identification strategy exploits the structural
change in the domestic aviation network induced by the industry deregulation of 1978.
This policy change triggered unanticipated and permanent shocks to the regional airline
traffic growth (i.e., airit+1 ). In particular, metropolitan areas that had enjoyed an
excess supply of air services during the pre-deregulation period as a consequence of the
imposed regulations may have lost service after deregulation (or at least seen a much
more sluggish growth in flights post-deregulation). Similarly, regions that had been
undersupplied relative to their potential need, may have witnessed a significant increase
in traffic growth post deregulation. The empirical test we perform essentially evaluates
whether the differential changes in air passenger traffic growth across metropolitan areas
are systematically related to differences in population and income growth.
       Estimating the growth regression models given by equations (11) and (12) raises
several issues. First, for properly identifying the effect of air traffic on regional devel-
opment, one needs to fully specify all the fundamental determinants of urban growth,
including factors affecting local changes in productivity or quality of life (i.e., the Xit
variables in equations (11) and (12)). However, many such determinants may be un-
observable or very hard to measure over longer periods of time. Fortunately, we can
overcome this challenge by using MSA specific effects. Since our identification strategy
exploits the time dimension of the data, we can conveniently remove any time invari-
ant determinants of urban growth (or time-varying ones that affect equally all MSAs in
the sample). Thus, variables such as initial economic conditions, area and geographic
location, climate and natural resource endowments, socio-cultural characteristics, all
fall in this category of time-invariant determinants of growth. Unless either of these
variables has a differential effect on regional growth over the sample period (i.e., have
  17
    Formally, γ = (γ1 + γ2 )/(1 − α + σ); β = (β1 + β2 )/(1 − α + σ); γ̃ = (δγ1 + (σ − 1)γ2 )/(1 − α + σ);
and β̃ = (δβ1 + (σ − 1)β2 )/(1 − α + σ).



                                                   13
time-dependent elasticities), we can safely rely on the MSA fixed effects to completely
remove any location specific trends.
      The second issue comes from the fact that the economic outcome variables mea-
suring regional growth, such as population, per-capita income or employment, tend to
change slowly over time. This means that long run growth rates may be the most
appropriate metrics for capturing regional development. Unlike year-on-year changes,
taking long differences of the data is more appropriate for correctly identifying any per-
sistent, long-term relation between the variables of interest in the presence of significant
autocorrelation (Bertrand and Duflo, 2004).
      For these reasons, in our estimation we consider two subsample periods indexed
by s: one that defines the time interval before the aviation deregulation, i.e., 1969-1977,
and one defining the time interval following the policy change, i.e., 1977-1991.18 Let
the indicator variable “Post” define the two time periods, with Post = 0 denoting the
pre-deregulation period and Post = 1 the post-deregulation period, respectively. Then,
based on the discussion above, the empirical specification corresponding to equations
(11) and (12) respectively, can be written as follows:

                         log yis = αi + β log(airis ) + P osts + is                               (13)

where y ∈ {l, w} stands for annualized growth rates for population, employment or per-
capita income, respectively, calculated over each time period s 19 ; αi indexes the MSA
fixed effect and accounts for pre-deregulation trends; and P osts acts as a time effect
and captures any nation-wide macroeconomic factors specific to the post-deregulation
period that may influence regional development. We expect the coefficient β on air
traffic growth to be positive in a regression explaining population, per-capita income or
employment growth rates across metropolitan areas.
       It is worth pointing out however that a double-differencing of the data – first,
to construct the long run growth rates, and second, to identify the main coefficient
  18
    We choose the year 1977 as the cutoff point rather than 1978, which is when the Airline Deregulation
Act entered into effect, mainly because we want to calculate long-run changes in air traffic before any
major changes take place in terms of price levels or routes operated.
 19
    To be specific, we compute the annualized growth rate y ∈ {l, w} as follows:
                                        1/8
                                Yi,1977
                               
                                               , if time period s is 1969-1977
                                  Y
                         yis =  i,1969 1/14
                                Yi,1991
                               
                                                , if time period s is 1977-1991
                                  Yi,1977


where the capital letter Y ∈ {L, W } denotes the level of the variables of interest, population and
per-capita income, respectively.



                                                  14
of interest separately from MSA fixed effects – may be very demanding in terms of
data variation. In particular, if the exogenous shocks are not large enough to generate
substantial variation in the variables of interest, or if the time period considered is not
long enough to allow the regional outcome variables to fully adjust to the new equilibrium
levels following the policy shock, then any useful variation in the data may be swept
away. Yet Figure 2 provides convincing evidence that, at least for the case of air traffic,
this should not be a problem.
       One may still be concerned that the empirical specification in equation (13) may
suffer from potential omitted variable bias. This becomes an issue to the extent that
there are determinants of urban growth, Xi , that go through systematic changes dur-
ing the same time period as the aviation deregulation. For example, it is customary
for economic growth regressions to include variables that control for initial economic
conditions, such as, population, income level, factor endowments or industrial special-
ization. Moreover, it is possible that their effect on regional growth varies over the two
time periods in a way that is location-specific and thus not captured by the time fixed
effects (i.e., P osts ). If that is the case, then the level of these initial condition variables
may still be an important determinant of the differential growth rates of population and
per-capita income across MSAs and over time. If ignored, these location-specific time-
varying effects may incorrectly load on our coefficient of interest β and bias upwards the
estimated effect of air traffic on urban growth.
       To account for such systematic changes in population, per-capita income or em-
ployment growth, which may occur at the time of the aviation deregulation, but are
unrelated to any changes in air traffic growth, we augment the baseline regression model
as follows:

                log yis = αi + β log(airis ) + (Xi ∗ P osts )0 θ + P osts + is             (14)

where Xi now captures any MSA specific characteristics that could affect urban growth
differentially across the two time periods. In the estimation exercises, we will allow
the growth rates for the dependent variable to vary across periods with the MSA size
category (i.e., small, medium or large metropolitan areas), to vary with the MSA level of
population or income in the base year 1969, as well as with the industrial composition of
an MSA in the base year 1969 (i.e., employment shares in manufacturing, services, retail
and wholesale sectors). This means that the identification of our coefficient of interest
β comes from comparing how differential changes in air traffic post-deregulation affect
urban growth across those MSAs that otherwise should have the same time-varying


                                               15
growth paths across the considered sample period.


4      Data and Estimation Results
4.1. Data Description
The data used in this study correspond to years 1969, 1977 and 1991, and are collected
from various sources. The beginning and end years of the sample period are dictated by
data availability, as well as the distance in time away from the policy shock of the 1978
aviation deregulation. The data, collected at city or county level for the 48 contiguous
U.S. states, are aggregated to the level of the metropolitan statistical area (MSA).
This seems the most appropriate spatial unit for evaluating the economic impact of an
airport’s transport services.
      The air passenger transport data are collected by the Department of Transporta-
tion (DOT). For the early years, 1969 and 1977, we get the data from the Airport
Activity Statistics of Certificated Route Air Carriers, published by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). We restrict attention to scheduled service and, for each city or
airport in the U.S., we record the total annual number of enplaned passengers. Starting
with 1991, aviation datasets have become available electronically and have improved
much in their level of detail. We use the dataset T3 from the U.S. Air Carrier Airport
Activity Statistics database provided by the Bureau of Transport Statistics (BTS), and
supplement it with Schedule T1 from the Small Air Carrier Statistics database in order
to construct the total annual number of enplaned passengers by U.S. airport.20 We map
all U.S. airports or city locations into the corresponding counties using information from
the FAA, and then map counties into MSAs based on the concordance available from
the U.S. Census Bureau.
      Data on population and per-capita income is provided by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis at the county level, which we then aggregate to the MSA level.21 Employment
data - total and by major sectors (i.e., manufacturing, services, wholesale, retail, con-
struction, transportation and utilities) - is available from the County Business Patterns
(CBP) provided by the U.S. Census.22
      After combining all sources of data over the three selected years 1969, 1977 and
  20
     We benefited from guidance from the BTS representatives in choosing the appropriate datasets and
constructing airport traffic statistics that are consistent over the three disparate years.
  21
     Nominal per-capita income rates are converted into real values using the consumer price index
(CPI) series provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
  22
     The U.S. Census provides electronic data on CD-ROMs only starting from year 1986. For some
years prior to that, including 1969 and 1977, the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) provides CBP data files and this is what we use here.


                                                 16
1991, and screening the resulting sample for potential outliers, we end up with a sample
of 296 metropolitan areas.23 Each of these MSAs hosts at least an airport that has been
operative in every one of the three years spanning the 23 year period. The summary
statistics on the variables of interest, including the constructed annual growth rates for
the 1969-1977 and 1977-1991 periods, are reported in Table 1. An important thing to
notice is the substantial variation in the growth rates over the two periods, especially
with respect to passenger traffic. This gives us confidence that there is sufficient time
variation in the data to be usefully exploited in our model.
       The specifications we estimate are given by equation (14), which is provided in
its baseline form in equation (13). We use population and employment as measures of
labor force, and per-capita income as proxy for wage growth generated by productivity
effects. Before discussing the estimation results, Table 2 provides correlation coefficients
between several sets of variables. Panel A reports the correlation between changes in
growth rates over the two time periods for the economic outcomes of interest and for
passenger traffic across the two periods. Except for the correlation between population
and employment, and between income and employment, the differences in growth rates
are not highly correlated, suggestive of sufficient differentiation in development patterns
across metropolitan areas. This is in contrast to the correlation coefficients between
the level of these variables. As noticed in Panel B of Table 2, scale differences across
regions are large enough to make the volume of air traffic highly correlated with the size
of population and employment.
       Two additional things are worth mentioning here. First, given the high correlation
between population and employment in 1969, we do not include both variables as con-
trols for initial conditions. Second, given the significant drop in correlation coefficients
moving from levels to differences in growth rates (Panel B versus A), we can reasonably
argue that most of the factors that simultaneously determine both travel and regional
economic agglomerations are eliminated, diminishing endogeneity concerns. More evi-
dence on the reduced concern for endogeneity comes from the relatively low correlation
between first period growth rates in economic outcome variables and subsequent period
growth in air traffic, as seen from Panel C of Table 2. In particular, the correlation coef-
ficient between population growth in the pre-deregulation period and passenger growth
post deregulation is 0.31 (absent any other controls). In the event that this may still
reflect potential endogeneity in the differential growth of air passenger traffic, we revisit
this concern in one of the robustness exercises.
  23
    In obtaining the estimation sample, we have dropped the top and bottom 1 percent of MSAs based
on (per-period) passenger growth rates in order to remove any outliers.



                                               17
       4.2. Estimation Results
       Table 3 reports the results from estimating equation (14) with population growth
as the regional economic outcome. The specification in the first column includes only the
air traffic variable of interest, in addition to time and MSA fixed effects. This corresponds
to the baseline model formalized by equation (13). The specification controls for any
systematic differences in the annual population growth rates across metropolitan areas
and also for any post-deregulation macroeconomic shocks that may affect population
growth nation-wide.
       The growth of air passenger traffic has a positive and significant effect on the
rate of population growth. This result however, while significant, does not take into
account the possibility that MSA population growth rates may change following the
1978 aviation deregulation for reasons unrelated to changes in air passenger traffic but
related to particular MSA characteristics. It is possible that the growth trajectory of
small MSAs evolves differentially over time compared to medium or large MSAs in the
sample. For example, the 1979 oil crisis may have had a more severe or more prolonged
effect on small versus large metropolitan areas. Such unobserved factors could bias the
estimated coefficient upwards, explaining the positive and significant effect of air traffic
on regional growth. To remove this concern, we first include interaction terms between
the deregulation period dummy and the size category of an MSA (small, medium or
large) in the regression.24 This implicitly controls for any differential trends in the
rate of population growth across the three MSA size categories. Column 2 reports the
results. The effect of air services on population growth decreases in magnitude, but
remains highly significant.
       To allow for even more flexibility in population growth paths across MSAs, in col-
umn 3 we interact the post-deregulation time dummy with MSA characteristics capturing
economic conditions at the start of the sample period. In particular, we allow MSAs
with different population and income levels in 1969 to respond differently to unobserved
shocks occurring in the post-1977 time period. However, the industrial composition of a
city’s activities is a significant determinant of urban growth. Glaeser et al. (1992) found
evidence that inter-industry knowledge spillovers facilitated by a diverse industrial base
explain economic agglomerations. At the same time, the industrial composition of a
region also determines its average level of human capital. More importantly, Brueckner
(2003) provides evidence from a cross-section of MSAs that service activities benefit more
  24
    The small, medium and large MSA categories are defined by splitting the sample distribution of
1969 population levels in three equal sized parts.



                                               18
than manufacturing from the availability and quality of air services. Therefore, we also
allow post-deregulation growth rates to differ according to the industrial composition of
MSAs at the beginning of the sample period. Essentially, this means that we identify
the coefficient of interest by comparing communities with identical characteristics at the
beginning of the sample period, and exactly the same time growth paths until the 1978
aviation deregulation, when they experience differential shocks to air services with direct
implications for their subsequent population growth rates.
      Column 3 of Table 3 reports the results from this augmented model specification,
which becomes our preferred specification. The coefficient on the variable of interest
remains positive and significant, with a one percent increase in the air traffic growth
rate generating on average a 0.03 percent increase in the annual population growth rate,
or a cumulative 0.60 percent increase over a 20-year period. Increasing the rate of air
passenger traffic growth from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile level (i.e., a 4.6
percent change) leads on average to a 0.14 percent increase in the annual population
growth rate. To put our result in perspective, this estimate represents 11.7 percent of
the average annualized rate of population growth observed across MSAs over the 23-year
sample period.25
      We further verify if the estimated elasticity varies by size category of MSA. Col-
umn 4 reports the specification with the full set of controls for initial conditions, as
well as interaction terms between passenger growth and MSA size category. While the
interaction terms are negative, they are imprecisely estimated, suggesting no significant
differences in the effect of air traffic growth on population growth across MSAs.
      Overall, the estimates in Table 3 provide robust evidence that regional growth,
as measured by population size, is directly affected by the availability of air services.
Next, we investigate whether per-capita income responds in a similar matter. If air
transport is an important factor of productivity growth, then the theory predicts it
should directly affect per-capita income growth. Table 4 reports the estimation results
following the same model specifications as in Table 3. In all specifications, the impact
of air traffic on per-capita income growth is positive and significant. The magnitude of
the effects decreases as we mitigate the potential for omitted variable bias by controlling
for simultaneous changes in growth rates post-deregulation. Based on the preferred
specification reported in column 3, increasing the air passenger growth rate from the
25th to the 75th percentile leads to a 0.20 percent increase in the annual rate of per-
capita income growth on average. Given an annual income growth rate of 1.53 percent
  25
    The average population growth rate over the sample period 1969-1991 is equal to 1.18 percent per
year.



                                                19
for the average MSA over the sample period 1969-1991, our estimate corresponds to 13.2
percent of the observed average per-capita income growth rate. These effects are bigger
for small and large MSAs (see column 4), corresponding to 18 percent of the observed
average income growth rate.
      While there are several reasons why population growth may be preferred to em-
ployment as an indicator of regional growth, it is customary in the urban economics
literature to investigate the effects of air traffic on regional employment. Significant
research work has shown that agglomerations, through the positive externalities they
provide, represent a strong force of attraction for future businesses. The effect of air
passenger services on employment growth may operate not only through productivity
effects, but also through quality of life considerations (i.e., urban amenities). Given the
high correlation between employment and population across MSAs, both in terms of
levels and growth rates, we have additional reasons to expect significant effects. The
results reported in Table 5 confirm that. Again, columns 1 to 4 provide the results from
specifications that increase in the set of control variables for the regional growth path.
Focusing on the preferred specification in Column 3, we find that a one percent increase
in regional air traffic leads on average to 0.07 percent increase in annual employment
growth, or a cumulative 1.35 percent growth in employment over a 20-year period. This
result is comparable with estimates in the literature.26 The coefficient is larger in magni-
tude than the effect of traffic growth on population, suggesting that there are additional
channels through which traffic affects employment growth, which operate independent
of population growth.27
      To better understand the economic magnitude of our finding, it is useful to contrast
the estimated effects with actual employment growth rates. Increasing an MSA’s rate
of air traffic growth from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile (i.e., a 4.6 percent
change) leads on average to an increase in employment of 0.31. This corresponds to
11 percent of the average annual employment growth rate observed over the 23-year
  26
      It is useful to note that our estimates in column 4 of Table 5 can be compared with results in the
literature if one assumes that the parameters in the regression model given by equation (14) are the
same underlying parameters as in a regression model expressed in levels, i.e., lnYit = βlnTit + αt +
αi + αi ∗ t + θXi ∗ αt + it . In particular, under this model assumption, our results suggest that a
10 percent increase in the air passenger traffic at a large MSA leads to a 0.9 - 1 percent increase in
employment, which is very similar to the estimate obtained by Brueckner (2003) from a cross-section of
91 predominantly large MSAs. Our results also relate to the findings of Duranton and Turner (2012),
who find that a 10 percent increase in the stock of highways leads to a 1.1 percent growth in employment
over a 20-year period.
   27
      In unreported regressions, we have estimated all the specifications reported in Table 5 with the MSA
population growth rates included as control variables. The estimated effect of air traffic on employment
growth was always positive and significant even net of population growth effects.



                                                   20
sample period. The interaction terms reported in Column 4 reveal that these average
employment effects are heterogeneous across MSA size categories, being mainly driven
by small and large MSAs. In fact, the employment gains to small urban areas from
increased growth in air passenger traffic represent 16 percent of the observed average
sample employment growth rate.28
      To bring further evidence on the employment effects of air traffic, in Table 6 we
investigate which sectors respond in their demand for labor to changes in air traffic.
Studies analyzing the impact of road infrastructure find robust evidence that retail and
wholesale industries benefit the most from improved market access and lower transporta-
tion costs (e.g., Michaels, 2008). Our results reported in Table 6 are consistent with their
findings. The total employment effects previously estimated are mainly driven by growth
in employment in trade-related industries.29

      4.3. Robustness Checks
The identification strategy that we pursue in this study exploits the exogenous variation
in the long run growth rates generated by the quasi-natural experiment of the 1978
Airline Deregulation Act. Working with historical data covering two consecutive long
term periods has the great advantage of being able to exploit the MSA growth rates from
the pre-treatment period as a counterfactual for what subsequent growth rates should
have been in the absence of the policy shock. This estimation approach removes many
unobservable factors that influence both the demand for air transport and the level of
economic development at regional level, mitigating severe endogeneity concerns coming
from simultaneity or omitted variables.
      Nevertheless, one could still worry that previous growth rates in population and
per-capita income may influence air carriers’ decision to supply air service in a region
after deregulation, thus determining the size of passenger traffic post-deregulation. If
such serial correlation is happening in the data and none of the control variables are al-
ready accounting for it, then high population growth during 1969-1977 will be positively
correlated with passenger growth during the subsequent period 1977-1991, as well as
with subsequent urban growth measures. To account for this possibility, as a robustness
check we re-estimate our preferred specification with additional controls for those MSAs
  28
      The small estimates found for medium-sized MSAs should be interpreted with some caution. To
the extent that the insignificant results are a consequence of little data variation available in medium
size MSAs, this finding should not be taken necessarily as saying that medium MSAs do not benefit
from the availability of good air service.
   29
      Given that our sample period starts in 1969, when most interstate highway constructions projects
were already completed, we do not believe that our results capture the effects of road construction.



                                                  21
that witness particularly high or particularly low population growth over the initial
time period. More precisely, within each MSA size category (i.e., small, medium, large)
we identify those communities that belong to the top and bottom quartiles based on
population growth during the period 1969-1977. We then estimate our preferred specifi-
cation using these additional 6 indicator variables interacted with the deregulation time
dummy. This implicitly controls for any systematic differences in growth rates over time
that take place among, for example, small and fast growing MSAs versus large and slow
growing ones. However, the estimate on air traffic growth barely changes in magnitude,
maintaining its sign and significance irrespective of the urban growth measure to be ex-
plained. For this reason and in the interest of space, we only make these results available
upon request.
      Despite the exogeneity of the policy experiment and the range of controls that we
already account for, reverse causality may still be a potential issue with our findings
so far. In particular, it may be the case that positive shocks to income growth that
occur in some communities in the period after the aviation deregulation generate both
an increase in the demand for consumption goods, which triggers employment in retail
and wholesale sectors, as well as an increase in the consumption of air travel services
(viewed as a luxury good). Of course, such a scenario must happen systematically across
certain MSAs to generate the consistently positive and significant results obtained so
far. However, communities in the close proximity of large metropolitan areas may in fact
be a case in point. Economic geography forces such as market and supplier access could
provide possible reasons for why these locations may experience positive income shocks,
and also be strategic locations for wholesale and retail establishments.30 If these positive
income shocks also determine consumers in these locations to enjoy more air travel, then
the effect of air traffic on urban growth must be larger for the MSAs located in the vicinity
of large urban areas. Table 7 reports the results from a specification augmented with
an interaction term between the air traffic growth rate and and indicator for the small
and medium sized MSAs located within 150 miles from a large metropolitan area. In all
specifications the sign of the interaction term is negative although not always precisely
estimated.31 Based on results in columns 2 and 4 respectively, we conclude that there
  30
      Appendix Table A1 provides some evidence that small and medium size MSAs located within 150
miles from large urban areas witness a positive change in income, and a positive yet insignificant change
in population and employment growth over the two time periods. The reported     coefficients  are estimated
                                                               1      y           1     yi,1977 
from a regression model having as dependent variable: ∆yi = 14    log yi,1991
                                                                        i,1977
                                                                                − 8 log yi,1969 , where y ∈
{population, income, employment} and i indexes an MSA.
   31
      The distance between two MSAs is calculated as the straight line distance between the airports
hosted by those cities. Therefore, there is some noise in our constructed distance measures when
compared to actual distances between their centroids. This may lead to attenuation bias in the regression


                                                    22
is some evidence that proximity to large cities makes population and income growth in
small communities less responsive to changes in air passenger traffic.


5     Conclusion and Policy Implications
Public spending on aviation at federal, state and local level have constantly increased
since the beginning of commercial aviation, reaching 10 percent of total public spending
on infrastructure by 2004 (CBO, 2007). To evaluate the benefits of such resource alloca-
tions, it is crucial that we understand the implications of these investments for regional
development and economic growth. Surprisingly, this research question has received
little attention in the empirical literature, to a large extent because of the difficulty in
going beyond correlations to identify actual causation.
       This paper exploits the quasi-natural experiment created by the signing of the 1978
Airline Deregulation Act in order to more rigorously identify the link between airline
traffic and local economic growth. Our findings suggest that exogenous increases in air
service lead to statistically and economically significant increases in regional growth. For
example, increasing the annual growth rate of air passenger traffic in a given MSA from
the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile level leads to additional regional population
growth in a MSA that is equivalent to 11.7 percent of the average annual rate of popu-
lation growth observed over our 23-year sample period (we get similar magnitudes with
respect to air service effects on per-capita income and employment growth). From these
estimates, one can do simple calculations about how much a region may gain in addi-
tional income from increased air service. For example, an average MSA that witnesses
an increase in the air traffic growth rate equivalent to a move from the 25th percentile
to the 75th percentile level observed in our data sample will gain in discounted present
value terms a 2.9 percent increase in its total real GDP over a 15-year period, on av-
erage.32 This estimate is equivalent to a total discounted present value of 209 million
dollars in 1978.
       Our analysis also finds that differences can be observed across communities based
on their average size and geographic location. In particular, medium size MSAs seem
to benefit to a lesser degree from air traffic growth, while smaller communities located
in close proximity of large hub cities appear to be less sensitive to local changes in air
services. We also find evidence for shifts in industrial composition associated with a
estimates.
  32
     This estimate combines the effects of air service on population growth and per-capita income growth
over the same time interval.



                                                  23
growth in aviation networks. When estimating the employment effects by sector, we
find that wholesale and retail industries are the ones experiencing significant growth
effects.
       These findings are important for better understanding the determinants of regional
growth, but also for influencing policies designed to allocate public infrastructure spend-
ing. And while the identification strategy forced us to focus on a period of time when
commercial aviation might not have been as essential to consumers and businesses as
it is today, this observation could only reinforce our results. From this perspective, the
estimated effects may be taken as a lower bound.




References

 [1] Aschauer, David, 1989. Is Public Expenditure Productive? Journal of Monetary
     Economics 23, 177-200.
 [2] Arnold, Jens, Beata S. Javorcik and Aaditya Mattoo, 2011. Does Services Liberal-
     ization Benefit Manufacturing Firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic. Journal
     of International Economics, forthcoming.
 [3] Audretsch, David B. and Maryann P. Feldman, 1996. R&D Spillovers and the Ge-
     ography of Innovation and Production. American Economic Review 86(3), 630-640.
 [4] Bailey, Elizabeth E., David R. Graham and Daniel P. Kaplan, 1985. Deregulating
     the Airlines, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
 [5] Bel, Germa and Xavier Fageda, 2008. Getting There Fast: Globalization, Intercon-
     tinental Flights and Location of Headquarters. Journal of Economic Geography 8,
     471-495.
 [6] Bertrand, Marianne and Esther Duflo, 2004. How Much Should We Trust
     Differences-in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249-
     275.
 [7] Blomstrom, Magnus and Ari Kokko, 1998. Multinational Corporations and
     Spillovers. Journal of Economic Surveys 12(3), 247277.
 [8] Borenstein, Severin, 1992. The Evolution of the U.S. Airline Competition. Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 6(2), 45-73.
 [9] Borenstein, Severin and Nancy Rose, 2011. How Airline Markets Work ... Or Do
     They? Regulatory Reform in the Airline Industry. In Economic Regulation and Its
     Reform: What Have We Learned?, N.L. Rose ed., University of Chicago Press.

                                            24
[10] Brueckner, Jan, 2003. Airline Traffic and Urban Economic Development. Urban
     Studies 40(8), 1455-1469.
[11] Chandra, Amitabh and Eric Thompson, 2000. Does Public Infrastructure Affect
     Economic Activity? Evidence from the Rural Interstate Highway System. Regional
     Science and Urban Economics 30, 457-490.
[12] Congressional Budget Office (CBO), 2007. Trends in Public Spending on Trans-
     portation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2004. Available at:
     www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/85xx/doc8517/08-08-infrastructure.pdf
[13] Cristea, Anca, 2011. Buyer-Seller Relations in International Trade: Evidence from
     U.S. States’ Exports and Business-class Travel. Journal of International Economics
     84(2), 207- 220.
[14] Dempsey, Paul Stephen, 1987. Dark Side of Deregulation: Its Impact on Small
     Communities. Administrative Law Review 39, 445-465.
[15] Donaldson, Dave, 2010. Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transporta-
     tion Infrastructure. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, mimeo.
[16] Duranton, Gilles and Matthew Turner, 2012. Urban Growth and Transportation.
     Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
[17] Duranton, Gilles, Peter Morrow and Matthew Turner, 2011. Roads and Trade:
     Evidence from the U.S.. University of Toronto, mimeo.
[18] Evans, Paul and Georgios Karras, 1994. Are Government Activities Productive?
     Evidence From a Panel of U.S. States. The Review of Economics and Statistics 76,
     1-11.
[19] Feenstra, Robert and Hiau Looi Kee, 2008. Export Variety and Country Produc-
     tivity: Estimating the Monopolistic Competition Model with Endogenous Produc-
     tivity. Journal of International Economics 74(2), 500-518.
[20] Fernald, John, 1999. Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link Between Public
     Capital and Productivity. American Economic Review 89, 619-638.
[21] Gaspar, Jess and Edward L. Glaeser, 1998. Information Technology and the Future
     of Cities. Journal of Urban Economics 43(1), 136-156.
[22] General Accounting Office (GAO), 1996. Airline Deregulation: Changes in Airfares,
     Service, and Safety at Small, Medium-Sized, and Large Communities, GAO/RCED-
     96-79.
[23] General Accounting Office (GAO), 2000. Essential Air Service: Changes in Subsidy
     Levels, Air Carrier Costs, and Passenger Traffic, GAO/RCED-00-34.
[24] Glaeser, Edward L., Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Schleifer, 1995. Economic Growth
     in a Cross-Section of Cities. Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 117-143.

                                          25
[25] Glaeser, Edward L., Heidi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Schleifer, 1992.
     Growth in Cities. Journal of Political Economy 100(6), 1126-1152.
[26] Green, Richard K., 2007. Airports and Economic Development. Real Estate Eco-
     nomics 35, 91-112.
[27] Hanson, Gordon, 2005. Market Potential, Increasing Returns, and Geographic Con-
     centration. Journal of International Economics 67, 1-24.
[28] Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, 2006. Regional Wage and Employment Responses
     to Market Potential in the EU. Regional Science and Urban Economics 36, 573594.
[29] Hovhannisyan, Nune and Wolfgang Keller, 2011. International Business Travel: An
     Engine of Innovation? NBER Working Paper No. 17100.
[30] Kahn, Alfred E., 1988. Surprises of Airline Deregulation. American Economic Re-
     view Papers and Proceedings, 316-322.
[31] Lovely, Mary E., Rosenthal Stuart S. and Shalini Sharma, 2005. Information, Ag-
     glomeration and the Headquarters of U.S. Exporters. Regional Science and Urban
     Economics 35, 167-191.
[32] Michaels, Guy, 2008. The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from
     the Interstate Highway System. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(4),
     683701.
[33] Morrison, S. A., and C. Winston, 1986. The Economic Effects of Deregulation.
     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
[34] Munnell, Alicia H., 1992. Policy Watch: Infrastructure Investment and Economic
     Growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(4), 189-198.
[35] Poole, Jennifer, 2010. Business Travel as an Input to International Trade. University
     of California Santa Cruz, mimeo.
[36] Redding, Stephen and Anthony Venables, 2004. Economic Geography and Interna-
     tional Inequality. Journal of International Economics 62, 53-82.
[37] Rosenthal Stuart and William C. Strange, 2004. Evidence on the Nature and Sources
     of Agglomeration Economies. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Vol. 4,
     2119-2171.
[38] Sheard, Nicholas, 2012. The Effect of Air Transport on the Production of Goods
     and Services. Stockholm University, mimeo.
[39] Trefler, Daniel, 2004. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agree-
     ment. American Economic Review 94(4), 870-895.
[40] Winston, Clifford, 1993. Economic Deregulation: Days of Reckoning for Microe-
     conomists. Journal of Economic Literature 31(3), 1263-1289.


                                           26
           0
           −.02
           −.04
           −.06
           −.08




                         Small MSA                   Medium MSA              Large MSA



                            Passengers             Employment              Per−capita Income




Figure 1: Changes in Growth Rates Before and After Deregulation by MSA size category

Note: For each metropolitan area in our sample, we compute the difference between the annualized
long-run growth rate for the time period following the aviation deregulation (1991-1977), and the
annualized long-run growth rate for      the period preceding the policy change (1969-1977), as follows:
        1     yi,1991          yi,1977 
∆yi = 14  log yi,1977 − 18 log yi,1969  , with y ∈ {air passenger traffic; income per capita; employment}.
The graph bar plots the sample means for ∆yi by each of the three MSA size categories. This illustrates
the systematic variation in growth rate changes surrounding the quasi-natural experiment of the 1978
Airline Deregulation Act.




                                                   27
                                                        .4
       Log Average Air Passenger Traffic (normalized)

                                                        .3
                                                        .2
                                                        .1
                                                        0
                                                        -.1




                                                              1973   1974     1975   1976   1977        1978   1979   1980   1981     1982   1983


                                                                            Small MSA                   Medium MSA                  Large MSA
                                                                                                                                                    !

                                                               Figure 2: Trends in Air Passengers by MSA Size Category



Note: Each series plots the average (log) number of air passengers across all the MSAs in a given size
category. The data is available at annual frequency between 1973 and 1983. To eliminate the level
differences across urban size categories, each series was adjusted by the average value level for 1973.
The use of geometric averages in constructing the trends is dictated by concerns about potential data
outliers.




                                                                                                   28
                                     300




                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                       Airline Deregulation Act
                                                                                                    (Oct 1978)




                                                                                                                                                            77
                                                                                                                                                       B7




                                                                                                                                                                 350
                                     250




                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                              A3
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                             −1
                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                            D




                                                                                                                                                                 300

                                                                                                                                                                       Aircraft Seating (average)
         Price Index (2000 == 100)




                                                                                                      00
                                     200




                                                                                                   A3
                                                                                                  11
                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                              L−
                                                                                          47




                                                                                                                           A3 7
                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                             6
                                     150




                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                         B7




                                                                                                                          B7

                                                                                                                                 75




                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                               B7




                                                                                                                                                       −9
                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                   −8




                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                  C




                                                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                                                      A3
                                                                                                                  D
                                     100




                                                                                   37
                                                                       7



                                                                                  B7
                                                                        2
                                                                     B7



                                                                             −9
                                                                80
                                                            C7 8




                                                                            C




                                                                                                                                                                 100
                                                            0C−
                                                             V8




                                                                            D
                                                          B7D
                                     50



                                                      6
                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                 H
                                                 D
                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                           50

                                                19 2
                                                19 4
                                                19 6
                                                19 8
                                                19 0
                                                19 2
                                                19 4
                                                19 6
                                                19 8
                                                19 0
                                                19 2
                                                19 4
                                                19 6
                                                19 8
                                                19 0
                                                19 2
                                                19 4
                                                19 6
                                                19 8
                                                19 0
                                                19 2
                                                19 4
                                                19 6
                                                20 8
                                                  00
                                                  5
                                                  5
                                                  5
                                                  5
                                                  6
                                                  6
                                                  6
                                                  6
                                                  6
                                                  7
                                                  7
                                                  7
                                                  7
                                                  7
                                                  8
                                                  8
                                                  8
                                                  8
                                                  8
                                                  9
                                                  9
                                                  9
                                                  9
                                                  9
                                      19
                                            19




                                                          Real Oil Price                                          Introduction of Jet Aircraft Model



           Source: Authors’ Calculations

                                     Figure 3: The Introduction of Jet Aircrafts and Oil Price Shocks


Note: This graph illustrates the countercyclical relationship between real oil prices and the capacity
of newly introduced airline jets. Data on fuel prices is provided by IATA (International Air Transport
Association). Data on the introduction of jet planes by model and average seating capacity is con-
structed from Wikipedia sources. This list may not be exclusive, however it covers the main aircraft
manufacturers and the most common civil airplanes.




                                                                                                           29
                     Table 1: Summary Statistics


Variable                          Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.   Min      Max

Growth rates: total sample
Passenger Growth (log)            592   0.027      0.056     -0.157   0.197
Population Growth (log)           592   0.124      0.013     -0.014   0.080
Income Growth(log)                592   0.017      0.011     -0.021   0.052
Employment Growth(log)            592   0.028      0.019     -0.033   0.114

Growth rates 1969-1977
Passenger Growth ’69-’77 (log)    296   0.046      0.048     -0.157   0.197
Population Growth ’69-’77 (log)   296   0.015      0.013     -0.012   0.080
Income Growth ’69-’77 (log)       296   0.025      0.009     -0.021   0.052
Employment Growth ’69-’77 (log)   296   0.032      0.021     -0.033   0.115

Growth rates 1977-1991
Passenger Growth ’77-’91 (log)    296   0.009      0.057     -0.156   0.150
Population Growth ’77-’91 (log)   296   0.009      0.012     -0.138   0.060
Income Growth ’77-’91 (log)       296   0.009      0.007     -0.136   0.025
Employment Growth ’77-’91 (log)   296   0.025      0.015     -0.014   0.071

Initial Condition Variables
Log Passengers 1969               296   11.205     1.887     7.004    16.624
Log Population 1969               296   12.005     1.367     9.425    16.644
Log Income 1969                   296    9.119     0.170     8.478     9.554
Log Employment 1969               296   10.585     1.520     7.745    15.586
Share Manufacturing 1969          296    0.292     0.145     0.021     0.705
Share Services 1969               296    0.187     0.055     0.066    0.504
Share Wholesale 1969              296    0.068     0.024     0.015    0.187
Share Retail 1969                 296    0.228     0.058     0.096     0.417
Share Transport/Utilities 1969    296    0.068     0.023     0.028     0.171
Share Construction 1969           296    0.066     0.029     0.023     0.282




                                   30
                                                          Table 2: Correlation Coefficients

                                Panel A: Correlation Coefficients between Changes in Variables’ Growth Rates


                                                                 ∆ Passenger      ∆ Population       ∆ Income        ∆ Employment
                                                                   Growth           Growth            Growth            Growth
                                ∆   Passenger Growth (level)        1.00
                                ∆   Population Growth (log)         0.31              1.00
                                ∆   Income Growth (log)             0.37              0.26              1.00               0
                                ∆   Employment Growth (log)         0.40              0.57              0.65              1.00
                                                                           1      yi,1991              yi,1977 
       Note: Each variable is constructed at MSA i level as follows: ∆yi = 14 log yi,1977   − 18 log    yi,1969 ,   with y ∈ {passengers; per capita income;
                                                                     employment}.



                                       Panel B: Correlation Coefficients between (log) Base Year Variables




31
                                                                Passengers     Population     Income      Employment
                                                                  1969           1969          1969         1969
                                           Passengers 1969         1.00
                                           Population 1969         0.90           1.00
                                           Income 1969             0.51           0.50          1.00
                                           Employment 1969         0.89           0.98          0.52           1.00



                              Panel C: Correlation Coefficients between Variables’ Growth Rates across Periods

                                     Passenger       Population         Income           Employment        Passenger           Population        Income        Employment
                                    Growth 69-77    Growth 69-77     Growth 69-77        Growth 69-77     Growth 77-91        Growth 77-91    Growth 77-91     Growth 77-91
     Passenger Growth 69-77             1.00
     Population Growth 69-77            0.54             1.00
     Inccome Growth 69-77               0.21             0.15             1.00
     Emplloyment Growth 69-77           0.49             0.75             0.43               1.00
     Passenger Growth 77-91             0.16             0.32             -0.20               0.07              1.00
     Population Growth 77-91            0.40             0.72             -0.09               0.52              0.48               1.00
     Income Growth 77-91               -0.04             0.03             -0.36              -0.13              0.32               0.10            1.00
     Employment Growth 77-91            0.34             0.58             -0.20               0.42              0.44               0.81            0.45            1.00
                    Table 3: Effect of Air Service on Population Size


                                                       Population Growth Rate (log)
                                                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

           Passenger Growth Rate (log)            0.043**      0.028*      0.030*       0.041+
                                                   [0.012]     [0.014]     [0.014]      [0.024]
           Passenger Growth * Medium MSA                                                 -0.022
                                                                                        [0.021]
           Passenger Growth * Large MSA                                                  -0.015
                                                                                        [0.026]
           Post                                  -0.004**     -0.007**    -0.126**    -0.129**
                                                   [0.001]      [0.002]     [0.042]     [0.042]
           Post * Medium MSA                                      0.001
                                                                [0.001]
           Post * Large MSA                                    0.006**
                                                                [0.002]
           Post * Population1969                                          0.002**      0.002*
                                                                           [0.001]     [0.001]
           Post * Income1969                                               0.010*      0.011*
                                                                           [0.004]     [0.004]
           Post * Sh Manufacturing1969                                       0.001       0.001
                                                                           [0.003]     [0.003]
           Post * Sh Services1969                                           -0.004    -0.004+
                                                                           [0.002]     [0.002]
           Post * Sh Retail1969                                            0.011*      0.011*
                                                                           [0.005]     [0.005]
           Post * Sh Wholesale1969                                          -0.002      -0.002
                                                                           [0.002]     [0.002]
           Post * Sh Transp/Utilitities1969                                 -0.000      -0.001
                                                                           [0.002]     [0.002]
           Post * Sh Construction1969                                     -0.003+     -0.003+
                                                                           [0.002]     [0.002]

           MSA fixed effect                             yes        yes         yes         yes

           Observations                               592       592         592            592
           R-squared                                0.359     0.397       0.454          0.459
           ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

Notes: The reported results correspond to the regression equation (14) in the main text. The constructed
panel includes only two time periods surrounding the 1978 aviation deregulation, 1969-1977 and 1977-
1991, with the post-deregulation time effects controlled by the dummy variable Post. The dependent
variable represents the long-run annual population growth rate calculated at MSA level over two time
periods. The main variable of interest is the long run air passenger growth rate and is calculated in
the same way. Each specification includes MSA fixed effects, which account for average growth trends
across metropolitan areas. Initial economic conditions characterizing the MSAs at the beginning of the
sample period are interacted with the Post dummy to capture differential changes in urban growth over
time. Base year population terciles are used to construct small/medium/large MSA size groups.




                                                  32
        Table 4: Effect of Air Passenger Travel on Local Per-Capita Income


                                                 Per-Capita Income Growth Rate (log)
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)

         Passenger Growth Rate (log)             0.072**    0.049**     0.044**        0.059**
                                                  [0.013]    [0.014]     [0.013]        [0.018]
         Passenger Growth * Medium MSA                                                 -0.043*
                                                                                        [0.021]
         Passenger Growth * Large MSA                                                     0.009
                                                                                        [0.026]
         Post                                   -0.013**    -0.019**    -0.074+        -0.080+
                                                  [0.001]     [0.002]    [0.177]        [0.174]
         Post * Medium MSA                                   0.006**
                                                              [0.002]
         Post * Large MSA                                    0.008**
                                                              [0.002]
         Post * Population1969                                           0.003**       0.003**
                                                                          [0.001]       [0.001]
         Post * Income1969                                                  0.005         0.006
                                                                          [0.005]       [0.005]
         Post * Sh Manufacturing1969                                     0.007**       0.007**
                                                                          [0.002]       [0.002]
         Post * Sh Services1969                                             0.004         0.004
                                                                          [0.004]       [0.004]
         Post * Sh Retail1969                                            0.016**       0.015**
                                                                          [0.005]       [0.005]
         Post * Sh Wholesale1969                                        -0.009**      -0.008**
                                                                          [0.003]       [0.003]
         Post * Sh Transp/Utilitities1969                                  -0.002        -0.003
                                                                          [0.003]       [0.003]
         Post * Sh Construction1969                                       0.004+        0.004+
                                                                          [0.002]       [0.002]

         MSA fixed effect                             yes        yes         yes            yes

         Observations                               592       592         592              592
         R-squared                                0.642     0.667       0.727            0.733
         ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

Notes: The reported results correspond to the regression equation (14) in the main text. The constructed
panel includes only two time periods surrounding the 1978 aviation deregulation, 1969-1977 and 1977-
1991, with the post-deregulation time effects controlled by the dummy variable Post. The dependent
variable represents the long-run annual per-capita income growth rate calculated at MSA level over two
time periods. The main variable of interest is the long run air passenger growth rate and is calculated in
the same way. Each specification includes MSA fixed effects, which account for average growth trends
across metropolitan areas. Initial economic conditions characterizing the MSAs at the beginning of the
sample period are interacted with the Post dummy to capture differential changes in urban growth over
time. Base year population terciles are used to construct small/medium/large MSA size groups.




                                                   33
            Table 5: Effect of Air Passenger Travel on Local Employment


                                                    Employment Growth Rate (log)
                                                       (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)

            Passenger Growth Rate (log)           0.120**    0.077**     0.067**     0.100**
                                                   [0.024]    [0.026]     [0.024]     [0.037]
            Passenger Growth * Medium MSA                                            -0.081*
                                                                                      [0.034]
            Passenger Growth * Large MSA                                               -0.011
                                                                                      [0.046]
            Post                                  -0.002+    -0.013**     -0.137*    -0.149*
                                                   [0.001]     [0.003]     [0.068]    [0.067]
            Post * Medium MSA                                 0.009**
                                                               [0.003]
            Post * Large MSA                                  0.017**
                                                               [0.003]
            Post * Population1969                                         0.004**    0.003**
                                                                           [0.001]    [0.001]
            Post * Income1969                                                0.009      0.011
                                                                           [0.008]    [0.008]
            Post * Sh Manufacturing1969                                   0.012**    0.012**
                                                                           [0.004]    [0.004]
            Post * Sh Services1969                                          -0.001     -0.002
                                                                           [0.005]    [0.006]
            Post * Sh Retail1969                                             0.012      0.011
                                                                           [0.007]    [0.007]
            Post * Sh Wholesale1969                                      -0.009**    -0.007*
                                                                           [0.003]    [0.003]
            Post * Sh Transp/Utilitities1969                                -0.005     -0.006
                                                                           [0.004]    [0.004]
            Post * Sh Construction1969                                       0.002      0.001
                                                                           [0.003]    [0.003]

            MSA fixed effect                           yes        yes         yes        yes

            Observations                              592        592         592      592
            R-squared                               0.244      0.325       0.474    0.490
            ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

Notes: The reported results correspond to the regression equation (14) in the main text. The constructed
panel includes only two time periods surrounding the 1978 aviation deregulation, 1969-1977 and 1977-
1991, with the post-deregulation time effects controlled by the dummy variable Post. The dependent
variable represents the long-run annual employment growth rate calculated at MSA level over two time
periods. The main variable of interest is the long run air passenger growth rate. Each specification
includes MSA fixed effects, which account for average growth trends across metropolitan areas. Initial
economic conditions characterizing the MSAs at the beginning of the sample period are interacted
with the Post dummy to capture differential changes in urban growth over time. Base year population
terciles are used to construct small/medium/large MSA size groups.




                                                  34
     Table 6: Effect of Air Passenger Travel on Local Employment by Sector


                                                 Sector Employment Growth Rate
                                            Manufacturing    Services   Wholesale      Retail
                                                       (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)

         Passenger Growth Rate (log)                 0.042      0.046     0.120**      0.54**
                                                   [0.043]    [0.031]      [0.040]     [0.018]
         Post                                     -0.331+      -0.107     -0.371*       -0.051
                                                   [0.183]    [0.121]      [0.155]     [0.068]
         Post * Employment1969                      -0.012     -0.002      0.016+        0.015
                                                   [0.011]    [0.010]      [0.008]     [0.005]
         Post * Population1969                       0.011      0.006       -0.010    -0.012*
                                                   [0.010]    [0.009]      [0.008]     [0.005]
         Post * Income1969                         0.045*      -0.015        0.035      -0.000
                                                   [0.020]    [0.014]      [0.022]     [0.007]
         Post * Sh Manufacturing1969              0.033**       0.007        0.004       0.005
                                                   [0.009]    [0.006]      [0.006]     [0.004]
         Post * Sh Services1969                    0.026+       0.008        0.015   -0.017**
                                                   [0.014]    [0.007]      [0.017]     [0.004]
         Post * Sh Retail1969                        0.005     -0.002       -0.022    0.036**
                                                   [0.021]    [0.012]      [0.026]     [0.009]
         Post * Sh Wholesale1969                     0.008     -0.006       -0.008    -0.008*
                                                   [0.009]    [0.005]      [0.009]     [0.003]
         Post * Sh Transp/Utilitities1969           -0.017      0.001        0.009    -0.007+
                                                   [0.011]    [0.006]      [0.009]     [0.004]
         Post * Sh Construction1969                  0.009      0.007        0.003    -0.006*
                                                   [0.009]    [0.005]      [0.007]     [0.003]

         MSA fixed effect                              yes        yes          yes        yes

         Observations                                   586       592          590        592
         R-squared                                    0.303     0.151        0.319      0.498
         ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

Note: The reported results correspond to the regression equation (14) in the main text. The constructed
panel includes only two time periods surrounding the 1978 aviation deregulation, 1969-1977 and 1977-
1991, with the post-deregulation time effects controlled by the dummy variable Post. The dependent
variable measures long-run annual growth rates in sector level employment shares calculated at MSA
level over the two time periods. The main variable of interest is the long run air passenger growth
rate. Each specification includes MSA fixed effects, a time dummy to control for the post-deregulation
time effects, and interaction terms between initial economic conditions and the Post dummy to capture
differential changes in urban growth over time. Base year population terciles are used to construct
small/medium/large MSA size groups.




                                                  35
Table 7: Robustness Check: Effect of Proximity to Large Airport Hubs for Small
         and Medium size MSAs


                                              Population                   Income             Employment
                                             Growth Rate                Growth Rate           Growth Rate
                                             (1)     (2)                (3)     (4)           (5)     (6)

 Passenger Growth Rate                      0.035*         0.033*      0.058**    0.047**     0.086**    0.069*
                                            [0.016]        [0.015]      [0.016]    [0.014]    [0.029]   [0.026]
 D(Dist<150 & S, M) * Passenger Gr.         -0.035*         -0.019     -0.048+     -0.015      -0.052    -0.014
                                            [0.018]        [0.016]      [0.024]    [0.022]    [0.034]   [0.028]
 Post                                      -0.007**        -0.124*    -0.018**    -0.072+    -0.012**   -0.136*
                                            [0.002]        [0.042]      [0.002]    [0.044]    [0.003]   [0.068]
 Post * Medium MSA                           0.001                     0.005**                0.009**
                                            [0.001]                     [0.002]               [0.003]
 Post * Large MSA                          0.005**                     0.008**                0.016**
                                            [0.002]                     [0.002]               [0.003]
 Post * Population1969                                     0.002**                0.003**               0.004**
                                                            [0.001]                [0.001]              [0.001]
 Post * Income1969                                          0.010*                  0.005                0.009
                                                            [0.004]                [0.005]              [0.008]
 Post * Sh Manufacturing1969                                 0.001                0.007**               0.012**
                                                            [0.003]                [0.002]              [0.004]
 Post * Sh Services1969                                     -0.004                  0.005                -0.001
                                                            [0.002]                [0.004]              [0.005]
 Post * Sh Retail1969                                       0.010*                0.015**                0.011
                                                            [0.005]                [0.005]              [0.007]
 Post * Sh Wholesale1969                                    -0.002                -0.008**              -0.008*
                                                            [0.002]                [0.003]              [0.003]
 Post * Sh Transp/Utilitities1969                           -0.000                 -0.002                -0.005
                                                            [0.002]                [0.003]              [0.004]
 Post * Sh Construction1969                                -0.027**                 0.008                0.001
                                                            [0.009]                [0.015]              [0.018]

 MSA fixed effect                             yes            yes        yes         yes        yes        yes

 Observations                               592        592        592               592        592        592
 R-squared                                 0.405      0.456      0.672             0.728      0.330      0.474
 ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

Note: The results report estimates from augmenting the preferred specification reported in the third
column of Tables 3, 4 and Table 5 respectively, with information on economic geography. The variable
D(Dist<150 & S, M) is an indicator variable equal to one if a Small or Medium size MSA lies within
150 miles from a large hub airport (as classifies by the Federal Aviation Administration). Its interaction
with the variable of interest identifies any differential response of smaller communities to changes in air
passenger growth based on proximity to large airport hubs.




                                                      36
A      Appendix Tables

 Table A1: The Effect of Proximity to a Large Hub on Changes in Growth Rates for
          the Variables of Interest

                                  ∆ Population Growth         ∆ Income Growth          ∆ Employm. Growth
                                             (1)                        (2)                       (3)

 D(Dist<150 & S, M)                          0.002                   0.006**                    0.005
                                            [0.001]                  [0.002]                   [0.003]
 Population 1969 (log)                       0.001                   0.004**                   0.006**
                                            [0.001]                  [0.001]                   [0.002]
 Per Capita Income 1969 (log)               0.011*                     0.005                     0.004
                                            [0.005]                  [0.005]                   [0.009]
 Medium MSA==1                               0.000                     0.002                     0.004
                                            [0.001]                  [0.002]                   [0.003]
 Large MSA==1                                0.003                    -0.000                    0.006
                                            [0.003]                  [0.004]                   [0.005]
 Constant                                  -0.118**                  -0.108*                    -0.117
                                            [0.038]                  [0.046]                   [0.072]

 Observations                                296                      296                        296
 R-squared                                  0.158                    0.212                      0.236
 ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, + p < 0.1. Robust standard errors in brackets.

                                                                                      1     y        
Notes: Each dependent variable is constructed at MSA i level as follows: ∆yi = 14       log yi,1991
                                                                                              i,1977
                                                                                                       −
1     yi,1977 
8 log yi,1969  , with y ∈ {passengers; per capita income; employment}. The variable D(Dist<150     &   S,
M) is an indicator variable equal to one if a Small or Medium size MSA lies within 150 miles from a
large hub airport (as classifies by the Federal Aviation Administration). All other variables are self
explanatory.




                                                   37
