                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         AM I MY BROTHER'S KEEPER? SIBLING SPILLOVER EFFECTS:
 THE CASE OF DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES AND EXTERNALIZING BEHAVIOR

                                         Jason Fletcher
                                         Nicole L. Hair
                                        Barbara L. Wolfe

                                       Working Paper 18279
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18279


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2012




The authors thank the WT Grant Foundation for their support for this research. Fletcher also thanks
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health and Society Scholars Program for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jason Fletcher, Nicole L. Hair, and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Am I my Brother's Keeper? Sibling Spillover Effects: The Case of Developmental Disabilities
and Externalizing Behavior
Jason Fletcher, Nicole L. Hair, and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 18279
August 2012
JEL No. I12,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

Using a sample of sibling pairs from the PSID-CDS, we examine the effects of sibling health status
on early educational outcomes. We find that sibling developmental disability and externalizing behavior
ar associated with reductions in math and language achievement Estimated spillovers for developmental
disability are large and robust to both a rich set of family-level controls and a fixed effects analysis
that exploits the availability of in-sample cousins. Our results suggest the importance of siblings in
the determination of children's human capital as well as the potential for typically uncounted benefits
to improving children's health through family multiplier effects


Jason Fletcher                                     Barbara L. Wolfe
Yale School of Public Health                       1225 Observatory Dr
Department of Health Policy and Management         University of Wisconsin
60 College Street, #303                            Madison, WI 53706
New Haven, CT 06520                                and NBER
and NBER                                           BWolfe@wisc.edu
jason.fletcher@yale.edu

Nicole L. Hair
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
nhair@wisc.edu
    Am I my Brother’s Keeper? Sibling Spillover Effects:
       The Case of Developmental Disabilities and
                 Externalizing Behavior
                    Jason Fletcher, Nicole Hair, and Barbara Wolfe∗
                                            July 27, 2012


                                                Abstract
            Using a sample of sibling pairs from the PSID-CDS, we examine the effects of sibling
        health status on early educational outcomes. We find that sibling developmental dis-
        ability and externalizing behavior are associated with reductions in math and language
        achievement. Estimated spillovers for developmental disability are large and robust to
        both a rich set of family-level controls and a fixed effects analysis that exploits the
        availability of in-sample cousins. Our results suggest the importance of siblings in
        the determination of children’s human capital as well as the potential for typically
        uncounted benefits to improving children’s health through family multiplier effects.



1       Introduction

While there has been extensive research across the social sciences examining the determi-
nants of child achievement, researchers still do not fully understand how the immediate
circumstances faced during childhood affect human capital accumulation. The influence of
children’s health status on their own educational outcomes (as well as parental decisions
and family resources) is well-documented. Much less is known about the direct and indirect
    ∗
    Fletcher: Yale University. Hair: University of Wisconsin-Madison. Wolfe: University of Wisconsin-
Madison. The authors thank the WT Grant Foundation for their support of this research. Fletcher also
acknowledges the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health & Society Scholars program for its financial sup-
port. The authors would like to thank Marsha Seltzer for sharing her knowledge of developmental disabilities
with them and Donna Nordquist at the PSID help desk. The authors thank participants at a seminar at
the Rand Corporation, the 2011 iHEA Conference, the PSID CDS-III and TA New Results Workshop Con-
ference, the 2012 summer health economics workshop in Sydney, a seminar at RSE at Australian National
University, and the 2012 ASHE Conference for helpful comments on preliminary presentations of this work.



                                                     1
effects of children’s health status on the outcomes of their siblings. The relative scarcity of
large scale research in this area is surprising. The great majority (roughly 80%) of children
in the United States grow up with siblings (Dunn, 1992). Siblings share a common family
heritage, both genetically and experientially, and may take on a number of roles during devel-
opment: role models, playmates, teachers, friends, and confidants. They share the benefits
of their parents’ human capital and capital resources (i.e., housing, private transport, and
neighborhood), while competing for parental attention and investments (Becker and Lewis,
1973; Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2009).
       A sibling’s health status may be expected to directly influence children’s development in
a number of ways. Sociologists have suggested that siblings may exert influence by acting
as role models (Haynie and McHugh, 2003). In addition, there is evidence in the psychology
literature to suggest that children’s personality and intelligence are shaped by direct inter-
actions with their siblings (Arnold, Levine and Patterson, 1975). To the extent that health
status influences these interactions, a child’s poor health could directly impinge on siblings’
outcomes. It is also possible that a child’s health problems may affect siblings indirectly.
Many childhood conditions have been shown to influence the availability of family finan-
cial resources (i.e., through direct medical expenditures or maternal labor supply decisions).
Parents may also consider variation in endowments when allocating resources across their
children (Becker and Lewis, 1973; Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2009).
       This study examines the effects of a sibling’s poor health on a set of early educational
outcomes intended to capture a child’s human capital accumulation. Most related research
has been based on small convenience samples1 and there are few, if any, studies that use
large national datasets to examine sibling health spillovers on global educational outcomes.
Our analysis is based on a sample of sibling pairs from the Child Development Supplement
   1
     For example, Smith et al. (2002) examine a sample of 30 males diagnosed with ADHD and their siblings;
Mikami and Pfiffner (2008) examine a sample of 91 children recruited from a university ADHD research
clinic; Mash and Johnston (1983) examine a sample of 46 boys to study the effects of ADHD; Derouin and
Jessee (1996) examine information from 15 families; Williams et al. (2002) examine 252 siblings of children
in poor health; and Greene et al. (2011) examine approximately 500, mostly white children recruited from
clinical settings.


                                                    2
of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID-CDS). The PSID includes extensive infor-
mation on families over the past 40 years (and across three generations). We investigate the
importance of sibling health spillovers using several different estimation strategies, including
OLS estimation with a rich set of family-level controls and a fixed effects analysis. Our fixed
effects analysis is unique in that it exploits the genealogical design of the PSID in order to
use cousins to control for otherwise unobserved family characteristics. Finally, guided by
evidence in the psychology literature, we explore heterogeneity in sibling health spillovers
according to the child’s gender and relative age.
   We focus on two childhood chronic conditions: developmental disability and external-
izing behavior. These conditions are both common and recently found to be increasing in
prevalence. Using data from the National Health Interview Survey, Boyle et al. (2011) report
that nearly 10 percent of children have some form of developmental disability, and nearly 7
percent of children have reported ADHD (these diagnoses may overlap). In contrast, “only”
0.58 percent of children have a reported sensory disability, such as blindness or moderate to
profound hearing loss. In terms of trends, the study reports marked increases in autism from
1997-99 to 2008-09, along with increases in ADHD, seizures, and other developmental delays
over the same time period. These conditions have far-reaching effects on the affected indi-
vidual. Consequently, having an affected child in the household can be expected to present
challenges for the family unit that may lead to spillover effects on siblings (as well as other
family members).
   We find that chronic conditions during childhood, namely developmental disability and
externalizing behavior, may have negative consequences not only for the child directly af-
fected by the condition but also for other children in the household. Specifically, we find
that having a sibling with a developmental disability or externalizing behavior is associated
with reductions in measured math and language achievement. There is also some evidence
to suggest an increased propensity for grade repetition. We find that estimates of sibling
health spillovers vary across our conditions of interest, with larger effects estimated in the


                                               3
case of developmental disability. We also find evidence that a sibling’s poor health may have
heterogeneous effects according to particular characteristics of the sibship, with sisters and
younger siblings (particularly in the case of externalizing behavior) appearing to fare worse.



2     Background

2.1    Why Would Siblings Affect Human Capital Accumulation?

When addressing the potential importance of siblings in children’s human capital accumula-
tion, three theoretical perspectives from the economics literature are relevant: the quantity-
quality trade-off in children, parental labor market response, and the intra-household alloca-
tion of resources across children. The literature on the quantity-quality trade-off in children
(Becker and Lewis, 1973; Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2009) explores the interaction of parents’
fertility and child-investment decisions. When making choices about fertility, parents are
thought to weigh outcomes of quantity (increased number of children) against quality (hu-
man capital of children). Models of the trade-off suggest that as family size increases, there
are reductions in average child quality. With a larger number of siblings present, there are
likely fewer resources available per child. Parents provide material goods and emotional
support to their children, and siblings are then thought to vie for parents’ time and at-
tention. This literature typically assumes homogeneity of children within a household. If
parents have a child with a significant disability, the quantity-quality trade-off and associated
resource constraints may become more complex.
    Work in the parental labor market response literature has investigated the effects of hav-
ing a child with a disability on parental decisions (rather than sibling outcomes). The focus
has typically been on either mother’s time allocation, i.e. maternal labor force participation
(Powers, 2004) or family resources (Parish and Cloud, 2006). In general, the literature has
found small reductions in maternal labor force participation, and hence reductions in family
resources. Recent work suggests, however, that the implications of the reported reductions


                                               4
in maternal labor market participation on child development may be unclear; there may be
fewer material resources available, but perhaps more parental time (Gould, 2004; Burton
and Phipps, 2009).
       Intra-household resource allocation across children has been a topic of interest since
the early work of Becker and Tomes (1976) and Behrman, Pollak and Taubman (1982).
Parents are thought to care about the quality (human capital, wealth) of their children
in addition to their own consumption. Depending on parental preferences and the human
capital technology, parents may optimally exhibit investment strategies that compensate for
or reinforce the variation in endowments across their children. An early-life shock to the
endowment of one child may therefore alter the parental investments made in all children in
the household.2
       Following the existing literature, we broadly consider a simple framework for a two-child
household that fits within the context of the current study (see Appendix A). One sibling
is healthy (high endowment), while the other has a disability or chronic health condition
(low endowment). Children’s human capital is a function of this initial endowment as well
as parental investments. Altruistic parents, who care about the quality (human capital) of
their children in addition to their own consumption, maximize utility subject to the human
capital technology and a budget constraint. Whether parents optimally adopt a reinforc-
ing, compensating, or neutral investment strategy in response to the differences in their
children’s endowments will hinge on a tension between parental preferences and the human
capital production technology, i.e. parental aversion to inequality (Behrman, Pollack, and
Taubman, 1982) and the complementarity (substitutability) of endowment and investment
in the production of human capital. If parents adopt a compensating strategy, such that
   2
     There is no consensus in the empirical literature as to whether parents tend to invest in ways that
compensate for rather than reinforce variation in endowments across their children. Some studies, particu-
larly those in developing countries, have found evidence of reinforcing investment behaviors(Rosenzweig and
Wolpin, 1988; Behrman, Rosenzweig and Taubman, 1994). Other work suggests that parents make com-
pensatory investments (Behrman, Pollak and Taubman, 1982; Pitt, Rosenzweig and Hassan, 1990). In more
recent work, Hsin (2013) finds little evidence of a relationship between low birth weight and maternal time
investments, but argues that this average effect masks important heterogeneity by socioeconomic status.



                                                    5
more resources are allocated to the low endowment child, the human capital accumulation
of the healthy sibling suffers. If, instead, parents adopt a reinforcing strategy, such that
more resources are allocated to the high endowment child, the healthy sibling benefits from
increased human capital.
   The standard framework generally precludes any direct effect of sibling poor health (low
endowment) on human capital accumulation. A sibling’s early-life health insult may only
affect human capital outcomes through the reallocation of intra-household resources. This is
a potential concern, particularly in the context where one member of the sibling pair is dis-
abled. In order to accommodate expectations of a direct or social learning effect of a sibling’s
poor health (Arnold, Levine and Patterson, 1975; Hauser and Wong, 1989; Oettinger, 2000;
Smith et al., 2002; Mikami and Pfiffner, 2008), the standard framework may be extended to
introduce sibling endowment as an additional factor in the human capital production func-
tion (see Appendix A). In this case, the effect on human capital may be decomposed into two
channels: the resource reallocation effect and the direct or social learning effect. As before,
if parents adopt a compensating strategy, such that more resources are allocated to the low
endowment child, the human capital accumulation of the healthy sibling suffers. However,
if parents adopt a reinforcing strategy, such that more resources are allocated to the high
endowment child, the net effect on the human capital of the healthy child is now ambiguous.
The relative magnitudes of the social learning (detrimental) and resource reallocation effect
(beneficial) are important.


2.2    Prior Evidence on the Effects of Siblings on Children’s Out-

       comes

While it has been well documented that children’s health status and behaviors impact their
own educational outcomes as well as parental decisions and family resources, much less is
known about the direct and indirect effects of children’s health on their siblings’ outcomes.
Within the economics literature, there is some existing evidence of sibling influences from

                                               6
an older sibling to a younger sibling, including high school graduation status (Oettinger,
2000), tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana use (Ouyang, 2004), and the initiation of sexual
intercourse (Widmer, 1997). Beyond this, there is some research that is suggestive of the
importance of siblings, including the literature that finds that family size (Hanushek, 1992),
birth order (Behrman and Taubman, 1986), and sex composition of sibship (Butcher and
Case, 1994; Kaestner, 1997) all help to shape achievement in children. The large literature
providing evidence that peers influence achievement and health behaviors is also suggestive
that siblings may also exert a strong influence (Hanushek and Rivkin, 2003; Gaviria and
Raphael, 2001).
   Most past research on the siblings of individuals with developmental disabilities is from
the psychology literature. This work tends to focus on emotional and adjustment outcomes
of the sibling pair during childhood (Rossiter and Sharpe, 2001; Sharpe and Rossiter, 2002;
Stoneman, 1998; Stoneman and Brody, 1993). In reviewing this research, Stoneman (2001,
2005) concluded that there are high levels of interaction when one sibling has a developmental
disability (DD), especially during childhood, although some of this interaction is likely due to
the expanded childcare roles that non-disabled siblings, especially sisters, often play. A meta-
analytic review of the effects on the sibling relationship and sibling well-being came to a more
negative conclusion (Rossiter and Sharpe, 2001). Based on 25 studies of siblings of individuals
with DD, Rossiter and Sharpe concluded that there was a statistically significant but small
negative effect on the psychological functioning of these siblings (depression, anxiety, and
behavioral adjustment in terms of internalizing and externalizing behaviors). Rossiter and
Sharpe (2001) show that well children with siblings with chronic or severe health conditions
may be disadvantaged because their parents’ attention is diverted to the siblings with an
illness, their siblings with a condition exhibit impaired interactions, other children ostracize
and isolate all the children in this family, and because of the direct caretaking responsibilities
of having an unhealthy sibling.
   In related research, children with siblings with ADHD have been shown to experience


                                                7
higher negative relationships within the family as symptoms increase (Smith et al., 2002;
Mikami and Pfiffner, 2008), younger siblings mimic the bad behaviors of their older siblings
with ADHD (Arnold, Levine and Patterson, 1975), and have higher risks of substance use
disorders (Milberger et al., 1997). Well children with siblings with mental retardation have
lower psychological functioning, including higher rates of depression and anxiety (Rossiter
and Sharpe, 2001). In more recent work, Fletcher and Wolfe (2008) explore the possible
influence of having a sibling with ADHD on adolescents. They find significant negative
effects of having a sibling with ADHD on three different measures of years of schooling as
well as the probability of being suspended. In terms of measures of schooling, they estimate
a larger influence of ADHD on siblings than on the individual with ADHD for years of school
and the probability of attending college but not for other measures, some of which (GPA
and grade repetition) are only significant for the individual with ADHD.



3     Data

Our analysis is based on data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its
Child Development Supplement (PSID-CDS). The PSID is a longitudinal study that began in
1968 with a core sample of approximately 4,800 families. The core PSID survey includes data
covering employment, income, wealth, education, health, marriage and fertility histories, and
numerous other topics. The study has a genealogical-based design. As children of sample
families establish households of their own, they and all the members of their new household
continue to be followed as sample members. As a result of this rather unique design, the
dataset contains information about multiple generations of a family. In many cases, as 1968
PSID children have now started families of their own, it is possible to trace families across
three generations and access extensive background information collected from these families
over the past 40 years.
    The Child Development Supplement was introduced in 1997 to collect additional infor-



                                             8
mation for a subset of PSID children (ages 0-12 years in 1997) and includes an array of
measures tied to the development of children across the domains of health, psychological
well-being, social relationships, cognitive development, and education. Sample children have
been followed over a period of ten years, with subsequent rounds of the CDS administered in
2002 and 2007. The PSID-CDS sample currently contains approximately 8,000 observations
on 5,500 children from 2,400 families. The survey sampled up to two children per family
unit,3 and our analysis will focus on the approximately 1,100 CDS sibling pairs.4 The sibling
sample, combining observations from the supplement’s three waves, contains approximately
5,000 observations on children ranging in age from 0 to 18 years.
       As part of our analysis, we estimate fixed effects models in order to control for otherwise
unobserved family characteristics. As our sibling sample described above consists solely of
sibling pairs and we are interested in chronic health conditions that do not vary with time,
sibling-level fixed effects would be perfectly collinear with own and sibling health status. Our
fixed effects analysis exploits the unique genealogical design of the PSID. Nearly 90 percent of
children in the sibling sample are members of long-term PSID families and represent a third
generation of PSID participation. In these cases, it may be possible to identify extended
family members, or cousins, in the CDS sample by tracing sample children back to their
original 1968 PSID household. Just under half (43.8%) of children in the sibling sample have
in-sample cousins. The extended families range in size from two unique sibling pairs (59%
of extended families) to, in one instance, five unique sibling pairs. Combining observations
from the supplement’s three waves, the cousin sample includes 2,723 observations on 982
children from 209 distinct extended families.
       The remaining 10 percent of children in the sibling sample are drawn from family units
   3
     The PSID-CDS surveyed a maximum of two children per family unit, so it is possible for a child in our
sibling sample to have additional siblings not captured in the CDS sample. To the extent that there are
unobserved children in poor health in these households, our estimates may be biased downward. We test the
sensitivity of our results to restricting our sample to only those families reporting fewer than three children
(around half of our sibling sample) and find our estimates to be robust (Table 5).
   4
     Siblings were identified using the PSID’s FIMS map file. All sibling types (full, step, adopted) were
permitted, but the sample was restricted to those sibling pairs identified as residing in the same family unit



                                                      9
newly added to the PSID through the immigrant refresher sample in 1997.5 These children
do not have the same family history available as those children descended from original 1968
families. While these children represent only a small fraction of the overall sibling sample,
they represent over 85 percent of the Hispanic children and over 97 percent of the children
reporting Asian or Pacific Islander background. This change in composition from our sibling
sample to our cousin sample is a potential limitation of our cousin-based fixed effect analysis.
However, we test the sensitivity of our baseline estimates (sibling sample) to the exclusion of
children in these groups and find that our results are not sensitive to the sample restriction
(Table 5).
       Table 1 provides a comparison of the full PSID-CDS sample to our sibling sample, as well
as to the subsample of siblings who also have extended family members in the sample (CDS
cousins). The sample means presented in Table 1 suggest that our sibling sample is highly
comparable to the full PSID-CDS in terms of observable demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics. We find no concerning differences in terms of age, gender, race, primary
caregiver education, income, or parental socioeconomic backgrounds. The average family
size is slightly larger in households with CDS siblings, but this may be expected given the
nature of the sample. A comparison of CDS siblings to the subsample of siblings with CDS
cousins shows the samples to be comparable with the exception of racial composition as
mentioned earlier.


3.1       Measures of Human Capital

We focus on a set of early education outcomes that are intended to capture a child’s human
capital accumulation. These measures include grade repetition and children’s scores on three
sections of the Woodcock-Johnson Revised (WJ-R) tests of achievement: Applied Problems,
Letter-Word, and Passage Comprehension. The WJ-R tests are standardized educational
   5
    The immigrant refresher sample introduced recent (post-1968) immigrant families and their children to
the PSID sample in order to reflect changes in the composition of the U.S. national population. These recent
immigrants were not previously represented in the PSID.



                                                    10
achievement assessments and are designed to provide a normative score that shows the
child’s language and math abilities in comparison to a national average for the child’s age.6
Children aged 3 years and older were eligible to complete the Applied Problems and Letter-
Word tests. The Passage Comprehension test was administered to older children who were
at least 6 years of age.7
       Panel B of Table 1 provides a comparison of our measures of human capital accumulation
across the full PSID-CDS sample and our CDS siblings and cousins samples. Close to 11%
of our CDS siblings sample has ever repeated a grade. Grade repetition is more common
among males (14.7%) than females (7.7%). The average scores on all three sections of the
WJ-R tests of achievement are slightly above national norms. This holds true in the full
PSID-CDS as well as in our CDS siblings and cousins samples. Males score slightly higher
on the WJ-R Applied Problems test, while females tend to score higher on the Letter-Word
and Passage Comprehension tests.


3.2       Indicators of Poor Health

As part of the CDS interview, primary caregivers are asked a series of questions assessing the
sample child’s health status, including a global measure of health and diagnosis of chronic
conditions. In addition, the CDS includes the Behavior Problems Index (BPI)8 to assess the
incidence and severity of behavioral problems in children. The BPI divides problem behaviors
into two subscales: a measure of externalizing or aggressive behavior9 and a measure of
   6
     Scores on the WJ-R are standardized with a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15.
   7
     In a small number of cases where that was a severe disability (e.g., co-morbid autism and mental
retardation), a child may not have been able to complete the assessments. Interviewers deferred to the
judgement of the primary caregiver. This may bias downward estimates of the effect of own disability, but
should not affect estimates of sibling spillovers. These sibling pairs are not excluded from the regression
sample when the health sibling is the target child.
   8
     The Behavior Problem Index was developed by James Peterson and Nicholas Zill from the Achenbach
Behavior Problems Checklist to measure in a survey setting the incidence and severity of child behavior
problems.
   9
     In the case of the externalizing subscale, these problem behaviors include: sudden changes in mood
or feelings; difficulty concentrating/cannot pay attention for long; bullies or is cruel or mean to others;
disobedient; does not seem to feel sorry after misbehavior; trouble getting along with people his/her own
age; impulsive or acts without thinking; restless or overly active, cannot sit still; stubborn, sullen, or irritable;



                                                         11
internalizing, withdrawn or sad behavior.
    As noted above, our analysis of sibling health spillovers will focus alternately on devel-
opmental disability and externalizing behavior as an indicator of health status.10 These
conditions are both common and expected to have far-reaching effects on the educational
and social outcomes of the affected individual. As a result, having an affected child in the
household is expected to present challenges for the family unit that may lead to spillover
effects on siblings (as well as other members of the family). Developmental disability is per-
haps the most studied of children’s chronic conditions. Consistent with federal definitions
of developmental disability, we classify a sample child as developmentally disabled if he/she
has ever been diagnosed with epilepsy,11 autism, or mental retardation. These conditions
are generally diagnosed in the first few years of life, so a child is likely to be influenced from
a time very close to the sibling’s birth (or their own birth in the case of younger siblings).
According to recent work by Eget (2009)


       Growing up in a family of a student with a developmental disability, specifically
       mental retardation, autism, and those consistent with significant mental limita-
       tions, can be a challenging experience. Siblings of these students are often faced
       with more responsibilities, and sacrifices, and may have less attention given to
       them because of their sibling’s needs.12
has a very strong temper and loses it easily; breaks things on purpose or deliberately destroys his/her own
or another’s things; demands a lot of attention
   10
      We had considered sensory deficit (i.e., difficulty hearing/deafness or difficulty seeing/blindness) as an
additional disability of potential interest. We did not find statistically significant effects on measures in
our set of early educational outcomes, and the results are not presented here. We do not include medical
conditions such as asthma and allergies in our analysis. These conditions may present symptoms over quite a
broad range of severity. As a result they are not well-defined in terms of the expected limitations experienced
by the affected individual (or the resulting challenges faced by the family).
   11
      While children with epilepsy/seizure disorder generally have normal intelligence, they are at increased
risk for mental health and developmental comorbidities, increasing the need for care coordination and spe-
cialized services. In a nationally representative sample, they were found to have a greater risk of limitation
in ability to do things, repeating a school grade, poorer social competence and greater parent aggravation
(SA, K and N, 2012).
   12
      Eget cites the following as the basis of the above quote: Bischoff and Tingstrom (1991); Breslau, Weitz-
man and Messenger (1981); Dellve, Cernerud and & Hallberg (2000); Dodd (2004); Opperman and Alant
(2003); Pilowsky et al. (2004).



                                                      12
       In recent years, there has been increasing attention paid to externalizing behavior as it
is a primary symptom of ADHD. Our measure of externalizing behavior is based on the
sample child’s score on the externalizing subscale of the BPI. We classify a child as having
an externalizing behavior problem if his/her score, averaged over the sample period, is at or
above the 90th percentile13 of the externalizing subscale distribution (a score of 11 our of a
maximum of 17).14 We average a child’s BPI score over all available periods in order to best
identify those children with chronic behavioral problems.15
       Panel C of Table 1 shows the incidence of chronic health conditions in our CDS siblings
and cousins samples as well as in the full PSID-CDS. By construction, approximately 10
percent of our sample children are classified as having an externalizing behavior problem.
Developmental disabilities are less common, with 4.5% of sample children affected by at
least one developmental disability. Among CDS siblings with a developmental disability,
epilepsy is the most common qualifying condition. Comorbidity is common. In our sample,
17 percent of children with DD report multiple qualifying disabilities (Table B.1). There are
some differences in the distribution of disabilities according to gender. As may be expected,
autism is found to be more prevalent in males than females (37.8% of DD cases versus 15.1%).
       Tables AB.2 and AB.3 offer insight into individual comorbidity and within-family corre-
lation of chronic conditions, respectively. Developmental disability is positively but modestly
correlated between siblings (ρ = 0.066). The correlation between sibling externalizing be-
havior is somewhat stronger (ρ = 0.149). Children with an externalizing sibling also have
  13
     We test the sensitivity of our results to our selection of the 90th percentile as the threshold for exter-
nalizing behavior. Our results are robust to lowering the threshold to the 85th and 80th percentiles (Table
5).
  14
     Currie and Stabile (2006) use a similar approach in their work with ADHD. They argue that it is
problematic to focus only on those with diagnosed ADHD as there can be systematic differences in those
children for whom treatment has been sought and for those whom it has not. Our approaches differ in the
particular scales used. In our work, we use the 17-item externalizing subscale of the PSID-CDS BPI. In their
work, Currie and Stabile use the 5-item hyperactivity subscale of the NLSY BPI. In our sample, children
with diagnosed ADHD score one standard deviation higher at the mean compared to the full PSID-CDS
sample (Table B.4).
  15
     In our sample, 88.5% of observations were consistently identified as ”externalizing”/”non-externalizing”
across permanent and transitory measures. We test the sensitivity of our results to the use of contempora-
neous (versus averaged) BPI score in classifying children with externalizing behavior (Table 5).



                                                      13
slightly elevated BPI scores (Table B.4).16 Neither developmental disability nor externalizing
behavior appears to be concentrated within extended families.


3.3       Predictors of Poor Health

The aim of our study is to examine the potential spillover effects of a sibling’s poor health
on outcomes tied to human capital accumulation. An important alternative hypothesis for
these associations is that they are driven by confounding family factors; households with a
child in poor health may differ systematically from households with healthy children. These
(potentially unobservable) differences in households may bias our estimation of sibling health
spillover effects. In order to explore the potential importance of this issue, we examine the
observable family correlates of having a child in poor health using the PSID-CDS sample.
       Table 2 shows the results of an analysis attempting to predict the presence of a child
with a developmental disability. We utilize a set of factors that predate the birth of the child
in order to focus on exogenous determinants. We find some racial differences, where black
families are nearly 2 percentage points less likely to have a child in the household with a
developmental disability. We also find some evidence that the likelihood of having a child
with a developmental disability is negatively associated with maternal education, since high
school dropout mothers are 3 to 4 percentage points more likely to have this outcome. On
the other hand, many family and individual factors are unrelated to this outcome, including
socioeconomic status of the father during childhood and age of the mother at birth. Table
3 then shows the results of a similar analysis for the presence of a child with externalizing
behavior, and we find even fewer associations with family factors. The only statistically
significant difference across families is the educational level of the mother.
       These findings of the predictors of the presence of an unhealthy child in a household
necessitate the use of controls for observable differences across families. Following the logic
  16
    We test the sensitivity of our results to a control for own BPI score (rather than an indicator for own
externalizing behavior). The magnitude of the coefficients of interest are slightly reduced, but our results
are largely robust (Table 5).



                                                    14
of Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005), among others, we suggest that if the estimated effects
of sibling health spillovers are robust to the inclusion of important observable factors in our
data, any residual effects of unobservables is likely to be small. However, there may be
additional unobserved differences in families with and without a child that is DD or exhibits
externalizing behaviors including genetic differences. We utilize the unique genealogical
structure of our data to deploy cousin fixed effects specifications to explore this possibility.



4     Empirical Methods

To obtain baseline estimates of the effects of sibling poor health on children’s human cap-
ital accumulation, we follow Fletcher and Wolfe (2008) and begin with OLS models of the
following form:


                     Yit = β + β1 Healthj + β2 Healthi + β3 Xit + δt + it                   (1)

    where Yit is one of the early educational outcomes for child i in period t. Healthj is
a measure of the sibling’s health status. Depending on the specified health condition of
interest, this measure is either an indicator for a sibling’s developmental disability or a
sibling’s externalizing behavior. Healthi is similarly defined, but is an indicator for a child’s
own health status. Xit is a vector of individual- and family-level covariates. Our models
allow for separate intercepts for the three waves of the PSID-CDS, and all standard errors
are clustered at the family (sibling pair) level.
    We estimate equation (1) using three different versions of Xit . The first version includes
child age, child gender, child race, birth order, an indicator of high-risk birth (mother’s
age at birth < 20 years or ≥ 40 years), and maternal education (less than high school,
high school, or more than high school). The second version of Xit is a much fuller list
of controls. In addition to the measures listed above, it also includes: mother’s marital
status at time of first birth; urbanicity at time of birth (urban, non-urban); parental family


                                               15
background (mother grew up “poor”, father grew up “poor”); average family income over
five years prior to the birth of first child; parental history of childhood psychological or
emotional problems; primary caregiver’s religion (Catholic, Protestant, no religion, other
religions); parent(s) ever incarcerated; father’s interview status (active PSID member, non-
sample/non-response); and whether the child’s family recently immigrated to the United
States (PSID immigrant refresher family). The third version of Xit instead introduces a set
of potentially endogenous mediators: family income (five-year rolling average of total family
income),17 family size (number of persons in the family unit), and family structure (whether
both biological parents in household).
       In each case, we attempt to carefully define our comparison or control group. The PSID-
CDS sample includes children with a range of health conditions. However, for many of
these conditions, the incidence within our sample is too low to address them directly in our
analysis. We restrict our focus to two specific conditions of interest: developmental disability
and externalizing behavior. For each of these conditions of interest, we restrict the regression
sample such that a sibling pair is included in the sample only if (at least) one of the following
conditions is satisfied:18 the target child has the specified health condition, the child’s sibling
has the specified health condition, or both members of the sibling pair are healthy. A child
is classified as “healthy” if he/she is free of a set of health conditions we observe in the CDS,
including developmental disability, externalizing behavior, developmental delay (including
speech impairment), serious hearing difficulty or deafness, and serious difficulty seeing or
blindness.
       We next estimate fixed effects models using cousins. As our sample consists solely of
sibling pairs and we are interested in chronic health conditions that do not vary with time,
  17
     We tested the sensitivity of our results to alternative measures of family income, including contempo-
raneous income, average income in five years prior to child’s birth, average income in five years prior to
mother’s first birth, and income adjusted for family size
  18
     A sibling pair will be included in the regression sample if both the target child and his/her sibling have
the condition of interest. A sibling pair may also be included in the regression sample if one sibling has
the condition of interest and the other sibling is “unhealthy”, i.e. has a chronic condition other than the
condition of interest.



                                                      16
we are not able to introduce sibling-level fixed effects to our specifications. Using the sub-
sample of sibling pairs who also have extended family members (CDS cousins) in the sample,
however, we estimate fixed effects models of the form:


                  Yit = β + β1 Healthj + β2 Healthi + β3 Xit + δt + αE + it               (2)

   where αE is a set of binary indicators for each extended family (or set of cousins). Xit
is a vector of individual and immediate family-level controls that includes child age, child
gender, child birth order, child high-risk birth, and maternal education. There was too little
variation of reported race within extended families to include child race in Xit . By including
extended family or cousin fixed effects, we control for otherwise unobservable time-invariant
characteristics consistent across units in the extended family, including shared genetics and
common grandparent’s SES and culture, diet and norms.
   For the cousin fixed effects analysis, we adjust our definition of the control or comparison
group to reflect the increased scale of the family structure of interest. For each of our con-
ditions of interest, we restrict the regression sample such that all members of an extended
family are included in the sample if any member of the extended family has the specified
health condition or if all members of the extended family are healthy. An additional ad-
justment was made for large extended families (i.e. families for which we observe cousins
from more than two family units) with an unhealthy member(s), but no history of the con-
dition of interest. In these cases, if at least two family units within the extended family had
healthy sibling pairs, the healthy sibling pairs from that extended family were included in
the comparison group.




                                              17
5        Results

Table 4 shows OLS estimates for the effects of sibling poor health,19 specifically develop-
mental disability (Panel A) and externalizing behavior (Panel B), on our measures of human
capital accumulation with varying sets of controls. The first column shows estimates with
the baseline set of controls, the second column shows estimates with a rich set of controls
for family background, and the third column shows estimates with a set of potentially en-
dogenous family mediators: family income, family size, and family structure.
       Our baseline results suggest that chronic conditions during childhood have detrimental
effects not only on the early educational outcomes of the child directly affected but also on
the human capital accumulation of other children in the household. We find evidence that
having a sibling in poor health, either a sibling with developmental disability or a sibling with
externalizing behavior, may be associated with an increased risk of ever having repeated a
grade. In the case of externalizing behavior, we find that a sibling’s poor health is associated
with lower scores on the Woodcock-Johnson (WJ-R) Applied Problems, Letter-Word, and
Passage Comprehension tests. We estimate even larger sibling health spillovers on measured
math and language achievement in the case of developmental disability. In particular, our
results suggest that children with a developmentally disabled sibling may be expected to score
3.8 (Passage Comprehension) to 5.8 (Letter-Word) points lower on the WJ-R achievement
tests. Score reductions of this magnitude represent 1/4 to 1/3 of a standard deviation. The
inclusion of a rich set of controls for family background (Column 2) has very little effect on
the estimated effects of sibling health spillovers.
       The specifications in Columns 1 and 2 estimate an “overall” effect of sibling poor health on
measures of human capital accumulation. These specifications do not control for potentially
endogenous mediators. Prior research suggests that a child’s poor health may affect the
financial resources, fertility decisions, and structure of households. That is, if a family has
  19
   In the case of grade repetition, a binary outcome measure, we estimate a linear probability model;
however, our results are robust to probit estimation (Table 5).



                                                  18
a child with a developmental disability or externalizing behavior, parents may reduce labor
force participation in order to care for the child and thus have reduced incomes. Similarly,
the stress associated with raising a child with one of these conditions may lead to parental
separation or divorce as well as influence parents’ desired (and actual) number of children.
It is possible that children’s responses to a sibling’s developmental disability or externalizing
behavior may be the result of effects on family income, family size, and family structure. We
begin to explore these mediators with our estimates in Column 3. As one might expect, the
point estimates for the effect of a sibling’s poor health are reduced, suggesting a role for family
income, family size, and family structure. Point estimates of sibling health spillovers are
reduced by an average of 18% and 9% in the case of externalizing behavior and developmental
disability, respectively. Qualitatively, our core results are unchanged.
       The coefficients on the other control variables are generally consistent with expectations
from the related literatures.20 For example, the higher education of a child’s mother or
primary caregiver is highly predictive of improved outcomes across all four of our measures of
human capital accumulation. Children of mothers who were living in urban areas or married
at the time of their first birth tend to outperform their peers. In addition, the achievement
gap is reflected in significantly worse outcomes associated with a child’s minority status.
       Even with controls for a rich set of observable family characteristics, it is still possible
that families with a child with a developmental disability or externalizing behavior may differ
from families with healthy children in many unobserved ways. By introducing extended
family or cousin fixed effects, we are able to control for unobserved time-invariant family
characteristics that may bias our OLS estimates. These characteristics might include shared
genetics and common grandparent’s SES and culture, diet and norms.
       Table 6 shows fixed effects estimates for the influence of sibling poor health on our
measures of child human capital accumulation. Once we adjust for time-invariant unobserved
family characteristics, the results suggest that there may not be a significant influence of
  20
   In the interest of economizing on space, we present point estimates only for our coefficients of interest.
Tables with a full set of coefficients are available upon request.


                                                     19
sibling externalizing behavior on these outcomes (Panel B). We find that the estimated effect
diminishes in magnitude across all four of our outcome measures when compared to our OLS
estimates. None of the estimates are statistically significant at conventional levels.
      The estimates for the effects of sibling developmental disability (Panel A), however, are
largely robust to the inclusion of extended family fixed effects. Having a sibling with a
developmental disability is associated with important reductions in measured language and
math achievement. On average, a child with a developmentally disabled sibling may be
expected to score four to six points, or 1/3 of a standard deviation,21 lower on Woodcock-
Johnson (WJ-R) tests of achievement when compared to children with healthy siblings.
These findings suggest a very strong influence of having a sibling with a developmental
disability on one’s own human capital.



6       Results by Characteristics of Sibship

Up to this point in our analysis, we have implicitly assumed that a sibling’s poor health
affects all children equally. However, research in the psychology literature might lead us to
expect heterogeneity in sibling spillovers according to specific characteristics of the sibship.
Prior evidence suggests that females experience greater intimacy in the sibling relationship
compared to males. We may therefore expect that a sibling’s poor health may have an
increased influence among sisters. In addition, we might expect younger siblings to be
especially vulnerable to sibling health spillovers. A child born into a household facing the
stresses tied to an older sibling’s chronic condition may experience reduced investments and
parental attention from the earliest years of life. Additionally, older children often serve as
role models and therefore may exert a greater influence on their siblings. Over-identification,
where a child may adopt some of the behaviors of a disabled sibling, is more likely to occur if
the typically-developing child is younger than the affected sibling (Meyer and Vadasy, 2007).
Children born right after a sibling with a disability may feel additional parental pressure to
 21
      Scores on the WJ-R assessments are standardized with a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15

                                                    20
achieve. While some children will have the intellectual capacity and personality to live up
to these elevated expectations, for other children the additional demands may be too much
emotionally or intellectually (Siegel and Silverstein, 1994).
   The results of an examination of potential heterogeneity in sibling health spillovers by
the child’s gender and relative age are presented in Table 7. The results suggest that when
children’s human capital accumulation is measured through Woodcock-Johnson assessments,
females are more negatively affected by a sibling’s poor health. This disparity is especially
pronounced in the case of developmental disability. Among females, having a developmen-
tally disabled sibling is associated with significant (on the order of 1/3 to 1/2 of a standard
deviation) reductions in measured math and language ability. These large effects are not
seen among males. While some of the gender-based differences are imprecisely estimated
(only the difference in WJ-R Applied Problems scores is significant at conventional levels),
the estimated effect sizes are large across all three sections of the Woodcock-Johnson.
   We then divide the sample according to the child’s relative age. The “older” group
includes those children who were born prior to their sample sibling. The results of Panel B
suggest that in the case of externalizing behavior, younger siblings tend to be more negatively
affected by a sibling’s poor health. Among siblings of a child with externalizing behavior,
younger siblings can be expected on average to score 3 to 5 points (or 1/5 to 1/3 of a standard
deviation) lower on Woodcock-Johnson tests when compared to children born prior to their
affected sibling. In the case of developmental disability, the results are less clear. There is
some evidence to suggest that younger siblings may fare worse in terms of grade repetition
and performance on the WJ-R Passage Comprehension test, but this pattern is not consistent
across the remaining WJ-R measures.




                                              21
7     Discussion and Conclusions

Although there is high-quality research examining how the immediate circumstances faced
during childhood may affect child development and achievement, the influence of siblings
remains an area of relatively limited large scale research. With this study, we have begun to
address this gap by analyzing one particular aspect of the sibling relationship: the influence
of sibling health status on children’s human capital accumulation.
    We show that childhood chronic health conditions, specifically developmental disability
and externalizing behavior, not only negatively affect the early educational outcomes of the
individual directly affected but may also influence the human capital accumulation of other
children in the household. We find that having a sibling with a developmental disability or
externalizing behavior is associated with reductions in measured math and language achieve-
ment. There is also some evidence to suggest an increased risk of grade repetition. Estimated
sibling health spillovers for developmental disability, in particular, are large. We find that,
on average, siblings of children with a developmental disability may be expected to score
roughly 1/3 of a standard deviation lower on WJ-R tests of achievement. These results are
robust to our attempts to control for potentially confounding family factors.
    We also show, consistent with the psychology literature, that the influence of siblings
may vary according to characteristics of the sibship. We find evidence of heterogeneity
in sibling health spillovers according to the child’s gender and relative age. Specifically,
when human capital accumulation is measured through WJ-R assessments, sisters appear to
be more negatively affected by a sibling’s poor health. This gender-based heterogeneity is
especially pronounced among siblings of children with developmental disability. In the case of
externalizing behavior, we also find evidence of heterogeneous spillovers by the child’s relative
age, with the human capital accumulation of younger siblings more negatively influenced by
a sibling’s behavioral problems.
    A potential concern with our analysis is that estimates of sibling health spillovers may be
biased due to confounding family factors. Families with an unhealthy child may differ from

                                               22
families with healthy children along many observed and unobserved dimensions. We explore
the potential importance of this issue by examining the observable family correlates of having
a child affected by each of our conditions of interest. We find that many observed family and
individual characteristics are unrelated to having a child with a developmental disability
or externalizing behavior. Nevertheless, there may be additional unobserved differences
between families with and without a child in poor health, including genetics. This is an area
where our data poses some limitations on the potential analyses. We are unable to conduct
a sibling-level fixed effects analysis; our sample consists solely of sibling pairs and we are
interested in chronic conditions that do not vary with time. In our analysis we take a unique
approach to this issue. We exploit the genealogical design of the PSID in order to construct
extended family, or cousin, fixed effects. One caveat to this fixed effects approach, however,
is that we are only able to control for unobserved factors on one side of a child’s family.
   Overall, our results suggest an important influence of sibling health status on children’s
early educational outcomes. Our analysis of the PSID-CDS sample, however, does not
allow us to comment as to whether there may be longer term effects. Future work should
consider whether sibling health status influences human capital accumulation, along with
associated socioeconomic outcomes, into young adulthood and beyond. Further, future work
should explore the potential mechanisms that could explain the link between sibling health
and children’s outcomes. Potential pathways of interest include (1) direct effects of having
a sibling with an illness, such as behavioral spillovers that interfere with the well child’s
development, (2) income effects, i.e. those due to the need to finance medical expenditures
or a parent’s reduction in labor force participation, that stem from the sibling’s illness and
may then spillover onto the well child, and (3) substitution effects, such as those stemming
from parents’ efforts to either reinforce or offset differences in the health endowments of their
children, that could affect the level of time and financial investments made in the well child.
   Our results have several important implications. First, they suggest a need to broaden
theoretical and empirical models of human capital determinants to include a wider set of


                                               23
family factors with an emphasis on the importance of siblings. Second, the results suggest
there may be uncounted benefits of improving the health of children on the outcomes of
their family members. For example, reducing the hyperactive symptoms of a child through
medication or behavioral therapy can benefit the outcomes of the treated child, as well as the
child’s family members, especially siblings. The magnitude of these spillovers are large and
complement other results in the literature suggesting spillovers in addressing poor health
in children on their classmates’ school performance (Aizer, 2008; Fletcher, 2010). These
spillover effects are not currently included as a part of cost-benefit calculations when evalu-
ating programs that aim to improve children’s health, but our results combined with others
in the literature suggest current calculations of the effects of health improving programs are
(potentially severely) underestimated.




                                              24
References
Aizer, Anna. 2008. “Peer Effects and Human Capital Accumulation: the Externalities of
 ADD.” NBER Working Paper No. 14354.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection
 on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 151–184.

Arnold, J. E., A. G Levine, and J. R Patterson. 1975. “Changes in sibling behavior
 following family intervention.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 43: 683–688.

Becker, Gary S., and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity
 and Quality of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2): S279–S288.

Becker, Gary S, and Nigel Tomes. 1976. “Child Endowments and the Quantity and
 Quality of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4): S143–62.

Behrman, Jere R., and Paul Taubman. 1986. “Birth order, schooling, and earnings.”
 Journal of Labor Economics, 4: S121–45.

Behrman, Jere R, Mark R Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman. 1994. “Endowments
 and the Allocation of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins
 Experiment.” Journal of Political Economy, 102(6): 1131–74.

Behrman, Jere R, Robert A Pollak, and Paul Taubman. 1982. “Parental Preferences
 and Provision for Progeny.” Journal of Political Economy, 90(1): 52–73.

Bischoff, L. B., and D. H Tingstrom. 1991. “Siblings of children with disabil-
  ities:Psychological and behavioral characteristics.” Counseling Psychology Quarterly,
  4(4): 311–322.

Boyle, Coleen A., Sheree Boulet, Laura A. Schieve, Robin A. Cohen, Stephen J.
 Blumberg, Marshalyn Yeargin-Allsopp, Susanna Visser, and Michael D. Ko-
 gan. 2011. “Trends in the Prevalence of Developmental Disabilities in US Children, 1997-
 2008.” Pediatrics, 127(6): 1034–1042.

Breslau, N., M. Weitzman, and K. Messenger. 1981. “Psychologic functioning of
 siblings of disabled children.” Pediatrics, 67(3): 344–353.

Burton, P., and S. Phipps. 2009. “Economic Costs of Caring for Children with Disabili-
 ties.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2): S279S288.

Butcher, Kristin E., and Anne Case. 1994. “The effect of sibling sex composition on
 women’s education and earnings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 531–63.

Currie, Janet, and Mark Stabile. 2006. “Child mental health and human capital accu-
 mulation: The case of ADHD.” Journal of Health Economics, 25(6): 1094 – 1118.



                                            25
Dellve, L, L. Cernerud, and L.R. & Hallberg. 2000. “Harmonizing dilemmas. Siblings
 of children with DAMP and Asperger syndromes experiences of coping with their life
 situations.” Scandinavian Journal of Caring Science, 14(3): 172–178.

Derouin, D., and P. O. Jessee. 1996. “Impact of a chronic illness in childhood: siblings’
 perceptions.” Issues in Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing, 19(2): 135–147.

Dodd, L. W. 2004. “Supporting the siblings of young children with disabilities.” British
 Journal of Special Education, 21(1): 41–49.

Dunn, J. 1992. “Siblings and development.” Current Directions in Psychological Science,
 1(1): 6–9.

Eget, Leslie. 2009. “Siblings of those with developmental disabilities: career exploration and
 likelihood of choosing a helping profession.” PhD diss. Indiana University of Pennsylvania.

Fletcher, J. 2010. “Spillover effects of inclusion of classmates with emotional problems
  on test scores in early elementary school.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  29(1): 69–83.

Fletcher, Jason, and Barbara Wolfe. 2008. “Child mental health and human capital
  accumulation: The case of ADHD revisited.” Journal of Health Economics, 27(3): 794 –
  800.

Gaviria, Alejandro, and Steven Raphael. 2001. “School-Based peer effects and juvenile
 behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(2): 257–268.

Gould, Elise. 2004. “Decomposing the effects of children’s health on mother’s labor supply:
 is it time or money?” Health Economics, 13(6): 525–541.

Greene, Ross W. Ph.D.and Biederman, Joseph M.D, Michael C. B.A. Faraone,
 Stephen V. Ph.D.and Monuteaux, Eric Sci.D. Mick, Emily P. B.A. DuPre,
 Catherine S. B.A. Fine, and Jennifer C. B.A. Goring. 2011. “Social Impairment
 in Girls With ADHD: Patterns, Gender Comparisons, and Correlates.” Journal of the
 American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(6): 704–710.

Hanushek, Eric A. 1992. “The trade-off between child quantity and quality.” Journal of
 Political Economy, 100: 84–117.

Hanushek, Eric A., Kain John F. Markman Jacob M., and Steven G. Rivkin.
 2003. “Does peer ability affect student achievement?” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
 18(5): 527–544.

Hauser, R.M., and R. Wong. 1989. “Sibling Resemblance and Inter-Sibling Effects in
 Educational Attainment.” Sociology of Education, 62: 149–71.

Haynie, Dana L., and Suzanne McHugh. 2003. “Sibling deviance: In the shadows of
 mutual and unique friendship effects?” Criminology, 41(2): 35592.


                                             26
Hsin, Amy. 2013. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental Treatment.”
 Demography, Forthcoming.

Kaestner, Robert. 1997. “Are brothers really better? Sibling sex composition and educa-
 tional achievement revisited.” Journal of Human Resources, 32: 250–84.

Mash, E. J., and C. Johnston. 1983. “Sibling interactions of hyperactive and normal
 children and their relationship to reports of maternal stress and self-esteem.” Journal of
 Clinical Child Psychology, 12: 91–99.

Meyer, D. J., and P. F. Vadasy. 2007. Sibshops: Workshops for siblings of children with
 special needs. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

Mikami, A.Y., and L. J. Pfiffner. 2008. “Sibling relationships among children with
 ADHD.” Journal of Attention Disorders, 11(4): 482–492.

Milberger, S, J. Biederman, S. V. Faraone, T. Wilens, and M. P Chu. 1997.
 “Associations between ADHD and psychoactive substance use disorders: Findings from a
 longitudinal study of high-risk siblings of ADHD children.” American Journal on Addic-
 tions, 6(4): 318–329.

Oettinger, Gerald S. 2000. “Sibling similarity in high school graduation outcomes: Causal
 interdependency or unobserved heterogeneity?” Southern Economic Journal, 66(3): 631–
 48.

Opperman, S., and E. Alant. 2003. “The coping responses of the adolescent siblings of
 children with severe disabilities.” Disability and Rehabilitation, 25(9): 441–454.

Ouyang, Lijing. 2004. “Sibling effects on teen risky behaviors.” Duke University Working
 Paper.

Parish, S. L., and J. M. Cloud. 2006. “Financial well-being of young children with
 disabilities and their families.” Social Work, 51(3): 223–232.

Pilowsky, T., N. Yirmiya, O. Doppelt, V. Gross-Tsur, and R. S. Shalev. 2004.
  “Social and emotional adjustment of siblings of children with autism.” Journal of Child
  Psychology and Psychiatry, 45(4): 855–865.

Pitt, Mark M, Mark R Rosenzweig, and Md Nazmul Hassan. 1990. “Productiv-
  ity, Health, and Inequality in the Intrahousehold Distribution of Food in Low-Income
  Countries.” American Economic Review, 80(5): 1139–56.

Powers, E.T. 2004. “Children’s health and maternal work activity: Estimates under alter-
 native disability de?nitions.” The Journal of Human Resources, 38(3): 522556.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Junsen Zhang. 2009. “Do Population Control Policies In-
 duce More Human Capital Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s One-Child
 Policy.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1149 – 1174.


                                            27
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1988. “Heterogeneity, Intrafamily
 Distribution, and Child Health.” Journal of Human Resources, 23(4): 437–461.

Rossiter, L., and D. (2001) Sharpe. 2001. “The siblings of individuals with mental
 retardation: A quantitative integration of the literature.” Journal of Child and Family
 Studies, 10(1): 65–84.

SA, Russ, Larson K, and Halfon N. 2012. “A national profile of childhood epilepsy and
 seizure disorder.” Pediatrics, 129(2): 256–64.

Sharpe, D., and L. Rossiter. 2002. “Siblings of children with a chronic illness: A meta-
  analysis.” Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 27: 699710.

Siegel, Bryna, and Stuart Silverstein. 1994. What About Me? Growing Up with a
  Developmentally Disabled Sibling. Da Capo Press.

Smith, A. J., R. T. Brown, V. Bunke, R. L. Blount, and E. Christophersen.
 2002. “Psychosicial adjustment and peer competence of siblings of children with attention-
 deficit/hyperactivity disorder.” Journal of Attention Disorders, 5(3): 165–177.

Stoneman, Z. 1998. “Handbook of Mental Retardation and Development.” , ed. R. M.
  Hodapp & E. Zigler J. A. Burack, Chapter Research on siblings of children with men-
  tal retardation: Contributions of developmental theory and etiology, 669692. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Stoneman, Z. 2001. “Supporting positive sibling relationships during childhood.” Ment
  Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev, 7: 134142.

Stoneman, Z. 2005. “Siblings of children with disabilities: research themes.” Ment Retard,
  43: 339350.

Stoneman, Z., and G. H Brody. 1993. “The effects of mental retardation, disability,
  and illness on sibling relationships.” , ed. Z. Stoneman & P. W. Berman, Chapter Sibling
  relations in the family context, 3–30. Baltimore: Brookes.

Widmer, Eric. 1997. “Influence of older siblings on initiation of sexual intercourse.” Journal
 of Marriage and the Family, 59(4): 928–938.

Williams, Phoebe Dauz, Arthur R. Williams, J. Carolyn Graff, Sandra Han-
 son, Anne Stanton, Carol Hafeman, Adrienne Liebergen, Karla Leuenberg,
 Robyn Karlin Setter, Lavonne Ridder, Heather Curry, Martha Barnard, and
 Susan Sanders. 2002. “Interrelationships Among Variables Affecting Well Siblings and
 Mothers in Families of Children with a Chronic Illness or Disability.” Journal of Behavioral
 Medicine, 25(5): 411 – 424.




                                             28
8   Tables

     Table 1: Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics Across
        the Full psid-cds and the Siblings and Cousins Subsamples
                                               (1)            (2)                    (3)
                                            PSID-CDS      CDS Siblings           CDS Cousins
    A. Basic Descriptive Data
    Age                                        9.79           9.68                    10.0‡
    Male                                       0.50           0.51                    0.50
    Black (non-Hisp.)                          0.16           0.15                   0.20†‡
    Hispanic                                   0.13           0.14                   0.05†‡
    Birth order                                2.03           2.14†                   2.20†
    PCG Education (=12 yrs)                    0.36           0.36                    0.39
    PCG Education (>12 yrs)                    0.49           0.48                    0.50
    Mother Age at Birth (<20 yrs)              0.08           0.08                   0.10†‡
    Mother Age at Birth (≥40 yrs)              0.02           0.01†                   0.01†
    Urban (at birth)                           0.69           0.70                    0.68
    Mother Married at First Birth              0.66           0.67                    0.64
    Family Income Prior to First Birth1       50,553         49,858                  48,726
    Mother’s Family Poor                       0.29           0.28                    0.27
    Father’s Family Poor                       0.33           0.33                    0.31
    Family Income2                            72,586         73,054                  75,244
    Two Biological Parents in HH               0.65           0.69†                   0.67
    Members of Family Unit                     4.36           4.70†                   4.69†

    B. Human Capital Outcomes
    Grade Repetition                           0.119          0.109                  0.121
    WJ-R Applied Problems                      103.1          104.0                  103.6
    WJ-R Letter-Word                           102.5          102.6                 101.1†‡
    WJ-R Passage Comprehension                 101.9          102.1                  101.6

    C. Childhood Chronic Conditions
    Developmental Disability                    0.048         0.045                   0.049
    Externalizing Behavior                      0.100         0.109                   0.112
    Low Birth Weight                            0.086         0.084                  0.070†‡
    Difficulty Hearing/Deaf                     0.029         0.030                   0.029
    Difficulty Seeing/Blind                     0.050         0.048                   0.056
    Emotional Disturbance                       0.030         0.031                   0.036
    Hyperactive/ADHD                            0.261         0.256                   0.255
    Dev. Delay/Learning Disab.                  0.082         0.077                   0.085
    Speech Impairment                           0.094         0.098                  0.110†
    Heart Condition                             0.011         0.009                   0.010
    Diabetes                                    0.004         0.004                   0.004
    Asthma                                      0.164         0.159                   0.164
    Allergies                                   0.176         0.166                   0.168
    Notes: The full CDS sample includes 3,447 unique children with non-missing information on
    baseline demographic measures. The subsample of CDS sibling pairs consists of 2,206 unique
    children. The subsample of cousins includes 982 unique children from 209 distinct extended
    families. † Difference from full PSID-CDS statistically significant at p = 0.05. ‡ Difference from
    CDS-Siblings statistically significant at p = 0.05. Means weighted using sampling weights.
    1
      Average income measured over five years prior to mother’s first birth. 2 Total family income
    averaged over previous five years.


                                                    29
               Table 2: Predictors of Developmental Disability
                                                          Probit
                                                    dydx          SE
Birth order                                     -0.000213     (0.00445)
Male(d)                                          0.0178**     (0.00893)
Black (non-Hisp.)(d)                              -0.0162      (0.0127)
                     (d)
PCG Educ 12 years                               -0.0284**      (0.0119)
PCG Educ> 12 years(d)                           -0.0333**      (0.0159)
Family Income Prior to First Birth              -0.0154**     (0.00784)
                 (d)
High-risk Birth                                  -0.00664      (0.0145)
Urban (at birth)(d)                             -0.000149     (0.00938)
Mother Married at First Birth(d)                 0.0263**      (0.0123)
                         (d)
Mother’s Family Poor                             -0.00945      (0.0102)
Father’s Family Poor(d)                           -0.0130      (0.0101)
                                            (d)
History Childhood Psych./Emotional Problems       0.0510       (0.0574)
         (d)
Catholic                                         -0.00100      (0.0147)
Protestant(d)                                     -0.0132      (0.0141)
             (d)
No Religion                                      -0.00489      (0.0191)
Observations                                        1277
Log-likelihood Value                               -186.6
Pseudo R2                                          0.058
Notes: Marginal effects estimated at sample means except in the case of binary covariates(d) ,
in which case marginal effects estimated as discrete change in dummy variable from 0 to 1. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Family Income averaged over five years prior to mother’s first birth.
High-risk birth measure is an indicator for births to mothers < 20 years or ≥ 40 years
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                                30
                Table 3: Predictors of Externalizing Behavior
                                                         Probit
                                                   dydx          SE
Birth order                                    -0.000381     (0.00769)
Male(d)                                          0.0211       (0.0156)
                     (d)
Black (non-Hisp.)                               -0.0391*      (0.0224)
                        (d)
PCG Educ 12 years                                -0.0310      (0.0218)
PCG Educ > 12 years(d)                         -0.0681**      (0.0254)
Family Income Prior to First Birth              0.00776       (0.0128)
                 (d)
High-risk Birth                                 0.0516*       (0.0297)
Urban (at birth)(d)                              -0.0224      (0.0166)
Mother Married at First Birth(d)                 -0.0387      (0.0240)
                            (d)
Mother’s Family Poor                             0.0317       (0.0213)
Father’s Family Poor(d)                         -0.0346*      (0.0193)
History Childhood Psych./Emotional Problems(d) 0.192**        (0.0850)
         (d)
Catholic                                         0.0338       (0.0356)
Protestant(d)                                    0.0503       (0.0322)
             (d)
No Religiom                                      0.113*       (0.0677)
Observations                                       1264
Log-likelihood Value                              -381.6
Pseudo R2                                         0.079
Notes: Marginal effects estimated at sample means except in the case of binary covariates(d) ,
in which case marginal effects estimated as discrete change in dummy variable from 0 to 1. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Family Income averaged over five years prior to mother’s first birth.
High-risk birth measure is an indicator for births to mothers < 20 years or ≥ 40 years
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                                31
 Table 4: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
                          (1)                    (2)                   (3)
                       Baseline             Full Family           Baseline Incl.
                       Controls              Controls              Mediators
                          A. Developmental Disabilities
                   Own        Sibling     Own        Sibling   Own         Sibling
Grade Repetition 0.0700** 0.0476*        0.0214      0.0043 0.0680**       0.0458
                 (0.0316) (0.0287) (0.0277) (0.0278) (0.0314)             (0.0286)
WJ-R Applied     -9.297** -4.169** -7.786** -4.417** -8.697**             -3.628**
                  (1.988)     (1.632)   (2.324)      (2.206)  (1.955)      (1.631)
WJ-R Letter      -6.936** -5.777** -3.858* -5.082** -6.449**              -5.348**
                  (1.936)     (1.765)   (2.200)      (2.340)  (1.916)      (1.783)
WJ-R Passage     -5.770** -3.795** -4.413** -3.579* -5.285**              -3.289**
                  (1.861)     (1.623)   (2.065)      (2.103)  (1.833)      (1.625)
                            B. Externalizing Behavior
                   Own        Sibling     Own        Sibling   Own         Sibling
Grade Repetition 0.150** 0.0349* 0.149** 0.0580** 0.146**                  0.0314
                 (0.0248) (0.0201) (0.0308) (0.0266) (0.0251)             (0.0209)
WJ-R Applied     -6.381** -3.791** -5.612** -2.571** -5.809**             -3.439**
                  (1.026)     (0.970)   (1.211)      (1.200)  (1.026)      (0.958)
WJ-R Letter      -6.700** -3.569** -4.992** -2.781** -6.026**             -3.026**
                  (1.201)     (1.089)   (1.489)      (1.315)  (1.243)      (1.087)
WJ-R Passage     -6.718** -1.931** -5.200**           -1.220 -5.803**       -1.151
                  (1.092)     (0.914)   (1.318)      (1.127)  (1.133)      (0.913)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are robust to within-family correlation. Baseline correlation.
Baseline controls include wave indicators, age, gender, race, maternal education, birth order, and
high-risk birth. Expanded or ”Full” family controls additionally include mother’s marital status at
time of first birth, urbancity at time of birth, parental family background (poor, not poor), average
average family income prior to birth of first child, parental history of childhood psychological or
emotional problems, and primary caregiver’s religion. Potential family mediators include family
income, family size, and family structure. To be included in the regression sample, a sibling pair
must satisfy one of three conditions: the target child has condition of interest, the sibling has
the condition of interest, or both members of the pair are healthy.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                                 32
     Table 5: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation: Sensitivity Analyses for Baseline
                                                  Health Spillovers
                                                Developmental Disabilities        Externalizing Behavior
                                              (1)     (2)      (3)        (4) (5)    (6)       (7)       (8)
                                             WJ       WJ      WJ        Grade WJ     WJ       WJ        Grade
                                            Applied Letter Passage Repeat Applied Letter Passage       Repeat
     Only Observe 2 Children per HH
                                               √       √        √              √      √
     Restrict sample to HHs w/ < 3 children                                -                    -         -

     Compositional Diff: Sibings vs Cousin FE
                                                             √          √          √                      √          √           √            √
     Exclude Hispanic and Asian/Islander                                                       -

     Definition of Externalizing Behavior
                                                                                                          √          √           √            √
     Current (rather than average) BPI score                 na         na         na         na
                                                                                                          √          √           √
     Cuttoff: 85th percentile of BPI                         na         na         na         na                                               -
                                                                                                          √          √           √
     Cuttoff: 80th percentile of BPI                         na         na         na         na                                               -

     Sibs of EXT kids have higher BPI scores
                                                                                                          √          √




33
     Control for own BPI (rather than EXT)                   na         na         na         na                                 -             -

     LPM used in estimates for grade repeat
                                                                                               √
     Estimate using probit                                   na         na         na                     na         na         na             -

     Particular DD driving results?
                                                             √          √          √           √
     Exclude children with autism                                                                         na         na         na            na
                                                             √          √          √
     Exclude children with mental retardation                                                  -          na         na         na            na
                                                             √          √          √           √
     Include only children with epilepsy                                                                  na         na         na            na

     Sensitivity to various income measures
                                                             √          √          √                      √          √
     Income in current year                                                                    -                                 -             -
                                                             √          √          √                      √          √
     Equivalent income (adj. for family size)                                                  -                                 -             -
                                                             √          √                                 √          √
     Avg. income prior to birth of first child                                      -          -                                 -             -
                                                                                   √
     Notes: This table summarizes results from a series of sensitivity analyses. A indicates that baseline estimates of sibling spillovers for the
     condition-outcome pairing are robust to the specified test. A -, in contrast, indicates that baseline estimates for the condition-outcome pairing
     appear to be sensitive to the indicated change in specification. Instances where a test would not appropriate for the given condition-outcome
     pairing are marked na. Individual tables with point estimates are available in Appendix B.
           Table 6: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
                               Cousin Fixed Effects Analysis
                      Baseline Estimates                        Cousin Fixed Effects
                (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)
                WJ       WJ        WJ       Grade       WJ         WJ         WJ      Grade
             Applied   Letter   Passage Repeat Applied           Letter   Passage     Repeat
                                  A. Developmental Disabilities
     Own     -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -13.64** -7.718** -9.273** 0.0673*
              (1.988)  (1.936)   (1.861) (0.0316) (2.056)        (2.172)   (2.097)   (0.0376)
     Sibling -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -5.753** -4.900** -4.203**            0.0312
              (1.632)  (1.765)   (1.623) (0.0287) (1.950)        (2.061)   (2.000)   (0.0382)
     Obs.      2287     2292      1984       2294       891        895        738       827
       2
     R         0.215    0.168     0.235     0.059      0.075      0.056      0.105     0.048
                                    B. Externalizing Behavior




34
     Own     -6.381** -6.700** -6.718** 0.150** -3.988** -5.308** -6.826** 0.0983**
              (1.026)  (1.201)   (1.092) (0.0248) (1.178)        (1.308)   (1.288)   (0.0284)
     Sibling -3.791** -3.569** -1.931** 0.0349* -0.0751           -1.006    -1.050    0.0141
              (0.970)  (1.089)   (0.914) (0.0201) (1.182)        (1.309)   (1.284)   (0.0277)
     Obs.      2684     2689      2354       2675      1234        1239      1050      1144
     R2        0.244    0.196     0.262     0.128      0.025      0.042      0.107     0.065
     Notes: Specifications include wave indicators and controls for age, gender, race, maternal education, birth
     order, and high-risk birth. To be included in an OLS regression sample,a sibling pair must satisfy one of
     three conditions: the target child has the condition of interest, the sibling has the condition of interest, or
     both members of the pair are healthy. The inclusion criteria are adjusted for the fixed effects analysis. All
     members of an extended family are included in a FE regression sample if any member of the extended family
     has the condition of interest or if all members of the extended family are healthy.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
  Table 7: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
                  Heterogeneity by Gender           Heterogeneity by Relative Age
               Males     Females Difference         Older   Younger Difference
                                   A. Developmental Disability
WJ Applied      0.757    -7.845**   8.602**        -4.539*    -3.343       -1.577
              (2.058)     (2.288)    (3.048)       (2.340)   (2.262)      (3.254)
WJ Letter      -3.028 -8.047**         5.019      -5.757** -5.395**        -0.968
              (2.628)     (2.185)    (3.377)       (2.800)   (1.993)      (3.417)
WJ Passage     -0.855 -6.034**         5.179        -2.335  -4.866**        2.198
              (2.390)     (2.094)    (3.171)       (1.515)   (1.195)      (2.009)
Grade Repeat 0.0113       0.0815*    -0.0702       (2.415)   (2.124)      (3.192)
             (0.0365) (0.0425) (0.0554)             0.0110 0.0850**       -0.0635
                                    B. Externalizing Behavior
WJ Applied    -2.902* -4.299**        1.397        -2.351* -5.292**        2.939
              (1.508)     (1.314)    (2.056)       (1.420)   (1.449)      (2.120)
WJ Letter      -2.586 -4.304**         1.719        -0.807  -6.143**     5.336**
              (1.661)     (1.497)    (2.280)       (1.579)   (1.626)      (2.385)
WJ Passage     -1.356     -2.129*     0.773          0.118  -4.024**      4.155*
               0.0445      0.0191     0.0254       (1.455)   (1.392)      (2.168)
Grade Repeat (0.0322) (0.0237) (0.0396)            0.0192    0.0482*      -0.0258
             (0.0380) (0.0431) (0.0569)           (0.0280) (0.0282)      (0.0398)
Notes: Specifications include wave indicators and controls for age, gender, race, maternal education,
birth order, and high-risk birth. To be included in the regression sample,a sibling pair must satisfy
one of three conditions: the targetchild has the condition of interest, the sibling has the condition
of interest, or both members of the pair are healthy.Standard errors in parentheses are robust to
within-family correlation.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                                 35
Appendix
A

Consider a household with two children indexed i=H,L. Sibling H is healthy with high
endowment eH . Sibling L, who has a chronic illness, experiences an early-life shock and
has low endowment eL = eH + µ. Assume that the human capital of children is produced
according to a CES technology and is affected by endowment and parental investment:


                                                             1
                                   hi = [γeφi + (1 − γ)iφH ] φ                           (A.1)

    Assume that parents are altruistic and care about the quality (human capital accumu-
lation) of their children as well as their own consumption. Following Behrman, Pollak, and
Taubman (1982), further assume that the utility parents derive from their own consumption
is separable from the utility they derive from children, so that we may analyze the allocations
of resources across siblings without regard to its effects on parental consumption. Parental
preferences are specified by a CES utility function:


                                                             1
                                   U = [ahρH + (1 − a)hρL ] ρ                            (A.2)

where the parameter a allows for the possibility that parents favor the human capital forma-
tion of one particular child - according to gender, birth order, etc. - over the other. Parents
maximize utility subject to the human capital production technology and the partial budget
constraint:


                                          iH + iL = ȳ                                   (A.3)

where ȳ is the total value of parental resources allocated to the children.
    Setting the marginal utilities from investment equal across children:




                                               36
                                           ∂U ∂hH    ∂U ∂hL
                                                   =
                                           ∂hH ∂iH   ∂hL ∂iL




                               ρ−φ                                                 ρ−φ
       a[γeφH + (1 − γ)iφH ]    φ    = (1 − a)[γ(eH + µ)φ + (1 − γ)(ȳ − iH )φ ]    φ    (ȳ − iH )φ−1


   We define G(µ, iH ):

                                                    ρ−φ
                G(µ, iH ) = a[γeφH + (1 − γ)iφH ]    φ


                                                                         ρ−φ
                          − (1 − a)[γ(eH + µ)φ + (1 − γ)(ȳ − iH )φ ]     φ    (ȳ − iH )φ−1


   Then by the implicit function theorem, the cross effect of the shock to sibiling L’s en-
dowment on investment in healthy sibling H may be written:


                                             ∂iH   −∂G/∂µ
                                                 =                                                       (A.4)
                                             ∂µ    ∂G/∂iH

   Whether parents optimally adopt a reinforcing, compensating or neutral strategy in re-
sponse to the differences in their children’s endowments will depend on two paremeters:
the complementarity (substitutability) of endowments and investments in the human capital
technology (φ)and the aversion to inequality in parental preferences (ρ). The direction of the
optimal investment strategy is independent of the degree of favor for child H in the parental
preferences (a).
   The cross effect on sibling H’s human capital may be written:


                                             ∂hH   ∂hH ∂iH
                                                 =                                                       (A.5)
                                              ∂µ   ∂iH ∂µ
                                                                ∂iH
   If parents adopt a compensating strategy such that           ∂µ
                                                                      > 0 (iH and µ move in the same
              ∂hH
direction),    ∂µ
                    > 0 and the human capital formation of healthy sibling suffers. If parents



                                                     37
                                           ∂hH
adopt a reinforcing strategy, however,      ∂µ
                                                 < 0. Healthy sibling H benefits from increased
parental investment and, ultimately, increased human capital formation.
   In the above model, a sibling’s early-life health insult may affect child outcomes through
the reallocation of intrahousehold resources. The model precludes any direct effect operating
through the human capital technology. In reality, we may expect a sibling’s chronic health
condition (diminished endowment) to directly influence child outcomes through several chan-
nels, including social learning (eg conformity, imitation, learning spillovers) and disruptions
to the learning environment. We extend the above model by introducing sibling endowment
as a thrid factor in the human capital technology:


                                                                   1
                             hi = [γeφi + λeφj + (1 − γ − λ)iφH ] φ                                (A.6)

   Parental preferences and the budget constraint are left unaltered. Again, we set the
marginal utilities from investment equal across children:



                                  ρ−φ                                                    ρ−φ
a[γeφH +λ(eH +µ)φ +(1−γ−λ)iφH ]    φ    = (1−a)[γ(eH +µ)φ +λeφH +(1−γ−λ)(ȳ−iH )φ ]       φ     (ȳ−iH )φ−1


   We define G(µ, iH ):

                                                             ρ−φ
        G(µ, iH ) = a[γeφH + λ(eH + µ)φ + (1 − γ − λ)iφH ]    φ


                                                                          ρ−φ
                 − (1 − a)[γ(eH + µ)φ + λeφH + (1 − γ − λ)(ȳ − iH )φ ]    φ    (ȳ − iH )φ−1


   The cross effect of the shock to sibiling L’s endowment on investment in healthy sibling
H may be written:


                                          ∂iH   −∂G/∂µ
                                              =                                                    (A.7)
                                          ∂µ    ∂G/∂iH

   Now, whether parents optimally adopt a reinforcing, compensating or neutral strategy in


                                                 38
response to the differences in their children’s endowments will hinge on the the complemen-
tarity (substitutability) of endowments and investments in the human capital technology (φ),
along with the aversion to inequality (ρ) and degree of favor for child H (a) in the parental
preferences.
   The effect on the human capital of child H may be decomposed into two channels:


                                  ∂hH   ∂hH ∂eL ∂hH ∂iH
                                      =        +                                             (A.8)
                                   ∂µ   ∂eL ∂µ   ∂iH ∂µ
                                                                                         ∂hH ∂eL
   The first channel represents the direct or social learning effect. The term           ∂eL ∂µ
                                                                                                   is
positive, which is consistent with a deterimental influence on hH (the shock µ is negative).
The second channel represents the resource reallocation effect. If parents adopt a compen-
                                        ∂iH
sating or neutral strategy such that    ∂µ
                                              ≥ 0 (iH and the µ move in the same direction),
∂hH ∂iH
∂iH ∂µ
          > 0 and the human capital formation of healthy sibling H suffers. If parents adopt a
                                              ∂iH
reinforcing investment strategy such that     ∂µ
                                                    < 0 (iH and the µ move in opposite directions),
∂hH ∂iH
∂iH ∂µ
          < 0. The net effect on human capital will be ambiguous, depending on the relative
magnitudes of the social learning and resource reallocation effects.




                                                    39
B

    Table B.1: Developmental Disability in the CDS-Siblings Sample
                                  (1)       (2)     (3)
                              CDS-Siblings Males  Females
           Autism               0.285      0.378   0.151
           Epilepsy             0.689      0.570   0.867
           Mental Retardation   0.219      0.222   0.215

           Single Disability             0.833         0.830        0.839
           Multiple Disabilities         0.167         0.170        0.161
           A child is classified as developmentally disabled if he/she has ever
           been diagnosed with epilepsy, autism, or mental retardation. There
           are 228 observations (95 unique children) with DD in the CDS-
           Siblings sample. Of those observations, 135 correspond to males and
           93 correspond to females.




                                           40
                   Table B.2: Cross-Correlation of Chronic Conditions in the CDS-Siblings Sample
                                  DD    EXT LBW Deaf Blind Emot. ADHD Delay Speech Heart Diabetes Asthma
     Developmental Disability
     Externalizing Behavior      0.053
     Low Birth Weight            0.062 -0.004
     Difficulty Hearing/Deaf     0.059 -0.005 -0.011
     Difficulty Seeing/Blind    -0.004 0.024 0.026 0.007
     Emotional Disturbance       0.128 0.249 -0.016 0.083 0.053
     Hyperactive/ADHD            0.069 0.119 0.017 0.026 0.062 0.115




41
     Dev. Delay/Learning Disab. 0.221 0.148 0.026 0.121 0.072 0.281      0.108
     Speech Impairment           0.188 0.047 0.045 0.246 0.045 0.164     0.106 0.317
     Heart Condition             0.010 -0.005 0.038 0.031 0.057 0.007    0.029 0.043 0.039
     Diabetes                    0.102 0.015 0.033 -0.012 -0.015 0.056   0.024 0.048 0.008 -0.006
     Asthma                      0.002 0.014 0.090 0.052 0.027 0.021     0.058 0.016 0.085   0.045 0.053
     Allergies                   0.045 0.008 -0.002 0.058 0.057 0.088    0.179 0.076 0.075   0.026 0.036 0.272
     Notes: The PSID-CDS sample includes children with a range of health conditions. We restrict our focus to two conditions of primary interest: developmental
     disability and externalizing behavior. A child is classified as developmentally disabled if he/she has ever been diagnosed with epilepsy, autism, or mental
     retardation. We classify a child as having externalizing behavior if his/her average score on the BPI externalizing subscale is at or above the 90th percentile.
Table B.3: Correlation of Chronic Conditions Within Families
                                  (1)              (2)
                                          †
                             Sibling Pair    Extended Family‡
                            DD        EXT    DD        EXT
  Developmental Disability 0.066            -0.020    -0.056
  Externalizing Behavior   0.037      0.149 -0.043    -0.022

  Low Birth Weight           0.035               0.020      -0.017       0.018
  Difficulty Hearing/Deaf    0.051               0.058       0.024      -0.015
  Difficulty Seeing/Blind     0.037              0.033       0.011       0.044
  Emotional Disturbance      0.089               0.087      -0.004      -0.003
  Hyperactive/ADHD            0.046              0.091       0.065       0.061
  Dev. Delay/Learning Disab. 0.052               0.050       0.021       0.030
  Speech Impairment           0.093              0.035       0.055      -0.019
  Heart Condition            -0.019              0.031      -0.011       0.065
  Diabetes                   0.020               0.081      -0.038      -0.064
  Asthma                      0.060              0.032       0.014       0.045
  Allergies                   0.022              0.020       0.040      -0.033
  Notes: † Correlation between own developmental disability (DD) or externalizing
  behavior (EXT) and various indicators of sibling health status. ‡ Correlation
  between own developmental disability (DD) or externalizing behavior (EXT) and
  various indicators of extended family health status - at least one CDS cousin has
  been diagnosed with the specified chronic condition.




                                         42
Table B.4: Distribution of Scores on the BPI Externalizing Subscale
          (1)    (2)  (3)   (4)   (5) (6) (7) (8)      (9)
                                    th   th   th   th
           n    Min Max Mean 10        25   50   75    90th
                           PSID-CDS Sample
         9,828    0    17   5.56 1.33 2.67   5    8   10.67

                                  CDS-Siblings Sample
         5,038         0      17    5.56      1   2.66     5    8           11
                            Diagnosed ADHD/Hyperactivity
          382          0     16.5 9.42       4      7     10   12           14
                                Developmental Disability
          228          0      16    7.24 2.67      5       7  10.3         11.5
                                                       †
                                 Externalizing Behavior
          549        10.67 17       12.4     11 11.3 12        13          14.3
                          Sibling w/ Developmental Disability
          226          0      15    6.37 1.33      3     6.25 9.33         11.5
                           Sibling w/ Externalizing Behavior
          551          0      17    7.63 2.67 4.5 7.5 10.5                  12
                 †
         Notes: By definition, the average BPI Externalizing score for a child
         classified as having externalizing behavior must be at or above the 90th
         percentile (score of 10.67).




                                           43
                Table B.5: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
              Sensitivity to Restricting Sample to Families with Less Than 3 Children
                         Baseline Estimates                      HHs with Less than 3 Kids
                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
                WJ         WJ         WJ        Grade        WJ        WJ        WJ      Grade
             Applied      Letter    Passage Repeat Applied            Letter   Passage Repeat
                                           A. Developmental Disability
     Own     -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -9.093** -6.967** -4.729*               0.0621
              (1.988)    (1.936)    (1.861) (0.0316) (2.730)         (2.677)   (2.499) (0.0396)
     Sibling -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -4.390* -6.828** -4.510** 0.0197
              (1.632)    (1.765)    (1.623) (0.0287) (2.474)         (2.290)   (2.268) (0.0364)
     Obs.      2287        2292       1984       2294       1318       1318     1125       1276
     R2        0.215      0.168      0.235      0.059       0.196     0.145     0.204     0.062




44
                                            B. Externalizing Behavior
     Own     -6.381** -6.700** -6.718** 0.150** -6.848** -7.569** -7.143** 0.111**
              (1.026)    (1.201)    (1.092) (0.0248) (1.284)         (1.637)   (1.405) (0.0337)
     Sibling -3.791** -3.569** -1.931** 0.0349* -2.656* -4.615** -1.009                  0.0160
              (0.970)    (1.089)    (0.914) (0.0201) (1.409)         (1.483)   (1.323) (0.0273)
     Obs.      2684        2689       2354       2675       1487       1486     1283       1435
     R2        0.244      0.196      0.262      0.128       0.238     0.189     0.259     0.111
     The PSID-CDS sampled a maximum of two children per family unit, so it is possible for a child in our
     sibling sample to have additional siblings not captured in the CDS sample. To the extent that there
     are unobserved children in poor health in these households, our estimates may be biased downward.
     This table compares baseline estimates to those obtained when the sample is restricted to only those
     families reporting fewer than three children.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
                   Table B.6: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
                        Sensitivity to Exclusion of Immigrant Refresher Families
                          Baseline Estimates                         Restricted Sample
                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)
                  WJ        WJ          WJ       Grade       WJ         WJ        WJ     Grade
               Applied     Letter     Passage Repeat Applied          Letter   Passage Repeat
                                            A. Developmental Disability
     Own       -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -8.427** -5.652** -4.995** 0.0641*
                (1.988)   (1.936)     (1.861) (0.0316) (2.007)       (1.953)    (1.840) (0.0339)
     Sibling   -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -4.613** -5.611** -4.202** 0.0437
                (1.632)   (1.765)     (1.623) (0.0287) (1.751)       (1.930)    (1.770) (0.0290)
     Obs.        2287       2292       1984       2294       2092      2098      1803     2020
     R2          0.215     0.168       0.235     0.059      0.225      0.177     0.230    0.069




45
                                             B. Externalizing Behavior
     Own       -6.381** -6.700** -6.718** 0.150** -6.368** -6.531** -6.677** 0.142**
                (1.026)   (1.201)     (1.092) (0.0248) (1.029)       (1.178)    (1.074) (0.0260)
     Sibling   -3.791** -3.569** -1.931** 0.0349* -3.827** -3.797** -2.088** 0.0454**
                (0.970)   (1.089)     (0.914) (0.0201) (1.016)       (1.146)    (0.962) (0.0215)
     Obs.        2684       2689       2354       2675       2449      2455      2136     2371
     R2          0.244     0.196       0.262     0.128      0.259      0.209     0.264    0.136
     Ten percent of children in the sibling sample are drawn from family units newly added to the PSID through
     the immigrant refresher sample in 1997. These children do not have the same family history available as
     those descendedfrom original 1968 families and are excluded from our cousins fixed effects analysis. This
     table compares our our baseline estimates to those obtained when the sibling sample is restricted to exclude
     children from immigrant refresher family units.
     ∗
       p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
            Table B.7: Effects of Externalizing Behavior on Human Capital Accumulation
           Sensitivity to Definition of Externalizing Behavior: Averaged BPI vs current BPI
                          Baseline Estimates                        Alt. EXT Measure
                             Averaged BPI                               Current BPI
                  (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                  WJ         WJ         WJ       Grade      WJ         WJ        WJ      Grade
               Applied     Letter     Passage Repeat Applied         Letter    Passage Repeat
     Own       -6.381** -6.700** -6.718** 0.150** -5.708** -6.987** -5.421** 0.0989**




46
                (1.026)    (1.201)    (1.092) (0.0248) (0.789)       (0.881)   (0.775) (0.0169)
     Sibling -3.791** -3.569** -1.931** 0.0349* -1.586** -2.583** -1.328* 0.0417**
                (0.970)    (1.089)    (0.914) (0.0201) (0.733)       (0.839)   (0.704) (0.0155)
     Obs.        2684       2689        2354      2675      2736      2743      2505      2830
     R2          0.244      0.196      0.262      0.128    0.244      0.212     0.266    0.127
     Notes: Throughout our analysis, a child is classified as externalizing if his/her BPI score, averaged over the
     sample period, is at or above the 90th percentile. This table compares our baseline estimates to those
     obtained when we instead use the child’s contemporaneous BPI score.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
                               Table B.8: Effects of Externalizing Behavior on Human Capital Accumulation
                                                     Sensitivity to Externalizing Behavior Threshold
                          Cutoff: 80th Pctile                          Cutoff: 85th Pctile                             Cutoff: 90th Pctile
                  (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)      (10)        (11)          (12)
                  WJ         WJ        WJ        Grade         WJ         WJ          WJ       Grade         WJ        WJ         WJ          Grade
               Applied     Letter    Passage    Repeat      Applied      Letter     Passage   Repeat      Applied    Letter     Passage       Repeat
     Own       -5.680** -6.475** -5.744** 0.104** -6.614** -6.934** -6.711** 0.128** -6.381** -6.700** -6.718**                              0.150**




47
                (0.815)    (0.877)   (0.824) (0.0177) (0.886)           (1.009)     (0.923) (0.0205) (1.026)         (1.201)    (1.092)      (0.0248)
     Sibling -2.359** -2.873** -1.683**         0.0254      -3.012** -3.295** -1.898**         0.0282     -3.791** -3.569** -1.931**         0.0349*
                (0.762)    (0.837)   (0.741) (0.0159) (0.850)           (0.957)     (0.808) (0.0176) (0.970)         (1.089)    (0.914)      (0.0201)
     Obs.        2916       2921      2557       2905         2819        2824       2469       2808        2684      2689       2354           2675
     R2          0.242      0.204     0.259      0.120        0.248      0.202       0.265     0.131        0.244     0.196      0.262         0.128
     Notes: Throughout our analysis, a child is classified as externalizing if his/her BPI score is at or above the 90th percentile. This table
     compares our baseline estimates to estimates obtained when the threshold for externalizing behavior is lowered to the 85th or 80th percentiles.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
              Table B.9: Effects of Externalizing Behavior on Human Capital Accumulation
             Sensitivity to Control for Own BPI Score Rather than Own Externalizing Status
                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)      (7)        (8)
                     WJ        WJ         WJ       Grade       WJ       WJ       WJ      Grade
                  Applied     Letter    Passage Repeat Applied        Letter  Passage    Repeat
     Own          -6.381** -6.700** -6.718** 0.150**
                   (1.026)   (1.201)    (1.092) (0.0248)
     BPI score                                              -0.755** -0.803** -0.711** 0.0141**




48
                                                            (0.0975) (0.109) (0.0970) (0.00202)
     Sibling      -3.791** -3.569** -1.931** 0.0349* -2.983** -2.707** -1.155            0.0190
                   (0.970)   (1.089)    (0.914) (0.0201) (0.961)      (1.060)  (0.908)  (0.0208)
     Obs.           2684       2689      2354      2675       2684     2689     2354       2675
     R2             0.244     0.196      0.262     0.128      0.254    0.207    0.268     0.129
     Notes: We find that siblings of externalizing children tend to have higher BPI scores. This table compares our
     baseline estimates of sibling spillovers for externalizing behavior to estimates obtained when we control for
     own BPI score(rather than own externalizing status).
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
      Table B.10: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
         Sensitivity of Grade Repeat Estimates to Probit Specification
                   Developmental Disability        Externalizing Behavior
                       (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)
                Grade Repeat Grade Repeat Grade Repeat Grade Repeat
                     LPM         Probit dydx        LPM          Probit dydx
Own                0.0700**       0.0732**        0.150**           0.126**
                   (0.0316)        (0.0323)       (0.0248)         (0.0238)
Sibling             0.0476*        0.0500*        0.0349*            0.0233
                   (0.0287)        (0.0300)       (0.0201)         (0.0156)
Observations          2294           2294           2675              2675
R2                   0.059          0.110           0.128             0.187
Notes: In the case of grade repetition, a binary outcome measure, we use a linear probability
model to obtain our baseline estimates of sibling health spillovers. This table compares our
baseline LPM estimates to the marginal effects from a probit.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                             49
             Table B.11: Effects of Developmental Disability on Human Capital Accumulation
                           Sensitivity to Exclusion of Autism from DD Category
                                Baseline Results                          Excl. Autism
                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)     (6)       (7)     (8)
                      WJ         WJ         WJ        Grade      WJ      WJ        WJ      Grade
                    Applied    Letter     Passage Repeat Applied        Letter   Passage Repeat
     Own           -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -8.418** -7.842** -5.877** 0.0682*
                    (1.988)    (1.936)    (1.861) (0.0316) (2.249)     (2.261)   (2.198) (0.0360)




50
     Sibling       -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -5.283** -6.068** -3.826** 0.0764**
                    (1.632)    (1.765)    (1.623) (0.0287) (1.850)     (2.063)   (1.927) (0.0360)
     Observations    2287       2292       1984        2294      2212    2216      1918    2212
       2
     R               0.215      0.168      0.235      0.059     0.223   0.175     0.241    0.065
     Notes: Throughout our analysis, a child is classified as developmentally disabled if he/she has ever been diagnosed
     with epilepsy, autism, or mental retardation. To address concerns that a single DD condition may be driving our
     results, we compare our baseline estimates of sibling health spillovers to estimates obtained when the DD category
     is restricted to exclude those children with autism.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
             Table B.12: Effects of Developmental Disability on Human Capital Accumulation
                     Sensitivity to Exclusion of Mental Retardation from DD Category
                                 Baseline Results                     Excl. Mental Retardation
                       (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
                       WJ         WJ         WJ      Grade       WJ         WJ        WJ      Grade
                    Applied      Letter   Passage Repeat Applied          Letter   Passage Repeat
     Own            -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -5.991** -3.480** -2.667* 0.0662*
                     (1.988)    (1.936)    (1.861) (0.0316) (1.713)       (1.645)   (1.498) (0.0353)




51
     Sibling        -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -5.604** -5.736** -4.777** 0.0474
                     (1.632)    (1.765)    (1.623) (0.0287) (1.742)       (1.942)   (1.738) (0.0315)
     Observations     2287        2292      1984      2294      2239       2244      1943      2234
       2
     R                0.215      0.168      0.235     0.059     0.214      0.161     0.236     0.054
     Notes: Throughout our analysis, a child is classified as developmentally disabled if he/she has ever been diagnosed
     with epilepsy, autism, or mental retardation. To address concerns that a single DD condition may be driving our
     results, we compare our baseline estimates of sibling health spillovers to estimates obtained when the DD category
     is restricted to exclude those children with mental retardation.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
             Table B.13: Effects of Developmental Disability on Human Capital Accumulation
                          Sensitivity to Inclusion of Only Epilepsy in DD Category
                                 Baseline Results                         Incl. Epilepsy Only
                       (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)     (8)
                       WJ         WJ          WJ       Grade       WJ        WJ         WJ     Grade
                    Applied      Letter    Passage Repeat Applied           Letter    Passage Repeat
     Own            -9.297** -6.936** -5.770** 0.0700** -4.099** -3.485*               -1.905 0.0643*
                     (1.988)    (1.936)     (1.861) (0.0316) (1.803)       (1.899)    (1.692) (0.0378)




52
     Sibling        -4.169** -5.777** -3.795** 0.0476* -6.632** -6.734** -4.894** 0.0669*
                     (1.632)    (1.765)     (1.623) (0.0287) (1.978)       (2.255)    (2.111) (0.0370)
     Observations     2287        2292       1984      2294       2179       2183       1891    2179
       2
     R                0.215      0.168       0.235     0.059      0.222     0.166      0.238    0.060
     Notes: Throughout our analysis, a child is classified as developmentally disabled if he/she has ever been diagnosed
     with epilepsy, autism, or mental retardation. To address concerns that a single DD condition may be driving our
     results, we compare our baseline estimates of sibling health spillovers to estimates obtained when the DD category
     is restricted to included only those children with epilepsy.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05
           Table B.14: Effects of Poor Health on Human Capital Accumulation
                            Sensitivity to Alternate Income Measures
                   Developmental Disability                     Externalizing Behavior
             (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)
             WJ         WJ           WJ       Grade        WJ       WJ          WJ     Grade
          Applied     Letter     Passage      Repeat    Applied    Letter    Passage Repeat
                               A. Baseline Estimates: 5yr Rolling Average
Own       -8.697** -6.449** -5.285** 0.0680** -5.809** -6.026** -5.803** 0.146**
           (1.955)    (1.916)     (1.833) (0.0314) (1.026)        (1.243)    (1.133) (0.0251)
Sibling   -3.628** -5.348** -3.289**          0.0458    -3.439** -3.026**     -1.151   0.0314
           (1.631)    (1.783)     (1.625) (0.0286) (0.958)        (1.087)    (0.913) (0.0209)
Obs.        2281       2286         1979       2287       2670      2676       2341     2661
R2          0.228      0.175        0.251      0.062      0.259    0.207       0.281   0.132
                             B. 5yr Rolling Average Adjusted for Family Size
Own       -8.691** -6.438** -5.279** 0.0679** -5.799** -6.013** -5.798** 0.146**
           (1.953)    (1.912)     (1.832) (0.0314) (1.025)        (1.242)    (1.133) (0.0251)
Sibling   -3.612** -5.328** -3.281**          0.0457    -3.445** -3.029**     -1.151   0.0313
           (1.632)    (1.785)     (1.626) (0.0286) (0.957)        (1.086)    (0.913) (0.0209)
Obs.        2281       2286         1979       2287       2670      2676       2341     2661
R2          0.228      0.175        0.251      0.062      0.259    0.207       0.281   0.132
                                C. Measured Prior to Mother’s First Birth
Own       -7.358** -3.657* -3.828**           0.0446    -5.153** -4.789** -4.947** 0.132**
           (2.119)    (1.979)     (1.932) (0.0333) (1.051)        (1.225)    (1.102) (0.0277)
Sibling   -3.780** -3.938*         -2.938     0.0261    -2.884** -2.655**     -0.970   0.0266
           (1.855)    (2.053)     (1.901) (0.0306) (1.063)        (1.147)    (1.021) (0.0233)
Obs.        1802       1808         1548       1739       2156      2163       1878     2080
R2          0.227      0.176        0.242      0.071      0.252    0.211       0.275   0.132
                                         D. Measured in Current Year
Own       -8.784** -6.457** -5.202** 0.0677** -5.794** -5.968** -5.760** 0.146**
           (1.950)    (1.894)     (1.805) (0.0312) (1.022)        (1.242)    (1.134) (0.0250)
Sibling   -3.724** -5.359** -3.221**          0.0453    -3.480** -3.028**     -1.136   0.0312
           (1.626)    (1.778)     (1.618) (0.0283) (0.966)        (1.093)    (0.920) (0.0209)
Obs.        2281       2286         1979       2287       2670      2676       2341     2661
R2          0.224      0.175        0.256      0.063      0.251    0.203       0.279   0.132
Notes: In baseline specifications family income is measured as a five-year average up to and including
the current year/wave. This table compares estimates of sibling health spillovers across specifications
with various controls for family income. In panel B family income is again measured as a five-year
average, but family income is additionally adjusted for family size. In panel C family income is
measured as an average over the five years prior to the birth of the first child. Finally, in panel D we
measure family income in the current year/wave.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05




                                                   53
