NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS AND FAIR VALUE ACCOUNTING SPARK FIRE
SALES IN DISTRESSED MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES?
Craig B. Merrill
Taylor D. Nadauld
René M. Stulz
Shane Sherlund
Working Paper 18270
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18270
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

Merrill and Nadauld are at the Marriott School of Management, Brigham Young University, Sherlund
is at the Federal Reserve Board, and Stulz is at the Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University,
ECGI, and NBER. We thank seminar participants at Brigham Young University for helpful comments.
The analysis and conclusions contained in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, its members, its staff, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Craig B. Merrill, Taylor D. Nadauld, René M. Stulz, and Shane Sherlund. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did Capital Requirements and Fair Value Accounting Spark Fire Sales in Distressed Mortgage-Backed
Securities?
Craig B. Merrill, Taylor D. Nadauld, René M. Stulz, and Shane Sherlund
NBER Working Paper No. 18270
August 2012
JEL No. G22,G28,G32,M41
ABSTRACT
Much attention has been paid to the large decreases in value of non-agency residential mortgage-backed
securities (RMBS) during the financial crisis. Many observers have argued that the fall in prices was
partly driven by decreased liquidity and fire sales. We investigate whether capital requirements and
accounting rules at financial institutions contributed to the selling of RMBS at fire sale prices. For
financial institutions subject to credit-sensitive capital requirements, capital requirements increase
as an asset’s credit becomes impaired. When accounting rules require such an asset’s value to be marked-to-market
and the fair value loss to be recognized in earnings, a capital-constrained firm can improve its capital
position by selling the credit-impaired asset even if it has to accept a liquidity discount to do so. Using
a sample of 5,014 repeat transactions of non-agency RMBS by insurance companies from 2006 to
2009, we show that insurance companies that became more capital-constrained because of operating
losses (uncorrelated with RMBS credit quality) and also recognized fair value losses sold comparable
RMBS at much lower prices than other insurance companies during the crisis.
Craig B. Merrill
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602-3113
Craig_Merrill@byu.edu
Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Shane Sherlund
Federal Reserve Board
Mailstop 93
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC, 20551
shane.m.sherlund@frb.gov

A key fact of the financial crisis is the dramatic drop in value of structured finance securities. Many
observers have argued that the drop in transaction prices exceeded the adverse change in the fundamental
value of the higher priority securities and that the magnitude of the drop is partly explained by loss of
liquidity and fire sales.1 In this paper we investigate whether capital requirements and accounting rules at
financial institutions contributed to the selling of structured finance securities at fire-sale prices. As many
of these securities were held by financial institutions, reductions in their value led to reduced levels of
capital, potentially forcing financial institutions with lower levels of capital to raise fresh equity capital or
sell low credit quality assets (Brunnermeier (2009), Shleifer and Vishny (2011)). The forced selling of
assets into a market where the most natural buyers of the asset are themselves constrained can result in
fire-sale prices (Shleifer and Vishny (1992)).
Financial institutions are required by regulators to hold a minimum level of equity capital against
risky assets, a means by which regulators protect the customers of financial institutions and/or the
insurance funds that insure the liabilities of these financial institutions. In the U.S., life insurance and
property and casualty (P&C) insurance companies are subject to credit-sensitive capital requirements.
Banks and broker dealers are also subject to credit-sensitive capital requirements for structured finance
securities. 2 The amount of capital an institution has to hold is a function of the riskiness of the
institution’s assets. As a result, costly capital requirements on credit-impaired securities can create an
incentive for financial intermediaries to sell credit-impaired securities. However, the incentive to sell
credit-impaired securities is substantially heightened when firms subject to capital requirements also have
to adhere to fair value (often called mark-to-market) accounting practices.
Capital requirements, together with fair value accounting, may trigger the forced sale of a financial
asset for the following reason. A systematic shock to the credit quality of a portion of an institution’s
assets, as occurred during the massive credit downgrades of residential mortgage-backed securities
1

See, for instance, Bank of England (2008).
See Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2012) for a discussion of the capital requirements for U.S. banks concerning
structured finance securities. Outside the U.S., banks subject to Basel II have capital requirements that are sensitive
to the credit risk of their assets. U.S. banks are subject to Basel I except for market risk and structured finance
securities. Under Basel I, changes in bond ratings have no impact on capital requirements.

2

1

(RMBS) in 2007-2008, has two important potential effects. First, losses in the value of securities may
reduce an institution’s capital through the impact of losses on earnings either through fair value changes
for assets held for sale or through other-than-temporary impairment (OTTI) accounting rules for assets
available for sale. Second, the decreased credit quality of assets increases the regulatory capital charge
that must be applied to the assets if the financial institution is subject to credit-sensitive capital
requirements. The increased regulatory charge has the effect of lowering the ratio of risk-adjusted assets
to capital for the financial institution. If the ratio of risk-adjusted assets to equity threatens to fall below
regulatory levels, institutions face one of three choices: go out of business, raise new equity, or sell risky
assets and replace them with safer assets. Given that the market for raising new capital can be limited due
to the very market conditions that led to the lowering of an institution’s asset quality, selling risky assets
can be a capital-constrained firm’s only choice, especially in the presence of accounting rules that may
have already forced the recognition of losses. The “sell low credit-quality assets” strategy is viable as
long as fire-sale discounts do not cause the resultant capital ratio to fall relative to pre-sale levels. If,
however, fair value accounting does not apply to an asset, then the recognition of the fair value loss upon
the sale of the asset may make the financial institution more capital-constrained if it sells the asset than if
it keeps it.3 Thus, the combination of capital requirements and fair value accounting rules creates an
economic incentive for constrained institutions to sell low quality assets, even at fire-sale prices. The
preceding argument gives rise to our proposed capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis.
Fire sales can be defined as forced transactions which result in prices dislocated from fundamentals.
While intuitive, the identification of capital requirements and/or accounting rules as causal factors in a
fire sale presents an empirical challenge for at least two reasons. First, it is difficult to measure the
urgency of an observed transaction (i.e., determining that the transaction is “forced”), and more
importantly, whether the urgency of the sale is on account of capital requirements or due to other factors.
Second, it is difficult to clearly determine a transaction price that incorporates a fire-sale discount.

3

This argument is made in Boyson, Helwege, and Jindra (2011) to argue against the economic importance of fire
sales.

2

Observed transaction prices can be low, but may very well be justified by a security’s fundamentals.
While we control for observables using the best available data, it may be the case that unobserved
fundamentals of a security influence the observed price of a transaction, creating a bias in the estimation
of the true relationship between fundamentals and transaction prices.
We propose an identification strategy that exploits the unique features of our data to address these
challenges. First, we focus on the securities transactions of insurance companies. Insurance companies
are required to report their securities holdings, including, importantly, the transaction price for each
security trade, and whether a trade was a purchase or a sale. This allows for the identification of
transactions as “purchases” or “sales” from the perspective of the insurance company, a feature we exploit
in determining the sale component of forced sales. Aside from being required to disclose information on
securities transactions, insurance companies are subject to regulatory capital requirements. When the
investment portfolio of an insurance company experiences a decline in credit quality sufficient to raise
concerns about risk-based capital ratios, regulation requires action be taken to increase the quantity of
capital or the credit quality of assets, or both. In the face of a shock to credit quality, insurance companies
can take one of two steps to improve their situation. Firms can either raise new capital or quickly dispose
of poor credit quality assets and reinvest the funds in higher credit-quality assets to increase their levels of
regulatory capital. In this way, capital requirements can trigger fire sales in that they can force capitalconstrained firms to sell low quality assets into a market where potential buyers, other intermediaries, are
themselves constrained.
In addressing the second challenge, the measurement of a security’s fundamentals, we focus our
analysis on the transactions of non-agency (subprime and alt-a) residential mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS) that are held on the balance sheets of insurance companies. We use loan-level data on the
mortgage collateral of RMBS to control for changes in the fundamental value of the RMBS. Our data
also provides observations from multiple transactions of the same RMBS, which allows for the creation
of a repeat sales sample. Estimating changes in RMBS prices over multiple transactions on the same

3

RMBS allows us to control for unobservable characteristics of the RMBS that could influence the
observed transaction prices.
Testing a capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis presents at least one additional empirical
challenge. The level of capital at an insurance company is determined by the credit quality of the assets
themselves. This makes it difficult to disentangle whether an observed sale that appears to be at a
discounted, fire-sale price can be uniquely attributed to the urgency arising from low levels of capital, or a
decline in the credit quality of the asset itself. To disentangle the impact of capital requirements from
fundamental asset quality, we focus on a variable which is correlated with an insurance company’s capital
that is not correlated with the fundamental quality of its RMBS portfolio.

We classify insurance

companies as being more likely to be capital constrained, and thus more likely to be forced to sell low
credit-quality bonds, if they report negative operating cash flow in a given year. Operating cash flow
essentially represents the insurance company’s underwriting income. Thus, negative operating cash flows
most likely occur on account of a shock to liabilities, and should not capture any financial distress that
might occur on account of a decline in the value of the RMBS held by the insurance company.
Finally, we exploit one additional feature of our data for identification. P&C insurance companies
were subject to different statutory accounting rules than life insurance companies during the bulk of our
sample period. P&C firms were required to use fair value OTTI accounting while life firms were not
before 2009, when the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) revised the standard for
life firms, forcing them towards OTTI accounting. The differences in accounting practices motivate a test
of the capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis on the transactions of P&C firms relative to those
of life firms for the years 2006-2008. The subsequent change in accounting rules for life firms leads us to
explore whether the transactions of life firms take on fire-sale characteristics in 2009.
We find the following results using a sample of 5,014 repeat transactions of non-agency RMBS
between the years 2006-2009. First, we find that P&C firms are significantly more likely than life firms
to sell RMBS, conditional on an observed prior purchase. The likelihood of selling RMBS is also
associated with the regulatory capital position of P&C firms. P&C firms with below-median levels of
4

regulatory capital are more likely to sell RMBS compared to P&C firms with above-median levels of
regulatory capital. Prior to the accounting rule change in 2009, life insurance firms exhibit no significant
relationship between regulatory capital levels and propensity to sell RMBS. Our second key result is that,
after controlling for observed and unobserved bond fundamentals (by virtue of the repeat sales sample),
the sales of negative operating cash flow insurance companies (our instrument for capital distress in the
pricing analysis) are associated with price discounts relative to the sales of positive-operating cash flow
insurance companies. For P&C firms, a one standard deviation decline in operating cash flow, conditional
on the operating cash flow being negative, is associated with an estimated 8%-12% lower sale price,
depending on the specification.
Our last result distinguishes a fire-sale hypothesis from other possible explanations of the observed
empirical patterns. RMBS which have experienced large credit quality declines require more capital to be
held. As such, a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis would suggest the greatest urgency, and
thus the largest price discounts, to be associated with the sale of the lowest credit-quality RMBS. We
provide evidence consistent with this prediction. The sales of constrained insurance companies reveal
larger price discounts for bonds that have experienced the largest declines in credit-quality.
This paper is closely related to two recent papers also investigating capital requirements and fire
sales. Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad (2011) document forced sales of corporate bonds by insurance
companies because of the downgrading of bonds to non-investment grade ratings between 2001 and 2005.
They show that such forced sales have an adverse transitory impact when made by firms that have weaker
capital positions. A second paper by Ellul, Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Wang (2012) investigates the
differences between the accounting practices of P&C firms relative to life insurance companies. The
authors document that fair value accounting motivates higher rates of selling of asset-backed securities
among P&C firms, whereas historical cost accounting for life insurance firms (hereafter called ‘life
firms’) motivates them to hold downgraded asset-backed securities, selling corporate bonds instead. The
“gains trading” of corporate bonds can induce fire sales in the corporate bond market. While similar in
motivation to these papers, our evidence focuses directly on whether capital requirements and accounting
5

rules led to fire sales of non-agency RMBS, the value of which played a critical role in the recent
financial crisis. Our work also uses a substantially different empirical strategy in identifying the effects of
capital requirements and accounting rules on fire sales. One key difference in empirical strategies is our
focus on the specific transaction prices of individual securities.
Other related papers examining the investment behavior of insurance companies include Ambrose,
Cai, and Helwege (2011) and Becker and Ivashina (2012). Ambrose et. al. (2011) examine regulatoryinduced trades of insurance companies and conclude that a widespread selling of bonds does not
necessarily lead to pressure on prices. Rather, observed pricing declines occur on account of information
effects. Becker and Ivashina (2012) show that capital requirements provide incentives for insurance
companies to “reach for yield” in their security selection.
A separate stream of literature proposes collateralized lending as having contributed to fire sales in
the market for real assets and financial securities. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) demonstrate
theoretically that a decline in funding liquidity makes arbitrageurs unable to play their role in driving
mispriced assets back to their fundamental values. Mitchell and Pulvino (2012) provide empirical
evidence of this mechanism at play. Unable to finance their positions during the 2008 financial crisis,
hedge funds were precluded from performing their traditional role of taking advantage of mispricing
through relative value trades.
Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature focused on the costs and benefits of fair value
accounting and of how fair value accounting contributed to the crisis. An early theoretical paper in this
literature, by Plantin, Sapra, and Shin (2008), shows how fair value accounting can lead to a vicious cycle
of sales for levered institutions. Laux and Leuz (2009) and Laux (2012) review much of the literature on
the topic. Laux (2012) concludes that “there is still no evidence that fair value accounting caused
widespread fire sales of assets or contagion.” Some papers (e.g., Shaffer (2010)) focus on the link
between fair value and bank regulatory capital. However, these papers are more concerned about the
impact of fair value losses on bank capital rather than about how capital-constrained banks are pushed
into fire sales. Baderscher et al. (2012) provide evidence of OTTI charges for the largest bank holding
6

companies and show that, for 2007-2008, the bulk of these charges were incurred in the last two quarters
of 2008. They also show that sales of RMBS are correlated with OTTI charges, but Laux (2012) argues
that such a correlation can have multiple causes. One paper, Boyson, Helwege, and Jindra (2012) argues
that, on net, banks did not engage in fire sales. However, in contrast to our analysis, the paper does not
have transactions for individual securities. The paper correctly points out that banks had many other ways
to relax capital constraints besides engaging in fire sales.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we develop our hypotheses further and review the
related literature in more detail. In Section 2, we present our data. In Section 3, we estimate the propensity
to sell RMBS in our sample and show how it relates to a firm’s capital position and accounting regime. In
Section 4, we investigate our fire-sale predictions. We conclude in Section 5.

Section 1: Hypothesis development and review of the literature
Section 1.1 Theories of Fire Sales
Theories of fire sales describe the conditions under which forced sales occur and commonly contain
two important elements: the mechanism(s) by which a forced sale is triggered and the mechanism(s)
which leads to a dislocation in prices. To date, the literature has argued that leverage in general and more
specifically collateralized lending can lead to the forced sale of assets (Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 1997)).
When debt is collateralized by a physical asset and the asset fails to generate the expected cash flows, the
optimal contract calls for the sale of the asset. 4 Consistent with this theory, empirical papers have
documented the forced sale of collateralized, physical assets. For example, Pulvino (1998) documents that
distressed airlines sold airplanes at substantially discounted prices. Collateralized lending also plays a
substantial role in the forced sale of financial assets (see Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). As the
value of an asset financed through collateralized lending falls, margin calls force the borrower to provide
more equity or to sell some of the holdings of the asset. Throughout the crisis, margin requirements

4

This will be the case when the debt contract is a combination of short-term and long-term debt, with the long-term
debt creating a debt overhang.

7

increased (see Gorton and Metrick (2012)), forcing borrowers to sell assets to meet margin requirements
or provide more equity. As shown by Coval and Stafford (2007), forced sales of assets can also occur
when investors in an investment vehicle redeem their holdings. In sum, both theoretical and empirical
work has carefully documented the mechanisms which can trigger a forced sale, the most common of
which is collateralized lending.
The existence of a forced sale itself need not, however, result in dislocated prices. In wellfunctioning, liquid markets, physical or financial assets should sell at prices which reflect their best use.
However, in periods of distress for the most natural purchasers of a class of assets, fire-sale prices can
occur because the assets have to be bought by investors who are not natural purchasers of these assets
(Shleifer and Vishny (1993)). For instance, these investors may lack the knowledge of these assets that
natural buyers would have or may find the payoffs of these assets riskier within their portfolios than
natural buyers would. In the case of physical assets, the most natural buyers of an asset might be defined
as industry specialists. Industry specialists operate in the same industry as the asset-selling institution and
are thus in a position to adequately value and utilize the asset being offered. Industry specialists can put
the asset to its first-best use, and pay prices accordingly. However, if potential buyers who are industry
specialists are constrained on account of financial distress, then the first-best use of the asset is not an
option. Eventual purchasers of the asset will pay prices below those reflecting the asset’s first-best use.
Liquidity concerns can also lead to fire sales as the urgent need for liquidity can force the distressed firm
to sell the asset at a discount. 5 In the case of financial assets, traditional models in finance rely on
arbitrageurs to keep asset prices closely aligned with fundamentals. Thus, when arbitrageurs themselves
become constrained, rendering them unable to correct mispricing, prices can become more dislocated
from fundamentals.6 Typically, arbitrageurs use collateralized lending. As this lending becomes harder to
obtain, they become less able to provide liquidity and correct mispricing. During the crisis, as discussed

5

See Benmelech and Bergman (2009) for empirical evidence regarding the role of distress in fire sales of physical
assets.
6
See Shleifer and Vishny (2007) for a theoretical discussion of this point and Mitchell, Pederson, and Pulvino
(2007) and Mitchell and Pulvino (2010) for empirical evidence of this phenomenon.

8

earlier, collateralized lending became harder to obtain and many securities that were initially considered
to be low risk became much riskier as the crisis evolved.
The central hypothesis of this paper is that credit-sensitive capital requirements, aside from
collateralized lending, can also trigger forced sales. Under this hypothesis, forced sales occur as financial
institutions seek to alleviate low levels of regulatory capital through the sale of low credit quality assets.
Natural buyers of the downgraded securities, many of which are themselves financial institutions, face
similar regulatory capital constraints. Given the urgent need for capital, sellers rationally accept liquidity
discounts on securities given that the benefit of an improved regulatory capital position outweighs the
cost associated with the liquidity discount. Pricing discounts are also driven by the fact that buyers of
downgraded securities find them to be positive NPV investments, but only at a sufficiently low price.

Section 1.2 Other-Than-Temporary Impairment Accounting
If assets are not valued on the balance sheet at fair value and if fair value losses have not passed
through earnings, selling assets that have lost considerable value is extremely costly for a financial
institution in terms of regulatory capital as the loss realized upon the sale relative to the value at which the
asset is on the balance sheet goes through earnings and comes as a deduction of regulatory capital.
Insurance companies held their assets on the balance sheet at amortized cost. However, under some
circumstances assets held at amortized cost must be marked down to fair value when they suffer from a
OTTI and the loss has to pass through earnings. With OTTI accounting treatment, a financial institution
does not postpone the realization of losses by postponing the sale of an asset that has suffered fair value
losses of a nature requiring OTTI treatment. Having recognized the fair value loss, the sale decision of the
financial institution simply depends on the comparison of the increased capital cost of continuing to hold
the security with the possible fire sale premium cost of selling the security. Absent the OTTI treatment,
the increased capital cost associated with a downgraded RMBS would have to be high enough to offset
the capital loss from a sale in order for there to be an incentive to sell the asset.

9

During the crisis, fair value accounting rules were relaxed and the evidence is that the stock market
reacted favorably to that relaxation (see Laux (2012)). However, in the insurance industry, there was also
a change towards broadening the implementation of fair value accounting rules. This change creates
another opportunity to identify the factors influencing RMBS sales by insurance companies. Prior to
2009, P&C companies were required to use fair value accounting for downgraded RMBS. In contrast, life
companies were allowed to use historical cost accounting for downgraded RMBS and were only required
to use mark-to-market accounting for defaulted securities. However, effective in 2009, the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) modified SSAP 43 and issued SSAP 43R requiring
OTTI treatment of asset-backed securities for all insurance companies. Thus, we would expect the
difference in accounting rules to manifest itself in the observed selling behavior of the two types of firms
before 2009. However, during 2009, we expect both life and P&C insurance companies to behave
consistently with a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis.

Section 1.3 Capital Requirements for Insurance Companies: A Numerical Example
Capital regulations for insurance companies are based on a system of risk-based capital calculations
where total adjusted capital is calculated and compared to an authorized control level risk-based capital to
determine adequacy. If the ratio of total adjusted capital to authorized control level risk-based capital falls
below two, regulatory intervention is required. Comparisons between banking, securities firms, and
insurance capital adequacy calculations are provided by Herring and Schuermann (2005). We focus on
capital requirements for insurance companies in this paper. A detailed numerical example can help to
illustrate the capital requirements and accounting mechanism at play.
In Figure 1 we provide key aspects of a hypothetical risk-based capital (RBC) calculation for an
insurance company. There are four categories of risks that are explicitly considered. We focus on asset
risk in this study. Each asset held by the company is categorized into six NAIC classes that correspond to
various financial strength ratings. The asset value is scaled by a risk weighting, called a RBC Net Factor,
to calculate risk-based capital. Lower asset quality is associated with a higher RBC Net Factor and, thus,
10

higher risk-based capital. Higher risk-based capital leads to a higher company action level and a
corresponding increase in total adjusted capital that must be held. Consider an insurance company that is
close to the mandatory action level capital threshold with an RBC ratio just above two. A portion of the
bond portfolio is downgraded from AAA to CCC, throwing the firm below the required level of
regulatory capital where the regulator would be required to assume control of the firm. The example
concludes with a demonstration of how selling the CCC-rated assets, even at fire sales prices, can restore
the firm to acceptable regulatory capital levels.
The details of the example are as follows. The first step in calculating risk-based capital is to multiply
the face value of a bond by the “RBC net factor,” which is the risk-adjustment factor applied to a bond’s
face value, where the risk adjustment factor is a function of the bond’s credit rating. Bonds rated AAA,
AA, and A are charged a net factor of 0.004. Bonds rated BBB are assigned a net factor of 0.013, BBrated bonds are charged 0.046, B-rated bonds 0.10, CCC-rated bonds 0.23, and bonds at or near default
are assigned a net factor of 0.30. Aside from credit risk-based factors, bonds are also subject to a “size
factor,” which we hold constant at 1.7 across all bonds in this example.
The relation between capital charges and credit quality lies at the heart of a capital requirementsOTTI-fire-sale hypothesis. As detailed in Figure 1, we consider a hypothetical portfolio with $100M in
bonds rated AAA, AA, or A, and $20M in bonds rated BBB. The total risk-based capital for the bonds
held by the firm is $1,122M, calculated as (($100M*0.004) + ($20M*0.013)) *1.7. Other risk factors
(total asset risk, insurance risk, interest risk, and business risk) are then added in to arrive at a company
action-level risk-based capital number of $2.464M. Risk-based capital is then scaled by total adjusted
capital which is a function of surplus (a.k.a. equity) and other nominal line items. In our example, total
adjusted capital is equal to $5.6M. Thus, the initial regulatory risk-based-capital ratio is equal to 2.272
($5.6M/$2.464M), above the regulatory threshold of 2.
Holding every other aspect of the regulatory capital calculation constant, we next consider the effect
of a downgrade of $1M worth of AAA-rated bonds to a CCC-rating, and assume that the market for CCCrated bonds is at 60 cents on the dollar. The downgrade and OTTI accounting create two important
11

effects. First, the insurance company must mark the face value of the bond from $1M to $600K. Second,
it must recognize the $400K loss on its capital, reducing the surplus from $5.5M to $5.1M. The net risk
factor charge on a CCC-rated bond is equal to 0.23, making the risk-based capital charge on the
downgraded bond equal to $138K ($600K*0.23). Holding everything else constant, the increased risk
charge results in a company action level RBC amount of $2.62M, a $227K increase from the original
regulatory capital level of $2.46M. The higher risk-based capital amount, in tandem with a lower level of
capital surplus on account of the forced recognition of the loss (OTTI accounting), renders a new
regulatory risk-based capital ratio of 1.931, below the regulatory threshold of 2.
Consider the following possible response from the firm. Selling the $600K of CCC-rated bonds at a
fire sale price of $500K would allow the firm to reinvest $500K into AAA-rated securities. Doing so
would force the firm to recognize the additional loss of $100K, leaving surplus at $5.0M. Applying the
lower risk factor charge to the new level of $99.5M in AAA securities, holding everything else constant,
results in a company action level RBC amount of $2.461M. When compared against the total adjusted
capital amount of $5.1M, the resultant regulatory capital ratio is restored to 2.072, just above the
regulatory threshold.
The preceding numerical example was constructed as a stylized example designed to illustrate the
interaction of regulatory capital charges and asset quality. The key insights from the example are (1)
OTTI accounting forces the recognition of loss when security values decline and (2) capital charges
increase sharply as asset quality falls below investment grade. For an insurance company, the capital
charge on a CCC-rated bond is over fifty times greater than the capital charge on a AAA-rated bond. As a
result, firms in capital distress can experience a net capital gain from selling low credit quality assets,
even at fire sale prices. The example is most relevant for P&C firms over the span of our sample and life
insurance companies beginning in 2009.

12

Section 1.4 Fire Sale Hypotheses
Existing theories of fire sales, in combination with the mechanics of capital requirements and OTTI
accounting practices, give rise to the following four hypotheses. First, we should observe a dearth of
liquidity in the market for credit-impaired securities. A lack of liquidity is ultimately what leads to pricing
discounts being accepted by motivated sellers. Second, all else equal, capital-constrained P&C firms are
more likely than life insurance companies to sell downgraded securities in an illiquid market. Third, the
RMBS sales of constrained firms that do occur in an illiquid market should occur at a discount in price
relative to the RMBS sales of non-constrained firms. This occurs because capital-constrained sellers
forced to recognize losses should be more likely to accept a liquidity discount than otherwise comparable
transactions. This result should be concentrated in P&C firms over our full sample period and in life
firms during 2009. Finally, fire-sale discounts should be most severe for the most credit-impaired
securities. Differentiating the magnitude of fire sale discounts as a function of credit quality uniquely
identifies the role of capital requirements in the fire sale, as opposed to alternative explanations of
observed discounts in prices.

Section 2: Data
Section 2.1 Sample Construction
Our sample construction begins with the universe of publicly available non-agency RMBS
transactions of insurance companies. Thomson Reuters EMaxx services compiles all of the publicly
reported transactions of P&C and life insurance companies from regulatory filings and produces a
standardized bond transaction file. Data fields include transaction date, transaction price, bond CUSIP,
whether the transaction was a purchase or sale, the name of the insurance company involved in the
transaction, the transaction broker, transaction volume (more than one investor can own a portion of the
bond), and the bond credit rating at the time of the transaction. The sample includes bonds with at least
two transactions, where the second transaction occurred between January 2006 and September 2009.

13

We match the universe of insurance company RMBS transactions to a database of mortgage collateral
attributes produced by CoreLogic. A non-agency RMBS is collateralized by over 5,000 individual nonagency loans, on average.7 Loan-level attribute data are rolled up to the deal level using loan sizes as
weights. Thus, when controlling for deal-level FICO scores, the deal-level measure represents the loanweighted FICO score of the 5,000 underlying mortgages. Importantly, our collateral attribute data is
dynamic, allowing for the real-time measurement of the mortgage attributes at the time of each
transaction, including the cumulative default rate on the pool of mortgages at the time of the transaction.
Other real-time collateral attributes aggregated to the deal level include mortgage rates, FICOs, and
combined loan-to-value ratios (LTVs). We also calculate the percentage of collateral with adjustable rates
(ARMs), mortgages supporting owner-occupied homes, no or low documentation loans, and the percent
that represent refinancing mortgages. We control for deal-level rates of cumulative house price
appreciation by matching ZIP-code level house price indexes to the ZIP code of each mortgage. 8
In dealing with a host of additional unobserved features of each RMBS (e.g., seniority in the capital
structure of a deal, performance triggers, differences in pre-payment treatment, and other unobserved
contractual features), we limit the sample to repeat-sales transactions of the same RMBS and estimate
changes in RMBS prices from the first transaction to the second. A repeat-sale sample has the virtue of
implicitly controlling for unobserved features that could impact the price of a RMBS.
Our sample period is dictated by the insurance company data availability because we require data
from the income statement, balance sheet, and regulatory capital filings for each insurance company in
the sample. AM Best, a firm which specializes in the production of insurance company analytics,
provides income statement and balance sheet data, including data on annual levels of operating cash flow
from 2006 through 2009. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) provides data
on regulatory capital filings.
7

It is important to note that the typical securitization deal produces 17 unique bonds on average. Individual
mortgages do not provide cash flows for individual bonds. Rather, the entire mortgage pool generates monthly
principal and interest payments which provide interest payments to bond holders. Bond coupon payments are
generated from the mortgage collateral pool according to pre-specified, prioritized cash flow rules.
8
We use MSA- and state-level indexes when ZIP-code indexes are unavailable.

14

The matching of insurance company data from AM Best and the NAIC to the bond transaction and
attribute data results in a sample of 10,388 unique transactions. We winsorize observations on RMBS
prices and the operating cash flow of insurance companies at the 1% and 99% levels to reduce the
influence of outliers in the data. Implementing a repeat-transaction criterion reduces our final sample to
5,014 repeat transactions from 385 unique life and P&C insurance companies over the period January
2006 toSeptember 2009.

Section 2.2 Control Variables
Our empirical tests control for fundamental attributes of RMBS which should impact RMBS
prices. One of the primary determinants of RMBS performance is the default rate on the underlying pool
of mortgages. Our data allow for the calculation of real-time collateral default rates. We focus on the
reported collateral default rate in the month prior to the observed transaction so as to ensure that the
default rate used in our estimation reflects the collateral default rate observed by market participants at the
time of a transaction.
An issue that deserves special consideration is our choice to control directly for the collateral default
rate as opposed to bond credit ratings, especially given that capital requirements are tied to credit ratings.
The reasons for our approach are straightforward. First, insurance companies are concerned about what
the rating will be at the time they compute their required regulatory capital, which occurs at the end of the
calendar year.9 We believe that our approach, because of its greater timeliness, offers a better forecast of
ratings for insurance companies. Second, our approach allows for greater granularity in assessing the
credit quality than credit ratings allow for because we use continuous variables. Third, we are able to
update our estimates of credit quality monthly using the most up-to-date information. It is commonly
known that ratings are not designed to reflect real-time assessments as rating agencies are also concerned
about the stability of ratings. Further, rating agencies face practical limitations in updating ratings as they
have tens of thousands of ratings outstanding on structured finance.
9

This argument has been highlighted in conversations with three separate industry professionals.

15

Two pieces of data show that these considerations are important. First, during our sample period,
Moody’s and S&P ratings differ, often markedly, for some deals. Such material differences could easily
arise because of differences in the timing of rating updates. Second, there is considerable variation in
prices within rating buckets during our sample period, which again is consistent with ratings being more
up-to-date for some deals than others. Because of these considerations, we believe that our approach
provides a more detailed and up-to-date assessment of credit quality than using credit ratings. We repeat
our primary tests using credit ratings. While the results using credit ratings are qualitatively similar to our
baseline results, they are not as robust.
Bond prices are also mechanically influenced by interest rates. Over 80% of the RMBS in our sample
pay a floating coupon rate, making their value immune to direct changes in interest rates. For the small set
of bonds with fixed coupon rates we control for changes in the 5-year Treasury bond rate between the first
and second transactions.10 Our results are robust to the exclusion of fixed-coupon RMBS, but we include
them in our reported tables so as to maximize our sample size. Other control variables that we include in
the regressions are variables commonly used to predict future loan defaults.11

Section 2.3 Summary Statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics on the quarterly attributes of our estimation sample. Each
observation in the sample represents the attributes associated with the second transaction in a given
repeat-transaction pair. Over the full sample period the average bond experienced a 6.9% decline in price
from the first transaction to the second. The declines are concentrated primarily in 2008, peaking in the
fourth quarter, where the average bond, conditional on an observed transaction, was bought or sold for a
price 41.4% less than the price of the previous transaction. The variance in price changes was also
substantially larger in 2008 and 2009 than in previous years. The pattern of price declines documented in

10

The expected duration of senior RMBS in our sample is about 5 years, on average.
The impact of specific loan attributes on loan default rates is documented by Sherlund (2008), Deng,
Quigley, and Van Order (2000), and Pennington-Cross and Ho (2006). Loans with high FICO scores, low
loan-to-value ratios, and low debt-to-income ratios default less frequently.
11

16

the initial columns of Table 1 can be observed visually in Figure 2, which plots the level of non-agency
RMBS prices through time. The figure provides stunning visual evidence of the rapid decline in the
market value of RMBS during the financial crisis. The rapid price declines were concentrated in RMBS
that were highly rated at origination. Though not reported in Table 1, 93.3% of the rated RMBS in our
repeat sample estimation were rated AAA, AA, or A at the time of the first observed transaction.
In the full sample, 51.5% of all transactions were sales, with many fewer sales during the 2008
market crisis. One-third (33.3%) of all life insurance transactions were associated with firms experiencing
negative operating cash flows in the year of the transaction. A lower percentage of P&C trades (15.7%)
were associated with firms experiencing negative operating cash flows in the year of the trade. The
distribution of negative operating cash flow transactions through time is lumpy. Transactions in 2007 and
2009 were more frequently associated with negative operating cash flow insurance firms compared to
transactions in 2006 and 2008. As expected, default rates on mortgage collateral at the time of the
transaction were highest during the years 2008 and 2009, periods which represented the largest declines in
bond value. This fact highlights the need for careful identification of the unique impact of capital
requirements, as opposed to RMBS fundamentals, in explaining the observed low prices paid for RMBS.
Observed RMBS prices were low in 2008 and 2009, but so was the quality of their fundamentals.

Section 3: Estimating the Propensity to Sell RMBS.
Section 3.1. Liquidity in the non-agency RMBS market.
A central feature of theories of fire sales is a lack of liquidity in the market for the asset. In this
section we document liquidity in the non-agency RMBS market amongst insurance companies between
the years 2006-September 2009. The available data is not suitable to estimate the liquidity measures that
are commonly used in the literature. These measures require bid-ask prices, trade data, or volume data.
Here, we can only show the extent to which insurance companies made RMBS purchases and sales. We
find that our proxy for liquidity, the number of purchases and sales, dropped sharply during the crisis.

17

In Figure 3 we provide a plot of the three-month moving average of the total number of P&C and life
RMBS transactions. The market appeared most liquid in June 2006 where the three-month moving
average of unique trades within our sample topped 300 trades per month. Liquidity in the market
remained fairly steady from this point until taking a dramatic dive at the beginning of 2008. Liquidity fell
throughout the next nine months hitting a low in the summer of 2008 when the market transacted nearly
85 trades per month, on average.
The lack of liquidity was most highly concentrated in sales transactions. In Figure 4 we plot the
number of purchases and sales separately. The majority of transactions per month during the summer of
2008 consisted of purchases. Sales averaged less than 20 transactions per month during the summer of
2008. The evidence provided in Figures 3 and 4 is consistent with a lack of liquidity in the market for
non-agency RMBS, a condition which could result in securities being transacted at fire sales.

Section 3.2. Are constrained firms more likely to sell?
Evidence presented in Section 3.1 indicates that the market for RMBS had many fewer transactions
during the financial crisis, which we interpret as evidence of the lack of liquidity required for fire-sale
discounts to occur. In this section, we test a second condition of the fire sales hypothesis, namely,
whether capital-constrained firms are more likely to sell securities. Under a capital-requirement-OTTIfire-sale hypothesis, the urgency of obtaining the capital relief that comes with selling a marked-tomarket, low-credit-quality asset outweighs the cost of the expected fire sale discount. As such, we expect
that capital-constrained firms subject to OTTI accounting will be more likely to sell, all else equal.
To test this aspect of a capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis we estimate a Cox proportional
hazard model using a firm-RMBS panel data set. For each unique RMBS purchase observed between
2006-2008, we construct a panel of monthly observations on the attributes of the mortgage collateral
supporting the purchased RMBS as well as the attributes of the insurance company which purchased the
RMBS. We track the attributes of the RMBS beginning at the date of purchase through time until either
we observe the selling of the RMBS by the original purchasing firm or our sample period ends. We begin
18

the panel in 2006 because it is the first year for which we have insurance company data. We end the
sample in 2008 so as to preserve the key difference between P&C and life firms’ adherence to mark-tomarket accounting in our estimates.
In the proportional hazard estimation, “failure” is the sale of an RMBS while the retention of a
purchased RMBS through the full sample period represents “survival.” The conditional nature of the
proportional hazard estimation allows us to control for the attributes of RMBS collateral which influence
the selling decision through time. Our baseline specification controls for several key measures of the
attributes of the RMBS collateral during each month the bond is held in the portfolio. These include the
RMBS collateral default rate in the month prior to the transaction as well as the cumulative rate of ZIP
code-level house price appreciation for the mortgage pool since origination. We also control for poollevel FICO, combined LTV, the percentage of mortgages that are ARMs, owner occupied, no/low
documentation, or refinancing mortgages. We cluster standard errors by month.
Table 2 reports results of the hazard estimation. Column (1) includes both life and P&C firms in the
estimation. We create a P&C indicator variable designed to measure the difference between life and P&C
firms in the propensity to sell, conditional on the real-time attributes of the RMBS. The estimated
coefficient on the P&C indicator is positive and statistically significant, indicating that for a given set of
RMBS characteristics – including time held in portfolio – P&C firms are more likely to sell RMBS. In
terms of economic significance, the magnitude of the estimated coefficient indicates that at sampleaverage collateral values, RMBS are predicted to remain in P&C portfolios 5 months less than in life
portfolios, all else equal.
The results in Column (1) are consistent with the prediction that P&C firms are more likely to sell
RMBS, but the estimation in Column (1) does not clearly identify the role of capital requirements. The
difference in selling propensity driving the positive estimate on the P&C indicator could also be attributed
to a host of unobservable differences between the two firm types. This includes the possibilities that P&C
firms could have higher portfolio churn on account of a more frequently changing liability structure
compared to life firms or because of more frequent policy redemptions. In an effort to identify the role of
19

capital requirements in the selling decision more directly, we create an indicator variable for firms with
below-median RBC in a given year. Under a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis, firms with
low levels of RBC would feel a greater urgency to sell RMBS compared to less capital-constrained firms.
In columns (2) and (4) we split the sample by insurance type and estimate the proportional hazard
model where the below-median RBC indicator is the independent variable of interest. The results in
Column (2) suggest that below-median RBC P&C firms are significantly more likely to sell than abovemedian P&C firms, conditional on a given set of RMBS characteristics. Holding RMBS attributes at the
P&C sample average, below-median P&C firms were predicted to hold RMBS 6 fewer months than
above-median P&C firms. In contrast, the results in Column (4) indicate that the RBC position of life
firms has no significant impact on their propensity to sell.
In Columns (3) and (5) we test whether the propensity for below-median RBC firms to sell is
different at a given level of collateral default. A capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis predicts
that the urgency of selling would be higher for poor credit-quality RMBS held by low capital firms
subject to OTTI accounting practices. In testing the poor credit-quality aspect of this prediction we create
a new variable which measures the interaction of the real-time mortgage collateral default rate with the
below-median RBC indicator for the P&C and life samples, respectively. Though the previous estimates
control for the average level of real-time credit attributes of the RMBS, the interaction term measures the
propensity to sell at a given level of collateral default. For the P&C sample, as reported in Column (3), the
estimated coefficient on the key interaction term is not statistically different from zero. In the life sample,
as reported in Column (5), the estimate on the key interaction term is also insignificant.
The results from the Cox proportional hazard estimation support two of the key predictions of a
capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis. First, P&C firms are significantly more likely to sell
RMBS than life firms. Second, the likelihood of selling is correlated with the RBC position of P&C firms
but not with the RBC position of life firms.

20

Section 4: Estimating Fire-Sale Effects in RMBS.
Section 4.1 Do capital constrained firms sell bonds at lower prices?
While a probability-based estimation strategy has the potential to estimate the likelihood of observing
sales, probability-based estimates are not as effective at capturing the urgency to sell. Tests involving
market prices are better suited for the estimation of liquidity discounts on account of selling urgency. In
this section we document pricing patterns that exist in the data and evaluate whether the observed patterns
are consistent with the fire sales hypothesis.
Our primary hypothesis states that the combination of capital requirements and accounting rules
should influence the observed transaction prices of RMBS. The effect should be pronounced in P&C
firms on account of their adherence to mark-to-market accounting practices. As a first pass approach in
evaluating the relationship between a firm’s RBC and the price of RMBS transactions we calculate the
RBC ratio for each P&C firm in our sample and stratify trades into above- and below-median RBC
buckets.12 Table 3 presents P&C summary statistics on the average price change between the first and
second RMBS transactions of the same bond in a matched transaction pair. Columns (1) and (2) of Panel
A document that, on average, below-median RBC P&C firms are associated with transactions which
declined 8.0% in price compared to average 6.2% declines for above-median RBC firms.
Such a discrepancy could be attributed to more frequent sales for below-median RBC firms given the
potentially large bid-ask spreads in an illiquid market. In order to adjust for the difference between sales
and purchases, Columns (3) and (4) of Panel A document differences between the price changes of aboveand below-median RBC P&C firms using a sample of only sales transactions. In the sales-only sample,
above-median RBC firms experienced average price declines of 4.7% compared to an average price
decline of 7.5% for below-median RBC firms.
Panel A adjusts for differences in purchases and sales transactions, but does not adjust for differences
in collateral credit quality. Columns (5) and (6) of Panel B document differences in price changes for

12

Above- and below-median RBC calculations are performed in each year of the sample for P&C and life firms
separately.

21

above and below-median RBC firms in a sales-only sample on transactions with above-median collateral
default rates. Above-median RBC P&C firms selling RMBS with above-median default rates exhibit
average price declines of 4.7% compared to 13.6% price declines for below-median RBC firms selling
RMBS with above-median default rates. By contrast, in a sales-only sample of transactions with belowmedian collateral default rates, as documented in Columns (7) and (8), the price changes between aboveand below-median RBC firms only differ by a few percentage points.

Consistent with a capital-

requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis, the summary statistics presented in Table 3 clearly indicate that
OTTI-adhering P&C firms that are regulatory-capital constrained sell low credit quality RMBS at a
discount compared to non-regulatory capital constrained P&C firms.
In Table 4 we reproduce the results of Table 3 on a sample of repeat-RMBS transactions for life
insurance companies. Given that life insurance companies were not required to adhere to fair value
accounting practices prior to 2009 we would not expect to observe similar sensitivity of pricing to
regulatory-capital positions and collateral default rates as exhibited by P&C firms in Table 3. Columns
(1) and (2) document that, on average, above-median RBC life insurance companies are associated with
larger pricing declines than below-median RBC firms, a result opposite to that ofr P&C firms. Such a
result is fully consistent with the view that accrual accounting delays sales of securities that have made
losses for companies with weaker capital positions. A similar pattern holds when examining the salesonly sample as tabulated in Columns (3) and (4). Columns (5) and (6) reveal that pricing declines are
higher still for above-median RBC firms transacting in RMBS with above-median collateral default rates.
This result suggests that life insurance companies are sensitive to the credit quality of RMBS, but that the
sensitivity is not related to their capital position, at least prior to 2009, as would be predicted under a
capital-requirement-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis.

Section 4.2 Do lower levels of capital cause fire sales?
Broadly speaking, the simple univariate comparisons provided in Table 3 show that poorly capitalized
P&C insurance companies consistently sold bonds at a discount relative to better capitalized insurance
22

companies. This pattern does not hold for life insurance companies, at least prior to 2009. The observed
pattern is potentially consistent with a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis. However, the
evidence does not rule out viable alternative explanations. First, the differences do not control for
unobservable attributes of the RMBS. Poorly capitalized firms may systematically own bonds of poorer
credit quality, justifying the lower observed prices.
A more subtle explanation, even more at odds with a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis,
is the possibility that the lower prices of the below-median RBC firms are justified by systematically
lower credit quality RMBS, so that losses associated with poor credit-quality RMBS are themselves
responsible for the lower levels of capital in the firm. Under this explanation, the below-median RBC
firms have lower levels of capital because they own portfolios of RMBS that are of systematically lower
credit quality and prices of RMBS of a systematically lower credit quality are appropriately discounted by
the market.
In this section we propose a specification designed to disentangle the endogenous relationship
between firm capital and RMBS credit quality in order to appropriately test a capital-requirements-OTTIfire-sales hypothesis. As a starting point, consider a simple, linear model of the following form:
,
where subscripts i and t represent RMBS i transacted at time t, subscript j represents firm j and X
represents a matrix of bond fundamentals.
X includes the full set of RMBS-specific fundamentals described in the data section. In addition to
observable attributes of the collateral, a specification explaining variation in RMBS prices must address
other issues. The repeat-transaction criterion implicitly controls for deal-specific features of each RMBS
such as seniority in the deal’s capital structure and other unobserved contractual features. Despite these
sample criteria, omitted variables may still plague the proposed pricing specification. The most obvious
concern is that an unobserved attribute of RMBS quality could itself be the cause of an intermediary’s
constrained capital position. RMBS values are not exogenous to a firm’s capital position because an
otherwise healthy firm could suffer capital distress on account of the credit attributes of the RMBS
23

portfolio itself. Such an omitted variable bias may make it difficult to determine whether a constrained
seller’s transaction of an RMBS at a dislocated price is on account of capital expediency or because of
unobserved features of RMBS credit quality that cause the firm to sell the RMBS and that justify a
dislocated price.
We propose using negative shocks to a firm’s cash from operations as an instrument for the capital
urgency of a firm. Cash from operations essentially represent an insurance company’s underwriting
income. As such, negative cash from operations represents an episode of increased liabilities, triggered
most frequently by an increase in insurance claims. Negative cash from operations should not be
influenced by recognizing losses on RMBS because, in the accounting treatment of insurance companies,
investment income does not contribute to cash from operations. Because of this, negative cash from
operations should be correlated with firms experiencing capital distress; however, the source of distress
should not be correlated with the fundamentals of the RMBS we are trying to evaluate. We scale
operating cash flow by the level of total capital in a given year in order to capture the contribution or
destruction of capital that can be attributed to a given level of operating cash flow in that year.
As a check on the validity of negative operating cash flow shocks as an instrument for capital distress,
we examine the empirical relationship between year-over-year changes in levels of capital at insurance
companies and episodes of negative operating cash flows. In our sample of insurance companies, firms
experiencing a negative operating cash flow shock in a given year are associated with statistically
significant 9.8% lower levels of capital compared to the previous year, on average. The result is
consistent across each of the years in our sample period. In contrast, the average firm in our sample not
exposed to a negative cash flow shock experienced a 6.1% increase in capital each year in the sample
period.

Section 4.3. RMBS pricing and operating cash flow shocks
In this section we test the pricing aspects of a capital-requirement-OTTI-fire sale hypothesis, which
argues that the sales of ‘adverse-shock-to-capital’ firms that do occur should reflect a discount in price
24

relative to the sales of non-capital shocked firms for RMBS of a similar credit quality. The prediction is
based on the argument that the capital relief associated with selling a credit-impaired bond outweighs the
cost associated with selling the credit-impaired bond, even if the expediency of selling the bond results in
a fire-sale discount.
The use of a repeat sales sample in our estimation requires careful attention to the potential empirical
issues it presents. One such challenge is the handling of bid-ask spreads, particularly in an illiquid
market. Our dependent variable is calculated as the percent change in the price of an RMBS from the
previous transaction to the second transaction. We create a sale indicator variable which is equal to one if
the second transaction in a pair of transactions is a sale because we are interested in testing whether the
sales of capital constrained firms are statistically different from the sales of non-constrained firms, all else
equal. Drawing inferences on fire sales from the coefficient on the sales indicator is potentially difficult
because sales are expected to be consistently lower by virtue of a bid-ask spread, particularly if the
previous transaction was a purchase. We overcome this challenge through the interaction of the sale
indicator with the operating-cash-flow-to-capital ratio. The interaction term allows for a comparison of
sales transactions of firms with various levels of operating cash flow. It is not clear ex ante why any bidask spread bias of sale transactions would be correlated with the ratio of operating-cash-flow-to-capital of
the seller in a given year.

Accordingly, we expect the estimated coefficient on the sale, capital-

constrained interaction variable to represent a reasonable estimate of the difference in sales between
capital constrained and less-constrained firms.13
A second issue of a repeat sales approach which deserves careful attention is the amount of time
between each transaction. Though we control for quarter fixed effects, changes in market conditions in
the time between two unique transactions would not be captured by simple quarter fixed effects. We
control for the number of months from the prior trade as an additional factor which could impact the
13

One remaining bid-ask spread issue to consider is whether the first transaction in a repeat transaction pair was a
purchase or sale transaction. Purchase-sale pairs would be expected to experience larger negative price changes than
an otherwise comparable purchase-purchase pair because of bid-ask spreads. While this is a concern conceptually,
we confirm in the data that price changes associated with purchase-sale paired transactions are not statistically
different than price changes in purchase-purchase pairs.

25

change in price between two consecutive transactions of the same RMBS. We also interact the numberof-months-from-prior-trade variable with the quarterly time dummies, so as to capture any changing
dynamics in the market that could occur in the time between two transactions.
The repeat sales sample also influences the specification of our control variables. Rather than
controlling for the level of collateral attributes such as collateral default rates, rates of house price
appreciation, etc., we control for changes in the control variables from the time of the first transaction to
the second. The change in collateral attributes should more accurately capture the change in credit quality
which might influence observed pricing changes. For example, two unique pairs of repeat transactions
might be associated with the same level of collateral default rates at the time of the second transaction,
but one pair of transactions might be associated with a much larger relative change in default rates
between the first and second transactions. Fundamentally, we believe the change in the price between the
two transactions should reflect the change in collateral attributes, not just the level of attributes at the time
of the second transaction.
Finally, the relationship between price changes and the sign of operating cash flow is likely to be
asymmetric. A positive operating cash position of an insurance company in a given year should have little
bearing on the capital urgency of the firm and thus the urgency of selling an impaired RMBS. We would
expect non-capital constrained firms to be less likely to accept the price discounts associated with a
“forced” sale transaction. However, a negative operating cash flow position should be associated with an
urgent sale and the potential to accept a liquidity discount to remove the capital requirement associated
with an impaired security. In order to capture the potential asymmetry in our estimates, we split the
estimation sample into transactions of firms with negative operating cash flow and positive operating cash
flow.
Table 5 reports the estimation results of our pricing specification. The dependent variable in each
specification is the change in price from the first transaction to the second. Control variables include
changes in collateral attributes, changes in market interest rates, the time between the two transactions,
quarterly fixed effects, and the interaction of the quarterly fixed effects with the time-between26

transactions variable. We cluster standard errors by the second transaction month. The sample period in
columns (1) and (2) is January 2006 to September 2009 given the adherence to mark-to-market
accounting practices for P&C firms over that whole period. The coefficient of interest in Column (1) is
the interaction of the operating cash-to-capital ratio with the sale indicator. The interaction term is
positive, indicating that the sales of firms with larger negative operating cash flows are associated with
larger price declines. The magnitude of the estimate indicates that a one-standard deviation decline in the
operating cash to capital ratio, from the mean of -.27 to -.69, results in a 8.2% price decline. In contrast,
the interaction of the sale indicator with the continuous measure of positive operating cash flows, as
reported in Column (2), is not significantly different from zero.
Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 repeat the estimation for the sample of life firms using the 2006-2008
sample period in which life firms did not uniformly follow OTTI accounting practices. The key
interaction term, operating-cash-to-capital*sale-transaction, is not statistically different from zero in the
negative or positive operating cash flow samples. This result is consistent with a lack of selling urgency
for life firms given their ability to hold RMBS on the books at historical cost. As a means of identifying
the effect of OTTI accounting on the urgency of selling, in Columns (5) and (6) we estimate the same
specification using a sample of repeat transactions for life firms where the second transaction occurred in
2009. Given the adoption of OTTI accounting for life firms within the year 2009, such transactions could
reflect the fire sale characteristics fueled by the combination of OTTI accounting and capital
requirements. The positive and significant estimate on the operating-cash-to-capital*sale-transaction
interaction term indicates the fire sale mechanism at play in 2009. Life firms in 2009 that experienced
larger negative operating cash flow shocks were involved in RMBS sales that occurred at significant
discounts relative to the prior transaction. The estimated coefficient suggests pricing discounts as large as
12.5% for life firms experiencing a one-standard deviation more severe level of negative operating cash
flow. By way of comparison, the sales of life firms with positive operating cash flow in 2009 do not
demonstrate similar pricing patterns.

27

The results presented in Table 5 appear consistent with a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale
hypothesis. All else equal, when selling an RMBS, a firm which experienced a larger negative operating
cash flow shock sold RMBS at a statistically significant lower price compared to a firm with a less
negative operating cash flow shock. The results only hold during periods in which firms adhere to OTTI
accounting practices. However, despite the consistency of the results with a capital-requirements-OTTIfire-sale hypothesis, the results still do not rule out viable alternatives.

Any issue besides capital

requirements which impacts an insurance company’s need for liquidity could be addressed through the
forced sale of securities. For example, life insurance firms may face higher policy redemptions, forcing
the firm to liquidate assets at potential fire sale prices to meet client’s liquidity demands. Such a demand
for liquidity would affect operating cash flow and could produce results consistent with those documented
in Tables 2-5. In the following section we propose a specification designed to test a unique aspect of a
capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis.

Section 4.4. Does the credit quality of the bond influence the magnitude of fire sale discounts?
Regulatory capital charges increase as the credit quality of assets declines. As detailed in Section 1.2,
in the case of insurance companies, assets of the highest credit-quality are assigned a 0.004 capital charge
while assets of poor-quality are assigned a substantially larger 0.23 capital charge. The inverse and nonlinear relationship that exists between the credit quality of an asset and the amount of capital that must be
held against the asset gives rise to our final test. Price discounts associated with urgent sales should be
most severe for the most severely credit-impaired securities.
A test of this hypothesis requires objective measurement of the credit quality of RMBS. As before,
we use observable default rates in the month prior to a transaction as our measure of credit quality. We
calculate collateral default rates as being above or below median at the time of the second transaction for
each repeat sample pair. We then create a variable which interacts the operating cash flow variable with
the sale indicator and an above-median default indicator. The above-median default calculation uses the
full sample of default rates as of the second transaction. The three-way interaction should measure the
28

marginal pricing difference between the sales of capital constrained firms on high versus low creditquality RMBS. As was the case in Table 5, we estimate the regression separately for negative and
positive operating cash flow firms.
Table 6 presents the results of this test. We control for the same set of collateral attributes as in
previous tables, with the exception of default rates. The above-median default rate indicator serves as a
proxy for the level of default rates in this specification. As reported in Column (1), the estimated
coefficient on the operating cash*sale transaction*above-median defaults is positive and statistically
significant. The positive coefficient indicates that sales from firms with larger negative shocks to
operating cash flow are associated with larger negative bond price changes for high collateral default
RMBS compared to low collateral default RMBS.

In contrast, column (2) reports results of the

estimation in the negative operating cash sample of life firms between the years 2006-2008. The
estimated coefficient on the interaction of interest is not statistically significant, consistent with estimates
on life transactions reported in previous tables. Column (3) reports results using the sample of life
transactions in 2009. Consistent with results presented in Table 5, the results documented in Column (3)
indicate that transactions of life firms exhibited fire sale characteristics in 2009 and that fire-sale
discounts were largest on RMBS of the worst credit quality. The existence and magnitude of fire sale
discounts appear to be related to the credit quality of the RMBS, but only for firms subject to OTTI
accounting.
Taken together, we interpret our results to be consistent with a capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale
hypothesis. If an omitted variable were driving these results, such a variable would have to be uniquely
correlated with the sales of the worst credit-quality bonds of insurance companies that have experienced a
negative shock to operating cash flows but not correlated with the sales of the worst credit-quality bonds
of insurance companies with positive operating cash flow. The omitted variable would also have to be
correlated only with P&C firms through the full sample period and not life firms except during the year
2009. While it is difficult to conclusively rule out all possible alternatives, we cannot identify alternative
hypotheses that are consistent with the observed empirical patterns.
29

Section 5. Conclusion
The role of collateralized lending is a common theme in some of the recent influential papers on the
financial crisis (Brunnermeier and Pederson (2009), Shleifer and Vishny (2011)). These papers argue that
the liquidation of financing positions which were collateralized by financial assets led to fire sales in
financial markets. In this paper, we consider capital requirements as a second important mechanism
which may contribute to fire sales in financial markets. We describe the economics of how capital
requirements can lead to fire sales and show that mark-to-market accounting is a critical requirement for
such fire sales to occur. We propose and test hypotheses designed to identify a capital requirement
channel at play in the transactions of non-agency RMBS by insurance companies. Understanding the
economics surrounding the market valuation of non-agency RMBS during the financial crisis is important
given the critical role that RMBS played in destabilizing financial institutions’ balance sheets.14
We show that the interplay of mark-to-market accounting rules and credit-quality based capital
requirements can create an economic incentive for a capital-constrained firm to sell credit-impaired
financial assets even, potentially, at fire-sale prices. In particular, even for assets available for sale, OTTI
accounting rules force financial firms to mark financial assets to market prices, thereby recognizing the
loss associated with a decline in an asset’s credit quality. Declines in credit quality have a second
important effect, which is that they raise the capital costs associated with holding a credit impaired asset
on a balance sheet if the capital requirements are credit-quality sensitive. Not all financial institutions
face credit-quality sensitive capital requirements, but insurance companies are among those that do. The
capital costs associated with holding a credit-impaired asset may be more onerous than a firm is willing to
bear. Seeking capital relief, capital constrained firms may have to quickly sell credit-impaired assets,
accepting liquidity discounts associated with an urgent sale.
We provide empirical evidence consistent with the capital-requirements-OTTI-fire-sale hypothesis.
We find that insurance companies subject to mark-to-market accounting practices with low levels of

14

See Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2012) for a discussion of the importance of RMBS and other structured finance
instruments on the balance sheet of financial institutions.

30

capital are more likely to sell RMBS, all else equal. When capital-constrained insurance companies do
sell RMBS, they sell RMBS at prices lower than sales of non-capital constrained insurance companies.
We further document that the fire sale discounts of capital constrained firms increase as the credit quality
of the asset being sold declines. This result is consistent with a regulatory system which assigns capital
charges as a function of asset quality. Our analysis employs data from insurance companies but our
results have broad implications for financial institutions of all types. Though calculated differently at
banks than insurance companies, capital requirements can create incentives for banks to unload assets at
fire sale prices. While capital requirements for U.S. banks were not credit-quality sensitive for loans, they
were for structured finance securities such as RMBS, so that we would expect the issues raised in this
paper to be relevant for RMBS transactions by banks as well.
We believe this work highlights a potentially unanticipated consequence of the interaction between
fair value accounting and credit-sensitive capital requirements.

Capital requirements can create

incentives for firms to sell fair-valued assets into an illiquid market, thereby further destabilizing the
market for a given asset class and further weakening the balance sheets of those firms least able to
withstand such weakening.

31

References
Ambrose, Brent W., Cai, Kelly Nianyun, and Jean Helwege. 2011 “Fallen Angels and Price Pressure.”
Working Paper.
Baderscher, Brad, Jeffrey J. Banks, and Peter D. Easton, 2012. “A Convenient Scapegoat: Fair Value
Accounting by Commercial Banks during the Financial Crisis.” The Accounting Review, 87(1).
Bank of England, 2008, Financial Stability Report, April.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina. 2012. “Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market.” Working Paper.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman. 2009. “Liquidation Values and the Credibility of Financial
Contract Renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4):
1635–77.
Boyson, Nicole, Helwege, Jean, and Jindra, Jan. 2012. “Crises, Liquidity Shocks, and Fire Sales at
Commercial Banks.” Working paper.
Brunnermeier, M. K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 23: 77-100.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity.” Review
of Financial Studies, 22(6): 2201–38.
Coval, Joshua D., and Erik Stafford. 2007. “Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets.” Journal
of Financial Economics, 86(2): 479–512.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert Van Order, 2000. “Mortgage Terminations,
Heterogeneity, and the Exercise of Mortgage Options,” Econometrica 68(2): 275-307.
Ellul, Andrew, Jotikasthira, Pab and Lundblad, Christian T. 2010. “Regulatory Pressure and Fire Sales in
the Corporate Bond Market.” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Ellul, Andrew, Jotikasthira, Pab, Lundblad, Christian T. and Yihui Wang. 2012. “Is Historical Cost
Accounting a Panacea? Market Stress, Incentive Distortions, and Gains Trading.” Working Paper.
Erel, Isil, Nadauld, Taylor, and René M. Stulz. 2012. “Why Did U.S. Banks Invest in Highly-Rated
Securitization Tranches?” NBER Working Paper.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo.” Journal of
Financial Economics 104 (3), 425-451,
Herring, R., and Til Schuermann, 2005. Capital Regulation for Position Risk in Banks, Securities Firms,
and Insurance Companies. In: Scott, Hal S (Ed.), Capital Adequacy Beyond Basel: Bank, Securities
and Insurance. Oxford University Press, New York, chapter 1.
Laux, Christian. 2012. “Financial Instruments, Financial Reporting, and Financial Stability.” Working
Paper.

32

Laux, Christian, and Christian Leuz. 2009. “Did Fair-Value Accounting Contribute to the Financial
Crisis?” NBER Working Paper.
Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino. 2011. “Arbitrage Crashes and the Speed of Capital.” Journal of
Financial Economics 104 (3), 469-490.
Mitchell, Mark, Lasse Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007. “Slow Moving Capital.” American Economic
Review 97, 215-220.
Pennington-Cross, A., Ho, G. 2006. “The Termination of Subprime Hybrid and Fixed Rate Mortgages,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Plantin, Guillaume, Haresh Sapra, and Hyun Song Shin, 2008. “Marking-to-Market: Panacea or
Pandora’s Box?” Journal of Accounting Research, 46(2):435-460.
Pulvino, Todd. 1998. “Do Fire-Sales Exist? An Empirical Study of Commercial Aircraft Transactions.”
Journal of Finance, 53(3): 939–78.
Shaffer, Sanders. 2010. “Fair Value Accounting: Villain or Innocent Victim – Exploring the Links
between Fair Value Accounting, Bank Regulatory Capital and the Recent Financial Crisis,” FRB of
Boston Quantitative Analysis Unit Working Paper.
Sherlund, Shane, 2008. “The past, present, and future of subprime mortgages.” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1343–66.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “The Limits of Arbitrage.” Journal of Finance, 52(1): 35–
55.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 2011. “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics" Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 29-48.

33

Figure 1. A Numerical Example of Capital Requirements in the Insurance Industry.
Before MBS Downgrade
Statement
RBC net
Risk-Based
Value
Factor
Capital
Asset Risk
NAIC Class 1 Bonds (AAA, AA, A)
NAIC Class 2 Bonds (BBB)
NAIC Class 5 Bonds (CCC)
Bonds subject to size factor
Size Factor
Total RBC for Bonds
Common Stock
Asset Concentration Factor

100,000,000
20,000,000

0.004
0.013

400,000
260,000

After MBS Downgrade
Statement
RBC net
Risk-Based
Value
Factor
Capital
99,000,000
20,000,000
600,000

0.004
0.013
0.23

396,000
260,000
138,000
794,000
1.7
1,349,800

99,500,000
20,000,000
0

0.004
0.013
0.23

398,000
260,000
0
658,000
1.7
1,118,600

1,000,000

0.2925

292,500

1,000,000

0.2925

292,500

660,000
1.7
1,122,000
1,000,000

0.2925

After Hypothetical CCC-Rated MBS Fire Sale
Statement
RBC net
Risk-Based
Value
Factor
Capital

292,500
45,000

45,000

45,000

Total Asset Risk - C1
Total Insurance Risk - C2
Total Interest Risk - C3
Total Business Risk - C4

1,459,500
874,250
672,750
160,160

1,687,300
874,250
672,750
160,160

1,456,100
874,250
672,750
160,160

Total Risk Based Capital
Effect of Covariance
Company Action Level RBC

3,166,660
-701,982
2,464,678

3,394,460
-701,982
2,692,478

3,163,260
-701,982
2,461,278

Surplus
Asset Valuation Reserve
Dividend Liability
Total Adjusted Capital

5,500,000
75,000
25,000
5,600,000

5,100,000
75,000
25,000
5,200,000

5,000,000
75,000
25,000
5,100,000

2.272

1.931

2.072

RBC Ratio

34

Figure 2. Transaction prices on non-agency RMBS through time.

35

Figure 3. Frequency of RMBS transactions during the sample period.
This figure plots the 3-month moving average of the total number of non-agency RMBS transactions.
The sample of transactions includes RMBS held on the balance sheets of both P&C and life insurance
companies.

Number of RMBS Transactions
350

3-mth. moving average

300
250
200
150
100
50

0

36

Figure 4. Sales and purchases of RMBS through the sample period.
This figure plots the 3-month moving average of the total number of non-agency RMBS transactions.
The sample of transactions includes RMBS held on the balance sheets of P&C and life insurance
companies. We plot the number of sales and purchases separately.

Number of RMBS Transactions
Sales

Purchases

3-mth. moving average

140
120

100
80

60
40
20
0

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics.
The RMBS transaction sample includes RMBS’s held on the balance sheet of life and P&C insurance companies. The sample includes bonds with at least two
transactions, where the second transaction occurred during the years 2006 - September 2009. The variable “chg price” calculates the change in transaction price
on the same RMBS from the first transaction to the second. The data classify each transaction as a “purchase” or a “sale.” We classify insurance companies as
being more likely to be capital constrained if the insurance company has experienced negative operating cash flow in a given year. Operating cash flow does not
include gains or losses on account of a change in the market value of the non-agency RMBS held on insurance company’s balance sheet. We report attributes of
the mortgage collateral supporting the RMBS at the time of the second transaction.

% of Transactions
that are Sales

Change in Bond Price from Prior Transaction

% of Transactions Associated
with Negative Operating Cash
Flow
Life
P&C

Mortgage Collateral
Default Rate in Month
Prior to Observed
Transaction

Year, Qtr

N

Average

Median

Std. Dev.

2006 Q1
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2006 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q1
2008 Q2
2008 Q3
2008 Q4
2009 Q1
2009 Q2

451
497
487
468
541
421
428
517
287
211
157
209
177
163

-0.13%
-0.21%
0.88%
-3.34%
-0.30%
-1.21%
-3.10%
-4.78%
-14.86%
-14.62%
-20.54%
-41.37%
-23.67%
-35.08%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
-0.19%
-0.79%
-0.56%
-6.95%
-6.00%
-12.51%
-31.04%
-11.56%
-31.38%

4.04%
5.11%
9.46%
13.51%
2.26%
4.15%
7.19%
15.44%
18.91%
21.85%
26.23%
39.42%
32.50%
41.88%

58.98%
66.00%
61.81%
64.10%
65.99%
62.95%
35.28%
51.64%
8.71%
29.38%
18.47%
32.54%
38.42%
59.51%

30.74%
39.12%
27.60%
33.66%
37.82%
49.23%
42.48%
33.13%
5.04%
18.49%
15.24%
33.86%
41.23%
43.48%

16.20%
10.34%
14.00%
16.98%
20.00%
8.16%
18.85%
18.27%
6.12%
7.69%
13.46%
18.29%
26.98%
23.94%

4.08%
4.16%
5.17%
6.08%
5.65%
6.85%
7.79%
8.01%
8.58%
10.59%
9.95%
14.96%
12.00%
19.19%

Aggregate Average

5014

-6.95%

-0.15%

20.06%

51.54%

33.33%

15.67%

7.44%

38

Table 2. Hazard Model: Likelihood of Selling RMBS.
This table presents the results of a Cox proportional hazard model which estimates the likelihood of selling an
RMBS following an observed purchase. We track the monthly, real-time collateral attributes of any given RMBS
following an observed purchase between 2006-2008. The model estimates a baseline hazard through time, where a
sale represents failure. Above and below-median capital firms are sorted based on an annual calculation of the
median risk-based capital ratio (RBC) for P&C and life firms, respectively. Each of the measures of collateral
quality measure real-time attributes of the mortgage collateral generating the RMBS cash flows. We cluster
standard errors by month and report estimated coefficients as opposed to estimated hazard ratios.

Cox Proportional Hazard Model: Propensity to Sell RMBS Following Observed Purchase
Sample: 2006 - 2008
Note: Coefficients Reported (Not Hazard Ratios)
P&C and Life Sample
(1)
Property & Casualty Indicator

P&C Sample
(2)

P&C Sample
(3)

Life Sample
(4)

Life Sample
(5)

0.477**
(2.302)

0.557*
(1.781)

0.054
(0.219)

-0.100
(-0.320)

0.394**
(2.365)

Below-Median Risk-Based Capital Ratio

Below-Median Risk-Based Capital Ratio* Default Rate

-1.354
(-0.523)

2.308
(1.163)

Deal-Level Measures of Collateral Quality:
Default Ratemonth t-1
Cumulative House Price Appreciation
Mortgage Rate
FICO Score
Combined Loan-to-Value Ratio
Percentage of A.R.M.'s
Percent of Loans Owner Occupied
Percent of Loans No Doc./Low Doc.
Percent of Refinance Loans

Cluster Standard Errors by Month
Number of Subjects:
Number of Failures (Sales):
Total Number of Obs.
Log likelihood
Prob > x2

-4.121***
(-4.851)
0.018***
(4.959)
0.068
(1.576)
0.000
(0.242)
0.015
(1.348)
0.654***
(3.641)
1.143***
(2.936)
0.489*
(1.732)
-0.336
(-1.290)

-6.624***
(-3.099)
0.012*
(1.735)
0.111
(1.366)
-0.000
(-0.239)
0.007
(0.329)
0.785**
(2.136)
1.344*
(1.759)
-0.178
(-0.434)
-0.054
(-0.0826)

-5.816**
(-2.510)
0.012*
(1.730)
0.111
(1.370)
-0.001
(-0.249)
0.007
(0.342)
0.784**
(2.133)
1.335*
(1.764)
-0.176
(-0.429)
-0.042
(-0.0647)

-3.162***
(-3.321)
0.019***
(4.878)
0.051
(1.237)
0.001
(0.384)
0.020*
(1.697)
0.559***
(3.273)
0.992***
(2.666)
0.682**
(2.065)
-0.395
(-1.290)

-4.137***
(-2.645)
0.019***
(4.874)
0.047
(1.123)
0.001
(0.455)
0.020*
(1.697)
0.549***
(3.293)
1.003***
(2.721)
0.669**
(2.041)
-0.407
(-1.331)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

8867
1185
211610
-9745.1

1996
311
41159
-2063.5

1996
311
41159
-2063.2

6721
849
167094
-6776.9

6721
849
167094
-6774.4

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

39

Table 3. RMBS Pricing: Property and Casualty Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics on repeat RMBS transactions for P&C insurance companies. The sample
period includes bonds with at least two transactions, where the second transaction occurred during the years 2006 September 2009. The variable “chg price” calculates the change in transaction price on the same RMBS from the
first transaction to the second. The data classify each transaction as a “purchase” or a “sale.” Above and belowmedian RBC firms are sorted based on an annual calculation of the median risk-based capital ratio (RBC) for P&C
firms. Panel B splits the sample based on whether transactions were associated with collateral that had above or
below-median collateral default rates. We calculate collateral default rates as being above or below-median based on
the collateral default rate at the time of the second transaction. The median default calculation uses the full sample
of repeat sales from 2006-September 2009.
Panel A

Year, Qtr

Full Sample
(1)
Above-Median RBC
N
% chg in price

(2)
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price

2006 Q1
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2006 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q1
2008 Q2
2008 Q3
2008 Q4
2009 Q1
2009 Q2

60
120
82
100
51
51
62
86
38
27
31
41
23
40

-0.45%
-0.04%
6.40%
-13.98%
-0.71%
-0.95%
-2.20%
-2.12%
-10.07%
-11.38%
-21.47%
-29.19%
-10.96%
-22.09%

82
80
67
57
58
46
60
97
11
37
21
36
36
28

-0.41%
0.70%
-0.52%
0.45%
0.09%
-0.42%
-2.90%
-3.60%
-6.88%
-14.73%
-27.77%
-49.28%
-41.50%
-26.68%

33
90
63
71
27
29
23
48
4
3
3
5
9
14

-0.45%
0.15%
8.51%
-19.08%
-1.24%
-1.40%
-3.91%
-1.75%
-4.92%
-1.90%
-38.22%
-65.83%
-2.63%
-31.04%

45
62
41
30
40
32
35
47
3
22
4
14
28
23

-0.68%
0.94%
-0.65%
0.15%
0.08%
-0.58%
-2.71%
-1.49%
0.68%
-21.07%
-34.37%
-47.28%
-39.14%
-29.25%

Aggregate Average

812

-6.15%

716

-8.02%

422

-4.73%

426

-7.52%

40

Sales-Only Sample
(3)
(4)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price
N
% chg in price

Panel B.

Year, Qtr

2006 Q1
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2006 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q1
2008 Q2
2008 Q3
2008 Q4
2009 Q1
2009 Q2
Aggregate Average

Above-Median Defaults, Sales-Only Sample
(5)
(6)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price
N
% chg in price

Below-Median Defaults, Sales-Only Sample
(7)
(8)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price
N
% chg in price

9
36
20
21
17
19
13
24
2
1
2
5
6
11

-0.94%
0.41%
2.21%
-0.40%
-1.99%
0.70%
-7.11%
-2.41%
-3.71%
-7.98%
-8.93%
-65.83%
-9.77%
-29.61%

16
21
12
11
25
18
24
26
3
16
4
14
20
20

1.01%
0.35%
-0.25%
0.15%
0.07%
-0.67%
-3.38%
-2.32%
0.68%
-26.85%
-34.37%
-47.28%
-50.38%
-37.75%

24
54
43
50
10
10
10
24
2
2
1
3
0
3

-0.27%
-0.03%
11.44%
-26.92%
0.04%
-5.40%
0.25%
-1.10%
-6.14%
1.14%
-96.79%
11.64%
0.00%
-36.27%

29
41
29
19
15
14
11
21
0
6
0
0
8
3

-1.61%
1.24%
-0.82%
0.14%
0.10%
-0.47%
-1.25%
-0.47%
0.00%
-5.64%
0.00%
0.00%
-11.04%
27.43%

186

-4.71%

230

-13.56%

236

-4.75%

196

-0.44%

41

Table 4. RMBS Pricing: Life Insurance Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics on repeat RMBS transactions for life insurance companies. The sample period
includes RMBS with at least two transactions, where the second transaction occurred during the years 2006 September 2009. The variable “chg price” calculates the change in transaction price on the same RMBS from the
first transaction to the second. The data classify each transaction as a “purchase” or a “sale.” Above and belowmedian RBC firms are sorted based on an annual calculation of the median risk-based capital ratio (RBC) for Life
firms. Panel B splits the sample based on whether transactions were associated with collateral that had above or
below-median collateral default rates. We calculate collateral default rates as being above or below-median based on
the collateral default rate at the time of the second transaction. The median default calculation uses the full sample
of repeat sales transactions, from 2006-September 2009.

Panel A

Year, Qtr

Full Sample
(1)
Above-Median RBC
N
% chg in price

2006 Q1
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2006 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q1
2008 Q2
2008 Q3
2008 Q4
2009 Q1
2009 Q2

139
131
150
139
279
123
208
106
173
52
33
67
45
59

-0.06%
-0.52%
-0.13%
-0.31%
-0.16%
-1.55%
-3.60%
-4.85%
-18.95%
-10.02%
-22.49%
-60.56%
-29.32%
-48.41%

165
159
184
167
148
194
97
209
64
92
72
60
69
32

0.10%
-0.57%
-0.18%
-0.85%
-0.56%
-1.29%
-2.74%
-6.85%
-8.22%
-18.45%
-17.14%
-25.14%
-16.93%
-38.24%

87
83
81
65
194
63
60
40
6
12
5
37
10
42

0.10%
-0.55%
0.01%
-0.77%
-0.27%
-2.87%
-4.63%
-4.16%
-34.51%
-27.82%
-81.91%
-86.76%
-44.61%
-55.79%

101
88
114
130
93
134
33
116
12
23
17
12
21
18

-0.43%
-0.69%
-0.32%
-1.09%
-0.88%
-1.59%
-4.22%
0.27%
-9.35%
-32.49%
-31.12%
-53.38%
-33.47%
-60.53%

Aggregate Average

1704

-8.46%

1712

-5.63%

785

-9.82%

912

-4.94%

(2)
Below-Median RBC
% chg in price
N

42

Sales-Only Sample
(3)
(4)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price
N
% chg in price

Panel B

Year, Qtr

Above-Median Defaults, Sales-Only Sample
(5)
(6)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
N
% chg in price
N
% chg in price

Below-Median Defaults, Sales-Only Sample
(7)
(8)
Above-Median RBC
Below-Median RBC
% chg in price
N
% chg in price
N

2006 Q1
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2006 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q1
2008 Q2
2008 Q3
2008 Q4
2009 Q1
2009 Q2

43
23
48
30
118
44
43
23
4
10
5
34
9
37

0.30%
-0.71%
-0.06%
-1.13%
-0.33%
-3.50%
-6.19%
-3.51%
-51.33%
-33.23%
-81.91%
-93.72%
-46.76%
-63.67%

39
33
53
70
70
87
17
78
8
16
15
11
13
17

-0.32%
-0.25%
-0.27%
-1.56%
-1.10%
-1.88%
-4.79%
-0.35%
-14.10%
-45.73%
-34.66%
-55.21%
-36.10%
-63.96%

44
60
33
35
76
19
17
17
2
2
0
3
1
5

-0.09%
-0.48%
0.10%
-0.46%
-0.17%
-1.41%
-0.67%
-5.05%
-0.85%
-0.79%
0.00%
-7.86%
-25.26%
2.44%

62
55
61
60
23
47
16
38
4
7
2
1
8
1

-0.50%
-0.95%
-0.37%
-0.55%
-0.21%
-1.03%
-3.62%
1.55%
0.14%
-2.23%
-4.54%
-33.30%
-29.19%
-2.35%

471

-15.90%

527

-7.63%

314

-0.71%

385

-1.26%

Aggregate Average

43

Table 5. Are the Sales of Constrained Firms Associated with Pricing Discounts?
The dependent variable in this OLS estimation is the change in price on a given RMBS between two transactions,
where the second transaction occurred in the years 2006 - September 2009. We classify insurance companies as
having experienced an adverse shock to their capital if the insurance company has experienced negative operating
cash flow in the year of the transaction. Operating cash flow does not include gains or losses on account of a change
in the market value of the non-agency RMBS held on insurance company’s balance sheet. We measure RMBS
fundamentals using the change in the collateral attributes from the prior transaction to the current transaction. We
create an indicator variable for sales. The model includes quarter fixed-effects, and the interaction of quarter fixed
effects with a variable which measures the number of months from the prior transaction. We cluster standard errors
by month of the second transaction.

Dependent Variable: % Change in Price from Prior Transaction
P & C Insurers: 2006- Sep. 2009
Neg. Op. Cash Flow Pos. Op. Cash Flow
(1)
(2)
Operating Cash/Capital * Sale Indicator
Operating Cash/Capital
Sale Indicator

Life Insurers: 2006-2008
Neg. Op. Cash Flow Pos. Op. Cash Flow
(3)
(4)

Life Insurers: 2009
Neg. Op. Cash Flow
Pos. Op. Cash Flow
(5)
(6)

0.195**
(2.431)
-0.196**
(-2.546)
0.026
(0.748)

-0.049
(-1.434)
0.056**
(2.311)
-0.017
(-1.209)

-0.001
(-0.0685)
-0.002
(-0.149)
-0.021
(-1.416)

0.002
(0.245)
0.011*
(1.721)
-0.019
(-0.983)

0.246**
(2.981)
-0.136
(-0.981)
0.071
(0.708)

0.055
(0.735)
-0.042
(-1.980)
-0.258**
(-3.931)

-1.535***
(-3.236)
0.000
(0.109)
0.068*
(1.774)
0.009
(1.659)
0.020
(0.684)
1.565*
(1.746)
0.700
(0.711)
-0.119
(-0.109)
2.410
(1.482)
0.009**
(2.366)
0.106**
(2.131)
-0.065
(-1.591)

-0.414**
(-2.161)
0.002
(1.192)
0.066***
(4.535)
0.005**
(2.173)
-0.007
(-0.614)
0.373**
(2.300)
0.340
(0.876)
-0.602
(-1.418)
0.102
(0.266)
-0.003
(-1.169)
0.058***
(3.188)
0.014
(0.273)

-0.282
(-1.372)
0.004***
(3.247)
0.026**
(2.279)
0.003
(1.538)
-0.007
(-0.937)
0.196
(1.126)
-0.230
(-0.565)
0.217
(0.885)
0.077
(0.328)
-0.015
(-1.412)
0.021
(1.135)
0.094
(1.304)

-0.603***
(-2.735)
0.004***
(3.833)
0.015***
(2.928)
-0.001
(-0.810)
0.005
(0.489)
-0.123
(-1.075)
-0.206
(-0.686)
-0.381
(-1.314)
-0.227
(-0.720)
-0.005***
(-3.532)
0.029***
(2.770)
-0.016
(-1.029)

-0.687
(-1.229)
0.027**
(3.043)
0.007
(0.141)
0.016
(1.584)
0.031
(0.943)
0.807
(1.568)
3.525***
(6.432)
0.872
(1.039)
-1.901
(-1.771)
0.012**
(2.800)
-0.031
(-0.683)
-0.031
(-0.266)

-1.728***
(-4.736)
0.001
(0.221)
0.026
(1.249)
-0.009
(-0.701)
-0.017
(-0.974)
-0.469
(-0.591)
1.976
(1.029)
-1.013
(-0.468)
-1.394*
(-2.372)
0.00
(0.00)
0.054
(1.825)
0.089
(1.852)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

241
0.683

1250
0.435

1055
0.655

2142
0.437

84
0.846

116
0.609

Change in Collateral Quality from Prior Trade:
Chg. Default Rate month t-1
Chg. Cumulative House Price Appreciation
Chg. Mortgage Rate
Chg. FICO Score
Chg. Combined Loan-to-Value Ratio
Chg. Percentage of A.R.M.'s
Chg. Percent of Loans Owner Occupied
Chg. Percent of Loans No Doc./Low Doc.
Chg. Percent of Refinance Loans
Months from Prior Trade
Chg. in 5-year T-Bond Rate
Constant

Quarter Fixed Effects
Quarter Fixed Effects * Months from Prior Trade
Cluster Standard Errors by Month
Observations
Adj. R2

44

Table 6. Are the Pricing Discounts on Sales of Constrained Firms Larger for RMBS of Lower Credit
Quality?
The dependent variable in this OLS estimation is the change in price on a given RMBS between two transactions,
where the second transaction occurred in the years 2006 - September 2009. The sample in this table includes
changes in prices where the second transaction was either a purchase or a sale. We create a separate indicator
variable for sales. We classify insurance companies as having experienced an adverse shock to their capital if the
insurance company has experienced negative operating cash flow in the year of the second transaction. We calculate
collateral default rates as being above or below-median based on the collateral default rate at the time of the second
transaction. The median default rate calculation uses the full sample of repeat sales transactions, from 2006September 2009. We measure RMBS fundamentals using the change in the collateral attributes from the prior
transaction to the current transaction. The model includes quarter fixed-effects, and the interaction of quarter fixed
effects with a variable which measures the number of months from the prior transaction. We cluster standard errors
by the month of the second transaction.
Dependent Variable: % Change in Price from Prior Transaction

Operating Cash/Capital * Sales * Above-Median Defaults
Operating Cash/Capital * Above-Median Defaults
Operating Cash/Capital * Sale Indicator
Sale Indicator * Above-Median Defaults
Operating Cash/Capital
Sale Indicator
Above-Median Defaults

P & C Insurers: 2006- Sep. 2009
Neg. Op. Cash Flow
(1)

Life Insurers: 2006-2008
Neg. Op. Cash Flow
(2)

Life Insurers: 2009
Neg. Op. Cash Flow
(3)

0.291***
(3.470)
-0.328***
(-5.339)
0.010
(0.271)
0.026
(0.295)
0.009
(0.272)
0.004
(0.0903)
-0.021
(-0.254)

-0.020
(-0.801)
0.005
(0.249)
0.012
(0.652)
-0.060**
(-2.233)
-0.007
(-0.509)
0.010
(1.222)
0.033*
(2.026)

0.668*
(1.807)
-0.154
(-0.879)
-0.258
(-0.903)
0.213
(1.752)
0.037
(0.351)
-0.083
(-1.285)
0.018
(0.576)

0.003
(0.728)
0.054
(1.396)
0.004
(0.614)
-0.015
(-0.528)
1.469*
(1.892)
0.103
(0.0732)
1.136
(0.864)
0.737
(0.516)
0.014**
(2.697)
0.120**
(2.684)
-0.081
(-1.601)

0.004***
(3.201)
0.022**
(2.184)
0.004*
(1.965)
-0.008
(-1.319)
0.316*
(1.894)
-0.292
(-0.715)
0.329
(1.197)
0.130
(0.551)
-0.015
(-1.492)
0.024
(1.262)
0.077
(0.995)

0.024**
(2.855)
0.037
(0.763)
0.033***
(4.107)
0.015
(0.399)
1.285
(1.295)
3.324**
(3.777)
1.205
(1.742)
-2.025
(-1.062)
0.007
(1.680)
-0.021
(-0.376)
-0.033
(-0.339)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

241
0.681

1055
0.657

84
0.864

Change in Collateral Quality from Prior Trade:
Chg. Cumulative House Price Appreciation
Chg. Mortgage Rate
Chg. FICO Score
Chg. Combined Loan-to-Value Ratio
Chg. Percentage of A.R.M.'s
Chg. Percent of Loans Owner Occupied
Chg. Percent of Loans No Doc./Low Doc.
Chg. Percent of Refinance Loans
Months from Prior Trade
Chg. in 5-year T-Bond Rate
Constant
Quarter Fixed Effects
Quarter Fixed Effects * Months from Prior Trade
Cluster Standard Errors by Month
Observations
Adj. R2

45

