NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CYCLICALITY OF SALES, REGULAR AND EFFECTIVE PRICES:
BUSINESS CYCLE AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Olivier Coibion
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Gee Hee Hong
Working Paper 18273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18273
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We are grateful to Yury Yatsynovich for excellent research assistance, Martin Eichenbaum and seminar
participants at UC Berkeley, NBER Summer Institute, New Economic School, Zurich University,
and Central European University for helpful comments. This Working Paper should not be reported
as representing the views of the IMF. The views expressed in this Working Paper are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, IMF policy, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Gorodnichenko thanks NSF for financial support.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular and Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 18273
August 2012
JEL No. E3,E4,E5
ABSTRACT
We study the cyclical properties of sales, regular price changes and average prices paid by consumers
(“effective” prices) in a dataset containing prices and quantities sold for numerous retailers across
a variety of U.S. metropolitan areas. Both the frequency and size of sales fall when local unemployment
rates rise and yet the inflation rate for effective prices paid by consumers declines significantly with
higher unemployment. This discrepancy can be reconciled by consumers reallocating their expenditures
across retailers, a feature of the data which we document and quantify. We propose a simple model
with household shopping effort and store-switching consistent with these stylized facts and document
its implications for business cycles and policymakers.
Olivier Coibion
University of Texas, Austin
and NBER
ocoibion@gmail.com
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Gee Hee Hong
University of California, Berkeley
ghhong@econ.berkeley.edu

I

Introduction

Explaining the apparent non-neutrality of money has led macroeconomists to study a variety of frictions,
such as nominal and real wage rigidities or information rigidities. But the most commonly emphasized
potential source of monetary non-neutrality remains “sticky prices” as epitomized by Woodford (2003).
In part, this likely reflects the ubiquitousness of sticky prices in daily life. For example, Starbucks has
raised its brewed coffee prices only once per year since the 2007-2009 recession began, despite the fact
that the spot price of (Robusta) coffee bean rose 50% between February of 2007 and February of 2008,
then fell 33% from February of 2008 to February 2010, before again rising 50% by February 2011.1 This
annual frequency of updating prices is not uncommon, and the notion that many prices change only
infrequently has been well-documented in the literature.2
Yet while firms may choose to change their prices only infrequently, this need not imply that the
“effective” prices actually paid by households are themselves sticky. Chevalier and Kashyap (2011), for
example, argue that if households respond strongly to sales, then “effective” price flexibility due to
consumers reallocating their expenditures across goods or time could potentially undo much of the
macroeconomic effects of the underlying price rigidities commonly observed in regular prices. While a
significant body of work now exists which quantifies how the treatment of sales affects the degree of
price rigidity (e.g. Bils and Klenow 2004, Nakamura and Steinsson 2008, Eichenbaum, Jaimovic and
Rebelo 2011, and Kehoe and Midrigan 2011), evidence on the extent to which sales prices affect the
effective prices paid by households remains limited.

In large part, this shortcoming reflects data

limitations: measuring effective prices paid by households requires data on both quantities and prices,
whereas most data-sets include only the latter.
Using a panel dataset of both prices and quantities sold at the universal product code (UPC) level
across different stores in 50 U.S. metropolitan areas from 2001 to 2007, we build on this literature by
studying the cyclicality in both the prices posted by retailers as well as the effective prices actually paid
by consumers. Consistent with Gali and Gertler (1999), Williams (2006), Roberts (2006) and others
documenting the lack of a strong negative relationship between inflation and unemployment in U.S.
macroeconomic data, we find little cyclical sensitivity in the inflation rate of prices posted by retailers. In
contrast, and consistent with the notion of significant consumer reallocation of expenditures in response
to economic conditions, we document that effective price inflation is indeed more cyclically sensitive
than inflation in posted prices. Furthermore, the difference is quantitatively large: a 2% point increase in
the local unemployment rate lowers the local inflation rate in effective prices by 0.5% relative to the
inflation rate in posted prices for a given UPC.
1
2

See “Starbucks to Raise Prices” in the January 4th, 2012 edition of the Wall Street Journal.
See e.g. Carlton (1986), Cecchetti (1986), and Kashyap (1995).

1

To assess whether this sensitivity of effective prices paid by households is driven by sales, we
also measure the cyclicality of regular and sales price changes, as well as the proportion of a given good
bought on sale. While regular price changes exhibit little cyclical sensitivity, we find that the frequency
and size of sales, as well as the share of goods bought on sale, decline when unemployment rates rise.
Thus, the greater flexibility in prices paid by households relative to the prices charged by firms does not
stem from the cyclical response of sales. Indeed, the cyclical behavior of sales is precisely the opposite of
what one would expect if sales were used in the same manner as regular price changes: for sales to undo
the effects of price rigidities in terms of monetary non-neutrality, we would expect them to be
systematically more frequent when local unemployment rates rise. Thus, these results provide new
evidence consistent with Eichenbaum et al. (2011), Kehoe and Midrigan (2010) and Guimaraes and
Sheedy (2011) that sales are fundamentally different from regular price changes.
If sales are not the source of the observed flexibility in the prices actually paid by households for
a given good in a given metropolitan area, what is? We argue that both the counter-intuitive cyclical
behavior of sales prices and the discrepancy between the cyclical changes in posted and paid prices can be
accounted for by consumers switching across stores in response to economic conditions. Intuitively,
given considerable dispersion of prices across stores in any given time period, a deterioration in local
economic conditions should lead some price-sensitive consumers to reallocate some of their consumption
expenditures toward low-price retailers, thereby lowering the average price paid for any given good. At
the same time, this store-switching behavior on the part of price-sensitive consumers should reduce the
incentive of high-price stores to attract these price-sensitive consumers through sales, which could
account for the counter-intuitive cyclical behavior of sales prices that we identify.
We document two pieces of evidence consistent with this mechanism. First, because we have
data for a variety of identical goods sold across different stores within a given geographic area, we can
quantify the extent to which some stores are systematically more expensive than others. High-price stores
experience larger a decline in the importance of sales than low-price stores when local unemployment
rates rise, consistent with the mechanisms described above. We also show that, when the unemployment
rate increases, the growth rate of revenues in high-price stores declines more than in low-price stores,
consistent with significant expenditure reallocation across retailers by households. Second, we exploit a
detailed panel dataset tracking individual households’ expenditures at the UPC level for each store.
Given that we can characterize the degree to which some stores are more expensive than others, these data
allow us to quantify the extent to which individual households reallocate their expenditures across
different retailers in response to economic conditions.

We find robust evidence that individual

households do indeed reallocate their consumption expenditures toward low-price retailers when local

2

economic conditions deteriorate and that this reallocation is most pronounced for households near the
middle of the income distribution.
In short, our empirical results point to significantly more flexibility in the prices paid by
households relative to the prices charged by firms, but this flexibility appears to be driven by the
reallocation of household expenditures across retailers rather than by sales. While previous work has
considered the macroeconomic consequences of effective price flexibility due to sale pricing by retailers,
the potential implications of retail-switching remain unexplored. As a result, we build on the effective
price literature by integrating store-switching by households into a basic New Keynesian model. In this
model, two retailers each purchase intermediate goods from monopolistic competitors, who are subject to
sticky-prices, and convert these goods into an identical final good. One “local” retailer charges a
premium over the “discount” retailer. However, household expenditures at the latter are subject to
iceberg costs which can be reduced by time-intensive shopping on the part of households. When the
return to shopping effort is diminishing, shopping effort on the part of households will be countercyclical.
As a result, periods of low employment are also periods of high shopping effort activity. This effort leads
to lower effective prices at the “discount” retailer and households therefore reallocate more of their
expenditures toward this retailer when employment is low. We show that time-intensive shopping effort
and expenditure reallocation lead to three testable predictions: 1) effective prices are high relative to
posted prices when the level of economic activity is high, 2) high-price retailers of otherwise identical
goods account for a larger share of total retail revenues when the level of economic activity is high, and 3)
the unconditional Phillips curve relationship between inflation and economic activity is steeper when
measured in terms of effective rather than posted prices.

Consistent with household expenditure-

reallocation, we find that all three predictions hold in our data even when aggregated across all categories
and regions.
In the model, the effective prices paid by households are much more flexible than the underlying
posted prices, as suggested by Chevalier and Kashyap (2011). However, this effective price flexibility
stems not from the presence of sales, as in Chevalier and Kashyap (2011), but from the reallocation of
household expenditures across retailers and the time-variation in shopping effort.

In response to

monetary policy shocks, for example, nearly 50% of the total adjustment in the price of the final
consumption good paid by households occurs in the first quarter, while only this ratio is less than 20% for
underlying posted prices. As a result, the contemporaneous effect of monetary policy shocks on output is
smaller, i.e. there is less monetary non-neutrality than one would expect based on the frequency of posted
price changes.

However, the effect is relatively small on impact and most importantly does not

qualitatively affect the persistence of the response of the output gap to monetary policy shocks. Hence,
the response of output to a monetary policy shock looks much more like that of a typical New Keynesian
3

model with high levels of price stickiness than one with low levels of price-stickiness. In short, despite
significant flexibility in the effective prices faced by households, the dynamics of the model are
dominated by the underlying level of price-stickiness in posted prices. In this sense, our results are
similar in spirit to those of Eichenbaum et al. (2011), Guimaraes and Sheedy (2011) and Kehoe and
Midrigan (2011) but whereas they focus on effective price flexibility due to sales, we emphasize the role
of the reallocation of expenditures across stores by households as the source of effective price flexibility.
Despite the fact that the quantitative implications of store-switching are limited in terms of the
degree of monetary neutrality, the presence of shopping effort and store-switching does have several
novel business cycle and policy implications. For example, the presence of shopping effort and storeswitching alters the effective Frisch labor supply elasticity and the effective elasticity of the output gap
with respect to real interest rates, when the latter are expressed in terms of input prices rather than final
consumption goods prices. For the labor supply elasticity, when the utility return to labor is high, then the
return to shopping effort must also be high since the marginal disutilities of labor and shopping effort are
identical. High returns to shopping effort require low shopping intensity under diminishing returns. But
if less time is spent on shopping, then the marginal disutility of labor is low so households will be willing
to supply more labor. For the sensitivity of the output gap to real interest rate changes expressed in terms
of posted prices, if real interest rates rise, then output will fall but be expected to rise via the dynamic IS
curve. With countercyclical shopping effort, the time spent on shopping will therefore be expected to rise
thereby lowering expected inflation in final goods prices.

The latter will lead to relatively more

consumption and output, thereby mitigating the initial decline in output.
The presence of store-switching and shopping effort also leads to new insights into some
traditional measurement issues regarding inflation. For example, the Boskin Commission report (1996)
and Shapiro and Wilcox (1996) discussed the potential for store-substitution to cause biased estimates of
inflation. Reinsdorf (1993), Hausman and Leibtag (2007) and Diewart, Greenlees and Hulten (2009) try
to assess the average inflation bias in the U.S. from store-switching, but focus primarily on the entry of
new potentially low-price outlets and the fact that these entrants will only gradually be included in the
CPI sample of stores. Triplett (2003) also highlights retail-switching behavior on the part of households
as well as the related costs faced by households due to shopping effort. As emphasized in Triplett (2003),
the difference in our model between the final consumption price index faced by households and a fixedexpenditure weight index will reflect two sources: the reallocation of expenditures by households across
retailers as well as the time-varying intensity of shopping effort on the part of households.

One

contribution of the paper is to show that the “effective” price index in our model, which uses time-varying
expenditure weights across retailers, will generally track the final consumption price index despite not
directly including the household costs stemming from shopping effort. Another contribution to the
4

inflation measurement literature is documenting how store-switching also leads to a cyclical
mismeasurement of inflation both in the data and in the model. We further document that substitution
across similar goods within stores also varies with business cycle conditions, so that the well-known
“substitution bias” will occur not just in the long-run but also over the course of the business cycle.
These two forms of cyclical biases suggest that to more precisely measure the cost-of-living, statistical
agencies would be well-served by tracking actual prices paid by consumers rather than prices charged by
retail outlets, as emphasized in Triplett (2003).
We also show that shopping effort and store-switching have policy implications above and
beyond that for the measurement of inflation. First, the loss function derived from the household’s
expected utility over consumption and leisure displays a larger relative weight on output gap stabilization.
This primarily reflects a reduced welfare cost of inflation volatility in the presence of shopping effort.
Inflation volatility implies higher price dispersion which requires more labor, and therefore less leisure,
due to the convexity of labor supply. However, countercyclical shopping effort implies reduced shopping
intensity when hours worked are high, thereby mitigating the decrease in leisure and therefore the welfare
costs of inflation volatility. Finally, we consider whether welfare would be enhanced if central banks
responded to effective price measures rather than posted prices. The results vary with the regime: an
inflation-targeting central bank is generally well-served by responding to posted price inflation rather than
measures of effective price inflation, but in price-level targeting regimes, significantly higher welfare can
be obtained by targeting deviations of effective prices from a target level than from targeting traditional
posted price gaps. This again suggests that devoting more resources to constructing aggregate measures
of effective prices paid by households could potentially lead to improved policy rules and therefore
greater economic stability and welfare.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the dataset used for the empirical
analysis. Section 3 presents baseline empirical results on the cyclicality of regular, sales and effective
prices while section 4 documents evidence supporting the cyclicality of store-switching by consumers.
Section 5 presents equivalent results for the cyclicality of within-store cross-good substitution. Section 6
develops the model with store-switching and household shopping effort and derives policy and business
cycle implications. Section 7 concludes.

II

Data Description

We use a very extensive data set assembled by Symphony IRI, a marketing and market research agency,3
and discussed in more detail in Bronnenberg, Kruger and Mela (2008). This data set contains weekly
3

Information Resources, Inc. (“IRI”) has changed its name to SymphonyIRI Group, Inc. All estimates and analyses
in this paper based on SymphonyIRI Group, Inc. data are by the author(s) and not by SymphonyIRI Group, Inc.

5

scanner price and quantity data covering a panel of stores in 50 metropolitan areas and 31 product
categories from January 2001 and December 2007. Importantly, the date set covers multiple chains of
retailers for each market. In addition, the data includes a panel of households in two of the metropolitan
areas in which households provided detailed information on their characteristics and purchases. This
household dimension can be linked to the store-level information of the data set.
The metropolitan areas are typically defined at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level. In
four cases (West Texas/New Mexico, South Carolina, New England, and Mississippi), the areas identified
in the data set offer a greater coverage than a city. Two of the metropolitan areas are smaller than typical
(Eau Claire, WI and Pittsfield, MA) but the household panel data were constructed only for these two
areas. Within each metropolitan area, the data includes price and quantity data from a panel of stores,
defined either as drug stores or grocery stores.

Grocery stores outnumber drug stores within each

metropolitan area. For example, data from San Francisco in 2005 cover 44 grocery stores and 14 drug
stores. Each outlet has an identifier which is constant over time so one can track the prices and revenues at
each retailer over time. However, retailers (or chains of retailers) are deliberately not identified by name.
For each retail outlet, weekly data are available at the UPC (universal product code) level. Goods
are classified into 31 general product categories (e.g., Beer, Coffee, Deodorant) as well as more refined
categories. Brand information is included (e.g., Budweiser, Heineken, Coors) but all private-label UPC’s
have the same brand identification so that the identity of the retailer cannot be recovered from the labeling
information. Detailed information about each good is included, such as whether a product is low-fat, as is
information about the volume of the product (e.g., 6-packs vs. 12-packs, volume per container).
Unfortunately, no data on costs are available.
Retailers report the total dollar value of weekly sales (TR) for each UPC code, as well as total
units sold (TQ). The combination of the two yields the average retail price during that week which is
computed as follows:
(2.1)
where m, s, c, t, and j index markets, stores, product categories, time, and UPC. This retail price includes
retail features, displays and retailer coupons, but does not incorporate manufacturer coupons. In addition,
retailers flag goods on sale. Thus, the dataset provides the average price of a good paid by consumers at a
given store during the course of the week, as well as whether this price is identified as a sales price.
Because we are interested in differentiating between regular price changes and those due to sales,
we adopt the following conventions. First, any change in prices between two periods when neither period
has a sales flag is defined as a “regular” price change if the price difference exceeds 1% in value. Second,
when a sales flag is listed and the price after the sale expires is the same as prior to the sale, we assume no

6

change in regular prices in intermittent periods. Third, in addition to the sales flag provided in the data
set, we apply an additional filter similar to the filter in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). Specifically, we
consider a good on sale if a price reduction is followed by a price increase of the same magnitude within
four weeks.4
Table 1 presents basic statistics about the weekly frequency and size (in log-percentage terms) of
both sales price changes and regular price changes across goods and for each of the main categories. We
also present data on the average share of goods bought on sale.5 The frequency of sales and regular price
changes are computed at the individual UPC level in a given month, then averaged across all UPC labels
within a category in a given city and month, and finally averaged across time and cities. To aggregate
across the individual UPCs within each product category, we use several weighting schemes: i) equal
weights; ii) expenditure shares for a given city and year (“city specific”); iii) cross-city expenditure shares
for a given year (“common”).6
The average size of sales is approximately 25% across all goods. While less than 20% of goods
are on sale in any given week, more than 30% of all goods purchased are done so when goods are on sale.
Frozen dinners and frozen pizzas are the goods which are proportionally most bought on sale, while
cigarettes are the least frequently bought on sale (Appendix Table A1). It is also the case that frozen
dinners and pizzas are among the goods which are most frequently on sale while cigarettes are only rarely
on sale. Cigarettes and beer are the goods for which sales, when they do occur, tend to be smallest while
frozen dinners and pizzas are, again, at the other extreme. Panel A of Figure 1 documents that there is a
strong positive correlation between the frequency and size of sales across categories, while Panel C
illustrates the fact that categories of goods with a higher frequency of sales also have a larger fraction of
goods bought on sale.
Rows (4) through (9) in Table 1 focus on the properties of regular price changes. Across all
goods, increases in regular prices are more frequent than price decreases. The average size of price
changes is 3.5% and the average size of absolute price changes is 12%. The average weekly frequency of
regular price changes is 5%, so that the average duration between regular price changes is approximately
5 months. While lower than the frequency found by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), our data is sampled
at the weekly frequency which can lead to higher estimates of the frequency of price changes than when
data is sampled at the monthly frequency, as documented in Kehoe and Midrigan (2010). Panel B of

4

Results are similar when we do not use this filter because the vast majority of sales are picked by the flag provided
in the dataset. See Appendix D for more details.
5
This share for each UPC is calculated as follows. The denominator is the total number of units of a UPC sold
across all stores in a given city and month. The numerator is the number of units of the same UPC sold on sale (i.e.,
when a flag indicates that a store had a sale of this UPC in a given week) across all stores in a given city and month.
6
See Appendix D for more details on how weights are constructed.

7

Figure 1 illustrates that, in contrast to sales, categories of goods with more frequent regular price changes
tend to have smaller price changes.
Figure 1 also examines whether there is any systematic link between the properties of regular
price changes and sales across categories. Panel D, for example, shows that there is little link between the
frequencies of sales and regular price changes across categories, while Panel E documents instead a
positive relationship between the average size of sales (in percentage terms) and the average change in
regular prices across categories. Finally, Panel F illustrates a weak positive relationship between the
frequency of sales and the average size of regular price changes across categories.

III

The Cyclicality of Effective, Regular and Sales Price Changes

While a significant literature now exists on measuring and quantifying different forms of price changes,
our primary interest is in examining the cyclicality of different prices in the data. In particular, we
distinguish between two forms of prices: posted prices are those provided at the store-level and consist of
both regular and sales prices, and “effective” prices are the average (weighted by quantities) prices paid
by households across retailers for a given good.

3.1

The Cyclicality of Posted and Effective Prices

To first characterize whether the prices that households pay differ in a systematic manner from the prices
charged by retailers, we examine the cyclicality of the two. Measuring the effective prices paid by
households exploits the fact that our data includes quantities sold as well as prices. It further exploits the
fact that we have data for a large number of retailers within each metropolitan area. Specifically, we first
construct the quantity-weighted average “effective” price of a specific good j in category c across stores
in geographic area m as
∑ ∈
∑ ∈

.

(3.1)

This measure can change because individual prices change or because consumers reallocate their
consumption of the good across stores. For each good j in category c and market m, we then compute the
monthly inflation rate log

,

,

. Then, using weights

for UPCs, we aggregate across

all goods j within a category c to get the average category-level inflation rate across stores.

In

aggregating across goods, we consider the use of equal weights, city-specific weights, and common
weights across UPC’s within each product category. Because these weights are held fixed within each
calendar year, our measure of “effective” price inflation does not include substitution across goods, a
question to which we return in section 5. Finally, we cumulate monthly inflation rates into the annual
inflation rate

. which we refer to as the “across-store effective inflation rate”.

Using prices
8

constructed in (2.1), we also construct posted inflation price measures

in an equivalent manner,

except for the fact that weighting across retailers is based on fixed-expenditure weights rather than timevarying expenditure-weights.7
To assess the cyclicality of price changes with respect to economic conditions, we adopt the
following baseline empirical specification:
(3.2)

,

where m, c, and t index markets (e.g., Atlanta, Detroit), the category of the good (e.g., beer, yogurt),
calendar time (i.e., month);

is a variable of interest (e.g., effective inflation rate);

seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate;8
good while

,

is the local

denotes the fixed effect for each market and category of

denotes time fixed effects. Because the unemployment rate at the metropolitan level is

only available at the monthly frequency, we estimate specification (3.2) at the monthly frequency as well.
Since the error term in specification (3.2) is likely to be serially and cross-sectionally correlated, we use
the Driscoll and Kraay (1998) method to construct standard errors.9
Estimates of

in specification (3.2) show the strength of correlations between local business

conditions and various pricing moments and thus are informative about cyclical properties of these
moments. One may, however, entertain a causal interpretation of the estimates. Because most goods sold
in stores are not produced locally, specification (3.2) should not suffer from endogeneity issues typically
associated with regressions of prices on real economic activity. For example, unobserved productivity
innovations for a specific product, like razors, are unlikely to be correlated with local unemployment
rates. While aggregate shocks could lead to simultaneous movements in prices of goods and local
economic conditions, controlling for time fixed-effects should eliminate this endogeneity issue. Hence,
the causal interpretation of

in specification (3.2) can stem from the fact that almost all products sold at a

given retailer will be produced in other geographic areas so that local variation in unemployment rates
will serve as proxies for shocks to the local demand for consumer goods.
Given these measures of posted price and effective price inflation rates at the category/market
level, we estimate their cyclical sensitivity to local economic conditions using equation (3.2). The results

7

In constructing fixed expenditure-weights across stores for a given UPC, we use the average share of revenues for
each store over the course of that calendar year. Thus, our measure of posted price inflation updates weights applied
to each retailer for each UPC at the annual frequency. In contrast, the BLS updates retailer weights once every five
years. This implies our estimates will actually understate the difference between posted and effective price
measures relative to BLS procedures.
8
We find similar results when we use alternative measures of local business conditions, e.g., local employment
statistics constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
9
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors tend to be conservative. Appendix Table 3 presents alternative estimates of standard
errors.

9

are presented in Table 2. Focusing on the results with both city-category and time fixed-effects, we find
little cyclical sensitivity of posted price inflation measures to local economic conditions. While the
coefficients on unemployment rates are mostly negative, we cannot reject the null of zero response. This
acyclicality in posted price inflation to economic conditions is consistent with Gali and Gertler (1999),
Williams (2006), Roberts (2006) and others documenting the lack of a strong negative relationship
between inflation and real economic activity in U.S. macroeconomic data, albeit that our results obtain at
a microeconomic level. However, the results for inflation in effective prices are quite different: the
inflation rate of prices actually paid by consumers drops significantly when local economic conditions
worsen. Furthermore, the difference between the two sets of coefficients is economically large: a 2%
point increase in the local unemployment rate lowers the effective price inflation rate by 0.5% at an
annual rate below the inflation rate of posted prices. Hence, the key finding is that effective prices paid by
households are significantly more flexible and sensitive to economic conditions than the underlying prices
charged by retailers.10

3.2

The Cyclicality of Sales and Regular Price Changes

The greater flexibility in the effective prices paid by households relative to those charged by firms is
consistent with the logic of Chevalier and Kashyap (2011) in which the reallocation of consumer
expenditures leads not just to greater effective price flexibility for households but ultimately to
diminished monetary non-neutralities. To investigate the source of this flexibility, we now consider
whether sales are the key driver of this behavior. Thus, we again estimate (3.2) but now use the
frequency and size of sales for each UPC aggregated to the category/market level, as well as the share of
monthly expenditures for each UPC done on sale, again aggregated to the category/market level. For
comparison, we also assess the cyclicality of regular price changes, both in terms of their frequency and
size. Note that since posted price inflation rates depend on both the frequency and size of price changes,
this can be interpreted as a decomposition of the results for inflation rates.
The first column of Table 2 documents results from estimating specification (3.2) at the
category/market level using a simple average across all UPC products within a category, excluding all
fixed effects in specification (3.2).

The results indicate that a higher local unemployment rate is

associated with more frequent sales and a larger share of goods on sales. However, it is unclear whether
this larger role played by sales reflects the fact that sales become more prevalent within a market when i)
10

Appendix Table 4 confirms this finding at the category level: the point estimates of the effect of unemployment on
effective price inflation are stronger than those on posted price inflation for 25 out of 31 categories. Likewise,
Appendix Table 4 documents that the same result obtains for the majority of individual categories for posted prices:
for 19 out of 31 categories, the point estimates of local unemployment on posted inflation rates are insignificantly
different from zero.

10

the unemployment rises (i.e. business cycle effects), ii) regions with higher unemployment rates on
average also experience more frequent sales for other reasons (i.e. systematically more depressed areas
may have on average more frequent sales), or iii) there is a comovement of trends in unemployment and
properties of sales.

As a result, columns (2) and (3) present equivalent results controlling for

geographic/category specific effects and time fixed effects to address ii) and iii).

Introducing

geographic/category level fixed effects eliminates much of the positive effect of unemployment on sales
found in the previous specification, leaving little evidence of cyclical sensitivity of pricing behavior to
economic conditions.

However, this lack of sensitivity to economic conditions could also reflect

macroeconomic shocks (or other omitted variables) which induce variation in both unemployment rates
and the dependent variables and thus lead to potentially spurious correlations. As a result, our preferred
specification includes both geographic/category fixed effects and time fixed effects. As illustrated in
column (3), controlling for time fixed effects alters the results: higher unemployment rates within an area
become associated with significantly less frequent sales and those sales which do occur are smaller in size
(the positive coefficient points to smaller sales since these are measured as negative values). Although
consumers may time their purchases to exploit scarcer sales and thus offset some of the decline by
purchasing more goods on sale whenever there is a sale, we find no support for this channel. Specifically,
the share of goods bought on sale declines with increases in the rate of unemployment.11 Hence, these
results indicate that once one controls for aggregate conditions, a worsening in local economic conditions
reduces the size, frequency, and relative importance of sales.12
In addition, column (3) documents the cyclicality of regular price changes. These results point to
a slightly reduced frequency in regular price changes. This reduced frequency of price changes obtains
for both price increases and price decreases, although the results are only marginally statistically
significant for the former. However, when we measure category averages using expenditure weights,
either city-specific (column (4)) or common across cities (column (5)), cyclical changes in the frequency
of regular price changes are no longer significantly different from zero. Furthermore, we find little
evidence that the size of regular price changes varies with local economic conditions, regardless of the
category aggregation method. The cyclicality of sales behavior, on the other hand, is very robust to the

11

Glandon (2011) also estimates the sensitivity of sales prices and shares of goods sold on sale to unemployment
rates using the IRI data but finds that higher unemployment rates are associated with larger discounts for consumers.
However, he estimates a specification similar to (1) at the annual frequency and without explicit controls for
geographic areas or categories of goods. Hence, his estimates point to the same conclusion as our pooled OLS
estimates. The results in Table 2 suggest, however, that controlling for time and regional/product dummies is key to
identifying the pro-cyclicality of sales.
12
Using another data set, Anderson et al. (2012) find that sales are unresponsive to macroeconomic shocks such as
changes in oil prices.

11

aggregation method. The frequency and average size of sales, as well as the share of goods bought on
sale, are robustly lower when local unemployment rates are higher.13
In short, these results suggest that the properties of regular price changes are close to acyclical:
neither the frequency nor size of these types of price changes vary in a systematic manner with local
economic conditions. Similarly, we find little evidence that category-level inflation rates are significantly
reduced by higher local unemployment rates. In contrast, sales prices appear to be much more cyclical:
sales are smaller and less frequent when local unemployment rates are high, and the share of goods bought
on sale declines with worsening local economic conditions. This counter-intuitive cyclical behavior of
sales strongly suggests that sales prices are unlikely to have the same macroeconomic implications as
regular price changes since one would then expect more frequent and larger sales in the face of economic
downturns accounting for the decline in aggregate inflation. Thus, the pro-cyclicality of sales suggests that
the relevant degree of price stickiness is closer to that of Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) than Bils and
Klenow (2004), consistent with Eichenbaum et al. (2011), Kehoe and Midrigan (2010) and Sheedy and
Guimaraes (2011).

3.3

Implications of Sales and Effective Price Cyclicality

The pro-cyclicality of both sales and effective prices identified in the previous two sections raises two
questions. The first is whether the two are related phenomena. The pro-cyclicality of effective prices
means that when local economic conditions deteriorate, households pay lower prices (or price increases
are smaller) for a given good. The acyclicality of regular price changes means that the regular prices of
the goods do not change, on average, when local economic conditions deteriorate while the pro-cyclicality
of sales means that goods are less frequently on sale and that sales are smaller on average. One way to
reconcile these sets of facts is through the reallocation of expenditures by households across retailers:
when local economic conditions worsen, households purchase relatively more of their expenditures at
low-price retailers, thereby lowering effective prices paid even in the absence of decreases in prices
charged by retailers.
While the pro-cyclicality of sales may seem counterintuitive when these are viewed primarily as
just another form of price changes, interpreting it in the context of a setting in which consumers can
switch across retailers delivers a natural link between the two. Intuitively, a deterioration in local
economic conditions should lead more price-sensitive consumers to reallocate some of their consumption

13

Appendix Table 4 presents disaggregated results from estimating (3.2) by category. The results support the notion
that the pro-cyclicality of sales is quite common and is not driven by just a few categories. For example, 22 out of
31 categories are characterized by higher unemployment rates being associated with less frequent sales, and these
effects are statistically significant for 15 of the categories. Only for two categories are the effects reversed and
statistically significant: diapers and tooth-brushes.

12

expenditures toward low-price retailers, thereby lowering the average price paid for any given good. At
the same time, this store-switching behavior on the part of price-sensitive consumers should reduce the
incentive of high-price stores to attract these price-sensitive consumers through sales, which could
account for the counter-intuitive cyclical behavior of sales prices that we identify. In addition, these two
effects should reinforce each other. To the extent that high-price stores reduce the frequency and size of
sales, then this should induce additional store-switching behavior on the part of price-sensitive
consumers, which in turn should again reduce the incentive of high-price stores to do sales, etc.
In Appendix B, we present a simple model building on Lal and Rao (1997) which illustrates this
mechanism and the multiplier effect of store-switching on sales and vice-versa. There are two retailers in
the model. One sets “everyday low prices” (EDLP) and does no sales while the other retailer, referred to
as “HiLo”, follows a pricing strategy that incorporates intermittent sales. The coexistence of the two
types of retailers is a unique Nash equilibrium and ensures a segmentation of the market. The two stores
compete over two different types of consumers: “bargain hunters” and “loyal” consumers. These
consumers differ in their transportation costs and in whether they observe sales prices. Bargain hunters
have low transportation costs and always observe all prices, hence they purchase from the store that offers
the lowest cost that period (including transportation cost). Loyal consumers have higher transportation
costs and do not observe current prices. As a result, they buy a single unit from the retailer which offers
the lowest price (net of transportation costs) in expectation. An increase in the share of bargain hunters
(which we interpret as similar to an increase in local unemployment rate) leads to relatively more
consumers buying from the low-price EDLP retailer. This reduces the incentive of the HiLo retailer to do
sales thereby increasing the relative price of HiLo stores by decreasing the optimal size of sales. This
simple model illustrates how variation in local economic conditions can, in the presence of storeswitching on the part of households, naturally account for the pro-cyclicality of sales observed in the data.
In section 4, we provide additional empirical evidence in support of this mechanism.
The second question which follows from store-switching by households is whether the flexibility
that it implies for effective prices paid by households matters for macroeconomic dynamics. Chevalier
and Kashyap (2011) argue that effective price flexibility due to sales could potentially undo the monetary
non-neutralities typically associated with rigid prices. Our evidence suggests that while the prices paid by
households are indeed significantly more flexible than implied by changes in posted prices, this flexibility
stems from the reallocation of household expenditures across retailers rather than from counter-cyclical
sales. An important question, therefore, is quantifying the extent to which effective price flexibility due
to store-switching affects the degree of monetary non-neutrality as well as assessing other business cycle
and policy implications of store-switching. To this end, we build a model in section 6 with shopping

13

effort and store-switching on the part of households which allows us to quantify the implications of storeswitching behavior for macroeconomic dynamics.

IV

Household Store-Switching

To provide more direct evidence on whether consumers reallocate their expenditures across retailers as
their incomes change, we pursue two complimentary approaches. The first approach establishes that the
pro-cyclicality of sales is particularly pronounced for high-price retailers. The second approach employs
household panel data and documents that households do indeed reallocate their consumption expenditures
toward low-price retailers when local economic conditions worsen.

4.1

Cross-sectional variation in the sensitivity of pricing to business conditions

To quantify expenditure switching across retailers, we construct a time-varying ranking of stores’ relative
prices as follows. First, for each UPC-level good j in category c and market m, we rank each store s in a
given market and period t by the price charged for that good. The rank R is 1 when a store has the lowest
1 , i.e., the

price, R = 2 for the second lowest price, and so on. We normalize the rank by
∈ 0,1 .

number of stores selling this good plus one, so that the resulting rank

14

Second, we

compute the average rank for a store across the set of UPC products Ω. We consider several versions of Ω
because different stores sell different goods: i) Ω includes all UPCs that are sold in every store in a given
market (Ω

); ii) Ω includes UPCs sold in 90% of stores in a market (Ω ); iii) Ω includes UPCs sold in

75% of stores (Ω ). 15 The average rank of a store for a given Ω is
where

,

∑ ∑

∈

is a weight (equal, city-specific, or common). Finally, we rank stores based on

,

to

determine stores with consistently low and high prices. To make ranks comparable across cities, we
normalize

,

by the number of stores in a city plus one to have the resulting rank

,

∈ 0,1 ,

where 0 is the lowest-price and 1 is the highest-price store. A store’s price ranking tends to be highly
persistent over time, with an autocorrelation parameter of 0.90 at the annual frequency.16
To quantify how the cyclicality of price changes varies with the relative price rank of the store,
we perform the analysis at the store-level using the following empirical specification
,

(4.1)

In this normalization, we use
1 instead of
to ensure that the average rank is centered at 0.5.
We do not consider Ω which includes goods sold in at least one store, which includes private labels specific to a
retail chain. In this case, when only one store sells a given UPC, it is automatically ranked as the lowest priced store
(R = 1). Consequently, stores with a significant share of private labels may appear cheap even when they are not.
Thus, using the universe of goods to rank stores can lead to distorted rankings of stores.
16
We find similar results when we use alternative measures to rank stores (e.g., percent deviation from median price
of a UPC in a given city and month). See Appendix Tables 6 and 7.
14
15

14

where

is a price moment considered for store s in market m at time t,

market m, and

is the store s fixed effect in

is the time fixed effect. The aggregation of the price measures across goods is done via

expenditure shares of each UPC product across all stores.
In Table 3, we present results using the three different definitions of Ω applied to the size and
frequency of sales, the share of goods bought on sale, and the size and frequency of regular price changes.
The results are consistent with the notion that a store’s price rank has significant effects on the cyclicality
of price changes. Specifically, more expensive stores (those with a higher rank) exhibit much more
pronounced declines in the frequency of sales. This is accompanied by a significant decline in the share
of goods bought on sale in more expensive stores. The size of sales in more expensive stores and the size
of sales in less expensive stores have similar reactions to the unemployment rate. Finally, when the
unemployment rate increases, the growth rate of revenues declines more strongly in expensive stores than
in cheap stores. In fact, the least expensive stores may experience an increase in the growth rate of
revenue when unemployment increases. These results hold for all definitions of Ω and are therefore
consistent with the notion that higher unemployment leads to store-switching by price-sensitive
consumers and a reduction in the incentive of high-price stores to offer discounts and sales to attract them.

4.2

Households’ choices of shopping outlets as a function of business conditions

We also consider an alternative and more direct approach to quantifying the extent of consumers’
reallocation of their expenditures across stores. The household panel data developed by IRI Symphony
tracks between 5,000 and 10,000 households in Eau Claire, WI and Pittsfield, MA from 2001 to 2007.
About 2,000 households are continuously present between 2001 and 2007. During this time, households’
expenditures on each UPC product were tracked, including the location of each purchase. Hence, these
detailed data allow us to directly measure the extent of the store-switching phenomenon at the level of
individual households in light of changing economic conditions.
To do so, we first construct a household-specific time-varying measure of the pricing rank of the
stores in which each household does its shopping. Specifically, we construct an average rank of stores at
which household h shopped in month t and market m (either Eau Claire, WI or Pittsfield, MA)
∑
where

,

∈

(4.2)

,

is the average price rank of store s in market m at time t across the set of goods Ω as defined

before and

denotes the share of the household’s expenditures spent at store s in market m and

month t. A low (high) value of
month t. Using

means that household h made purchases in low (high) price stores in

therefore provides a way to quantify the extent to which each household is

allocating their expenditures across retailers of different average price levels.

15

To assess whether individual households reallocate their expenditures across stores as local
economic conditions change, we estimate the following specification across households in the two markets
(4.3)
where

is a household h in city m fixed effect and

is a time fixed effect. The results are presented

in Table 4 using both a simple average across all UPC’s consumed by a household as well as using a
household’s average expenditure-weights across UPCs. Because store price ranks can vary with the set of
UPC’s used in their construction, we produce these results for each of the definitions of Ω considered
before.

The results are similar regardless of the choice for Ω or weights used to construct each

household’s average expenditure-rank: the coefficient on unemployment is negative and statistically
significantly different from zero at standard levels. Thus, higher local unemployment rates are associated
with households substituting more of their expenditures towards low-price retailers. In addition, the
estimated magnitudes are relatively large: a 1% point increase in the local unemployment rate is
associated with a decrease in the average rank at which households shop of between 0.05 and 0.13
depending on the specific measures used.17
The household data also includes detailed characteristics of each household for that year, such as
age of the head of household, income, and the number of household members. As a result, we can also
investigate which types of households are most likely to engage in store-switching behavior. Specifically,
we focus on the relationship between household income and store-switching via the following empirical
specification:
∑
where

(4.4)

is the dummy variable equal to one if the average annual income of household h in market m

falls into gth quintile of the income distribution we have in the IRI sample of households.18 Hence,
indicates the degree of store switching for the lowest-income quintile. Using

as the benchmark, we

explore how the degree of store-switching varies with income quintile. The results are presented in Table
5 for different measures of Ω and using both equal and expenditure-share weighting of different goods. In
each case, the strongest store switching is observed for households in the second and third income
quintiles (annual income between $22,600 and $50,000).

This seems intuitive: most low-income

17

An alternative way to assess store-switching by households is to construct the fraction of each household’s
expenditures going to high-price versus low-price retailers (defining low-price as rank less than 0.5), then regress
these time-varying expenditure shares for each household on local economic conditions using (4.3). The results are
qualitatively similar as those found using time-varying rank of stores at which households do their shopping: higher
local unemployment leads to a larger share of household expenditures being spent at low-price retailers. We are
grateful to Martin Eichenbaum for suggesting this alternative approach.
18
The income ranges for each quintile are: 1th quintile ranges from $5000 to $22,500; 2nd quintile ranges from
$22,600 to $31,600; 3rd quintile ranges from $31,700 to $50,000; 4th quintile ranges from $50,100 to $70,000; 5th
quintile ranges from $70,100 to $120,000.

16

households are likely to shop in less expensive stores most of the time, while high-income households are
more likely to consistently shop in the most expensive stores. Hence, sales by high-price stores are likely
to be designed to attract the middle of the income distribution, and it is these consumers whose switching
behavior is most significant over the course of the business cycle.

V

Cross-Good Substitution

While we have so far limited our attention to expenditure-switching across stores by households for a
given UPC product, the literature on price measurement has long emphasized another margin of
substitution, namely across goods. Our primary motivation for focusing on switching across stores for a
given good is that, as in the construction of the CPI, it is helpful to consider the cost of a fixed basket of
goods for welfare purposes. The substitution bias long emphasized in the literature, in which CPI
inflation will be overstated because it ignores the possibility of consumers switching to substitute goods
when relative prices change, instead involves a change in the composition of the basket which will have
implications for welfare. Nonetheless, we also consider this additional margin here for two reasons.
First, the substitution bias has primarily been considered as a source of a long-run bias in inflation
measurements, while the cyclical properties of this margin have been ignored. Second, comparing the
degree of store-switching to the amount of across-goods substitution provides one metric to quantify the
relative importance of store-switching for the measurement of inflation.
To quantify the degree of substitution across goods, we first construct the quantity-weighted
average “effective” price across all goods j within category c in store s and geographic area m as
∑∈
∑ ∈

.

is the quantity equivalent of good j. Hence, in calculating

where

(5.1)
, all prices are converted into

quantity-equivalent measures so that e.g. the price of a 6-pack of beer is comparable to a 12-pack.
can change because individual prices change or because consumers reallocate their consumption of goods
within a given category. For category c, store s and market m, we compute the monthly inflation rate
log

/

,

. Then, we aggregate across all stores in market m to get the average category-level

inflation rate. Similar to the aggregation above, we consider the use of equal weights or expenditureweights to aggregate across stores.19 Finally, we cumulate monthly inflation rates into annual inflation rate
which we refer to as the “within-category effective inflation rate”.
Because some categories include much more heterogeneity in goods than others, we consider two
classification schemes for measuring the substitution of goods within categories. The first (and broadest)
19

Because quantity equivalents are not available or are not comparable for some categories, we exclude the
following categories from this analysis: deodorant; frozen dinner; photo; soup.

17

includes all UPCs within a category. The second allows substitution only within subcategories which
approximately corresponds to adding another digit to the level of disaggregation. For example, we use all
types of milk when we calculate

for the first classification. In contrast, the second classification

considers separately such subcategories as whole milk, skimmed milk, 2% milk, etc. Inflation rates for
subcategories are aggregated to the category level using equal or expenditure-based weights.
The sensitivity of these inflation rates to local unemployment is then assessed using
(5.2)

,

which is equivalent to the specification used to measure the sensitivity of effective across-store inflation
rates to economic conditions. The results, presented in Table 6, point to a statistically significantly
negative relationship between unemployment rates and cross-good inflation rates.

Thus, as in our

baseline results, this indicates that there is significant substitution of expenditures by households in
response to changing local economic conditions, but along a different margin, namely substituting across
different goods within a category. Not surprisingly, the effect is stronger when we allow a larger set of
goods within each category. Importantly, the quantitative magnitudes are of the same order as those
identified for across-store substitution.

VI

Aggregate Implications of Store-Switching

The key message from our empirical results is that while significant flexibility is present in the prices paid
by households relative to those charged by retailers, this flexibility is driven primarily by store-switching
on the part of households rather than sales. To what extent should macroeconomists care about storeswitching behavior? In this section, we present a stylized New Keynesian model in which households can
reallocate their expenditures across stores in light of changing economic conditions. The model delivers
testable predictions which are confirmed in the data. We then present and discuss some business cycle
and policy implications of the model.

6.1

New Keynesian Model with Consumer-Expenditure Reallocation across Retailers

To assess the implications of the reallocation of expenditures across stores, we incorporate a decision on
the part of households over how much to purchase from different retailers into an otherwise standard New
Keynesian model as in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003). Retailers sell identical
composite goods but at potentially different prices.

The “local” retailer charges a higher price to

consumers, but purchases at the “discount” retailer come with an iceberg cost. This cost can be reduced
by households via time-intensive shopping effort. Thus, households can reduce the effective price of their
aggregate consumption at the expense of leisure time.

Intermediate goods are produced under

monopolistic competition subject to infrequent price adjustment. We abstract from sales in the model and
18

focus primarily on the expenditure reallocation decision of households, but including sales would tend to
strengthen the expenditure reallocation process given the cyclical properties of sales documented in
sections 3 and 4.

6.1.1

Household Problem

The representative household maximizes lifetime utility over consumption and leisure
∑

log

log 1

(6.1)

is the consumption bundle of goods,

where

searching for better prices, and

is labor supply,

is the shopping effort or time spent

is the discount factor. Labor is freely mobile across employers.

Households live in location A and can purchase consumption goods
purchase

,

,

from the “local” retailer and

from the “discount” retailer in location B. We assume that the total consumption bundle

is given by
/

where

(6.2)

,

,

measures the elasticity of substitution across stores (or rather locations).

The imperfect

substitution among retailers guarantees positive purchases at each retailer and will be used to calibrate the
degree of store-switching to what we observe in the data. The budget constraint of the household is
,

where

,

,

1

,

Π

(6.3)

is the iceberg cost of traveling to another location (or searching another location),

holding,

is the bond

is wages, and Π represents profits from ownership of all firms.

We will assume that the iceberg cost is a function of
,
To simplify algebra, we will assume that

1,

0

1,

0.

has constant elasticity
0.

Intuitively, one can think of

as e.g. an information cost associated with shopping at the “discount”

retailer which is reduced as the household devotes more time to search at this retailer. For example,
households typically do their shopping in one primary retailer at which they may accumulate substantial
store-specific knowledge, such as the location of different goods (Rhee and Bell 2002). Shopping at other
retailers will require more time and effort in the absence of this information, which is captured by .
However, households can reduce this additional cost via the time-intensive shopping process in which
information about other retailers is acquired.
Both retailers face the same marginal cost over consumption goods given by
retailer sells at cost

,

. The “discount”

, whereas the price at the “local” retailer is assumed to be a constant markup
19

over this input price

,

, possibly reflecting higher local taxes, high-quality service, the use of an

additional scarce input (such as more expensive local real estate), or a lower level of productivity. Thus,
,

the relative posted prices of the two retailers are assumed to be constant
expenditure costs faced by households will vary with

,

:

,

, but the relative

,

/ . The efficient allocation of

consumption by the household across retailers implies
,
,

,

(6.4)

,

such that the demand for goods from the “local” retailer at location A relative to the demand for goods
from the “discount” retailer at location B will fall when the iceberg costs associated with the “discount”
store are low. With iceberg costs a function of shopping effort, time variation in shopping intensity will
affect the relative prices at the two stores faced by households and will therefore underlie the reallocation
of household expenditures across retailers. The efficient allocation of consumption expenditures on the
part of the household also implies that the price of the final consumption bundle
/

/
,

is

,

1

,

,

Because the final goods sold at the two retailers are identical, log changes in

.

(6.5)
will be equivalent to those

of a fixed-expenditure-weighted price index like the CPI. Changes in the price of the final consumption
good (i.e. “cost-of-living” index), however, will systematically differ from changes in

for two reasons.

First, as emphasized by Triplett (2003), the price of final consumption good depends on the time-varying
effort devoted to shopping, which is a relevant cost from the household’s point of view but is clearly not
captured in standard price indexes. Second, the price of the final consumption good will vary with the
reallocation of expenditures across the two retailers on the part of the household, even when the
household buys identical individual goods at the two retailers, as long as prices differ across retailers.
Note also that the household budget constraint can be rewritten more simply in terms of the price
of the final consumption good as
1

Π.

(6.6)

As a result, the first-order conditions with respect to aggregate consumption and bond holdings will be
standard conditional on being expressed in terms of the final consumption good and its price index
Consumption:
Bonds:

1

:

⟹

(6.7)

⟹

(6.8)

where “checks” denote log-linearized deviations from steady-state values. The optimality condition for
labor is

20

1

Labor:

⟹

(6.9)

where
≡

and

≡

is the steady-state ratio of labor supply to leisure and equivalently for
levels of variables. Note that

and

, and bars indicate steady-state

are the steady-state elasticities of the marginal disutility of

reducing leisure hours with respect to labor and shopping hours respectively. The first-order condition for
since the latter also affects the marginal disutility of labor.

labor includes shopping effort

The optimality condition with respect to shopping effort is
1

Shopping Effort:

⟹

(6.10)

where
≡

1

1
̅

and ̅ is the steady-state level of iceberg costs. This optimality condition states that the marginal disutility of
shopping effort (the LHS) must equal the marginal benefit of shopping time (the RHS), which is the utility
flow from the reduction in expenditures associated with lower effective prices at the “discount” retailer.
The parameter

denotes the steady-state elasticity of this utility flow with respect to shopping. A steady

state with an interior solution for shopping requires the marginal return to shopping effort to be diminishing
0 which, as we document later, is consistent with the data.

in the hours spent shopping, i.e.

Because the marginal disutility of labor and shopping effort are equal, an optimizing household
will therefore also equalize the marginal returns to labor and shopping hours:
(6.11)
so that with diminishing returns to shopping effort, hours spent shopping will tend to be low when the
utility return to labor is high. A direct relationship between hours worked and hours spent shopping also
follows directly from the first-order condition with respect to shopping:
(6.12)
where, given
≡
The parameter

,
̅

1.

represents the steady-state elasticity of the net utility cost from higher shopping effort,

combining the fact that shopping hours above the steady-state both increase the marginal disutility of hours
worked or spent shopping and lead to lower marginal expenditure reductions from shopping effort. Note

21

0 is sufficient (but not necessary) for this net utility

that diminishing marginal return to shopping

0.20

elasticity to be negative, so that shopping intensity will be countercyclical with respect to hours:

Intuitively, if labor hours are low, the marginal disutility to shopping is low, so the household will increase
shopping effort which will both increase the disutility of shopping and lower its marginal return.
One can use this relationship between hours worked and shopping time to eliminate shopping
effort from the first-order condition with respect to labor, yielding
.

1

(6.13)

Shopping effort being countercyclical with respect to labor increases the effective Frisch labor supply
elasticity.21 This reflects the fact that when the utility return to labor is high, shopping intensity will tend
to be low so that the return to shopping is also high. But if the household spends fewer hours shopping,
then the marginal disutility of labor will be lower, and the household will therefore be willing to supply
more labor than it would in the absence of a time-varying shopping effort.

6.1.2

Firms

Retailer j for ∈

,

purchases intermediate goods along a continuum of mass one and assembles them

into a consumption good:
/
,

where

,

,

is an individual good (think of this as a UPC) bought by the retailer in location j, and

is

the elasticity of substitution across individual goods (varieties). Note that because the aggregator is the
same across locations, the composition of goods in the basket is exactly the same across locations and
buyers. Cost minimization implies that the marginal cost paid by both retailers for producing one
consumption good is given by
/

.
Intermediate goods are produced by a continuum of monopolistic competitors, each of which sells
to both retailers. Producer i therefore faces the following total demand:
,

,

,

,

20

Diminishing marginal return to shopping also ensures that leisure is countercyclical with respect to labor since
log-deviations of leisure are equal to
.
21

The steady-state ratio of labor to leisure is given by

which is independent of shopping effort in the

model.

22

where

,

,

. The production function for each intermediate goods producer i is given by
,

∈ 0,1
is the aggregate level of technology, and

is the output of variety i,

where

is employment of

firm i. Technology follows a stationary AR(1) process in logs with i.i.d. innovations denoted by

and

:

persistence

.
Workers are hired from a common labor market at nominal wage

. Firms can reset prices as in

Calvo (1983) with the probability of being able to reset their price denoted by 1
prices, firm i therefore choose a reset price
max
∗
where

|

Ξ

∗

,

∗

. When able to reset

to maximize profits

|

|

of the firm that reset its price in period , Ξ

is the level of output in period

is

,

the stochastic discount factor, subject to their demand curve and the production function. Combined with
the evolution of the intermediate goods price level
∗

1

this yields the log-linearized New Keynesian Phillips Curve in terms of input prices

for retailers
(6.14)

where

Θ, Θ

,

, and real marginal costs are given by

. In the absence of sticky-prices, output in the model would simply track technology, so the
log-linearized output gap is defined as

6.1.3

≡

.

The Central Bank

Monetary policy follows an interest rate rule in which interest rates respond to inflation, output growth
and the output gap such that, after-log-linearization,
1
where

∆

is the degree of interest-smoothing,

response to the output gap,

∆

∆

(6.15)

is the long-run response to inflation,

is the long-run response to output growth,

is the long-run

is an i.i.d. monetary policy

shock.

6.1.4

Parameter Values

To the extent possible, we rely on typical values of parameters in the model. For example, we set
0.99 and , the degree of price rigidity, to 0.70 such that firms update their prices every 10 months
23

on average, as in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). This rate of price-stickiness obtains empirically from
focusing only on regular price changes. This is consistent with our empirical results documenting the
pro-cyclicality of sales prices. However, we subsequently experiment with lower values of

to explore

the quantitative importance of store-switching relative to the effects of not treating sales as regular price
changes. We set

to be 0.66 and , the elasticity of substitution across intermediate goods, to be 10.

Coefficients for the interest rate rule follow Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011), such that long-run
responses to inflation

, output growth

∆

and the output gap

respectively while the degree of interest smoothing

are equal to 1.5, 0.5, and 0.1

is 0.9. The persistence of technology shocks is

0.95. Following Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Wieland (2011), the standard deviation of technology
shocks is set to 0.0090 while that of monetary policy shocks is 0.0024.
With respect to the parameters governing store-switching and shopping effort, we first normalize
the iceberg cost such that ̅ ≡

̅

.

As a result, steady-state consumption of “local” versus

“discount” stores is equalized. This appears to be in line with data since the 1990s. For example, in the
2002 Economic Census, discount stores and supercenters accounted for 73% of sales at general
merchandise stores and 41% of sales at both general merchandise and food stores (Annual Benchmark
Report for Retail Trade and Food Services (2005)).

Discount stores and supercenters are also

significantly cheaper on average. Cleeren et al. (2010) report that discount stores often charge up to 60%
less than regular grocery stores for leading brands. Hausman and Leibtag (2007) report that supercenters
are on average 27% cheaper than other grocery stores for selected food products. We set a slightly higher
value of

1.5, such that “discount” stores in the model are 33% cheaper on average, because the

ability of superstores and discount stores to achieve price discounts is likely to be even larger for nongrocery products (which are more durable and hence more amenable to bulk purchases) than for the
grocery goods which Hausman and Leibtag (2007) focus on. These parameters imply a steady-state
labor-leisure ratio of 0.4. The 2005 American Time Use Survey reports that the average American age 15
and older worked 3.7 hours a day while spending 5.7 hours on leisure and 8.6 hours on sleep. These
values imply average labor-leisure ratios of 0.65 (not counting sleep as leisure) or 0.26 (counting sleep as
leisure).
Evidence on the elasticity of substitution across stores is limited. Walters (1991) examined both
within and across-store substitution and found relatively low rates for the latter relative to the former.
Kumar and Leone (1988) found cross-store elasticities of substitution to be two to three times smaller
than within-store elasticities for narrow product categories. Rhee and Bell (2002) similarly document
limited switching by households in terms of their primary store of choice. As a result, we set

4, less

than half the elasticity of substitution across varieties. For the elasticity of iceberg costs to shopping
effort, Aguiar and Hurst (2005) report that retired households spend 42% more time shopping than pre24

retired households, leading to a 17% decline in total food expenditures (with no change in food
0.3 (rather than

consumption). We use a slightly lower elasticity of

0.4

17%/42%)

since some of the reduction in expenditures documented in Aguiar and Hurst also reflects a rise in time
4 and ̅

spent preparing food. Note that with
will obtain for

2/3

, diminishing marginal return to shopping effort

0, so our baseline value of

is squarely in the middle of the admissible

range.
While there is only limited evidence on empirical values for

and , we can use our estimates of

household-switching to assess how well our baseline parameter values conform to our empirical
estimates. For example, Table 4 indicates that a 1% point increase in the unemployment rate is associated
with a decrease in the average rank at which households shop of approximately 0.13 when counting goods
sold at all stores, with a standard error of almost 0.04. Using Okun’s Law such that a 1% point increase
in the unemployment rate is associated with a 2% decline in the output gap as in Knotek (2007), this
delivers a semi-elasticity of the average rank at which households shop with respect to the output gap of
approximately 0.065 with a 95% confidence interval of [0.028 0.102]. In our model with two retailers,
the average price rank at which the household shops is
,
,

,

,

,
,

,

,

,

,

,

,

where the 2/3 and 1/3 values reflect our ranking algorithm of section 4. It follows that the steady-state
semi-elasticity of the average price rank at which the household shops with respect to the output gap can
be expressed as
1
where

≡

0 is the steady-state elasticity of shopping effort with respect to the output gap and

is the steady-state share of household expenditures at high-price retailers.

Our baseline

parameter values then imply an elasticity of the average price rank at which households shop relative to
the output gap of approximately 0.082, which is close to the empirical estimate and well within the
confidence interval. Hence, our baseline parameter choices for

and

yield a rate of expenditure

reallocation across retailers which is in line with our empirical estimates of actual household behavior.

6.1.5

The Simplified Log-Linearized Model

A convenient property of the model is that it can be reduced to the same three equations typical of New
Keynesian models. The assumption that ̅

, which is not out of line with current expenditure shares in

the U.S., is particularly convenient in simplifying expressions in the model. Under this condition, the
standard New Keynesian Phillips Curve for input prices can be expressed in terms of the output gap
25

̃

(6.16)

where ̃ ≡

. The policy rule is unchanged. The Euler equation for the

output gap is
(6.17)
where

0 whenever shopping effort is countercyclical with respect to hours

one can verify that

is increasing in

0 . Furthermore,

1. Thus, larger elasticities of iceberg costs to

as long as

shopping effort (more negative ) effectively decrease the elasticity of the output gap, holding future
gaps constant, to contemporaneous real interest rates. This effect reflects the countercyclicality of the
shopping effort: if consumption prices are expected to rise, then the output gap should be high but falling
and therefore the shopping intensity should be low but expected to rise. The expected increase in
shopping time will therefore offset part of the increase in the rise in consumption prices which reduces the
expected decline in gaps. As a result, when the Euler equation is expressed in terms of input prices, the
sensitivity of the output gap to changes in real interest rates is diminished.

6.2

Testable Predictions of the New Keynesian Model with Store-Switching

In this section, we focus on the empirical validity of the key mechanism of the model with store-switching
that underlies the subsequent business cycle and policy implications of the model. Specifically, low
economic activity is associated with more shopping activity and therefore lower relative consumption
prices, as illustrated by:
.

(6.18)

When the output gap is low, shopping effort will be high

0 , thereby reducing the relative price of

the final consumption good relative to input prices. Because the price of the final consumption good,
rather than intermediate prices, is what matters ultimately for household welfare, the novel channel in this
model is how the ratio of the two evolves with economic conditions.

in the model is equivalent, when

log-linearized, to the CPI price index in the data. Unfortunately, there is no direct empirical equivalent to
the effective price of the final consumption good

since it incorporates both the iceberg cost, which is

unobservable, as well as the reallocation of expenditures across retailers.
However, we can construct an alternative effective price index

equivalent to that considered in

sections 3 and 4, which incorporates the reallocation of expenditures across stores:
≡

,

,

,

,

,

,

.

After log-linearization, this price index evolves according to:

26

.
Thus, our alternative measure of effective prices
the level of economic activity is high (
consumption price index

(6.19)

should be high relative to the CPI price index

when

0), exactly as would be the case with the measurable final

. Only the magnitude of the elasticity of relative price movements with

respect to economic conditions will differ. Given our calibration of the model,

0.8 so

will

capture 80% of the movements in the final consumption price index, despite the fact that iceberg costs are
not directly observable. Thus, our “effective” price measure

which reflects the prices consumers

actually pay will, at least in our calibration, closely track the final consumption price index

.

We can assess the validity of this prediction in our dataset by constructing a measure of the gap
between the average effective price level and the average posted price level. The average effective price
level is based on the average price paid by households for a given UPC in a metropolitan area, then
aggregated across UPCs and geographic areas using constant expenditure weights. Changes in this index
therefore reflect both changes in the individual prices as well as consumer reallocation of expenditures
across retailers. The posted price index is constructed using fixed expenditure-weights over all individual
UPC products and geographic areas. Panel A of Figure 2 plots the difference between these two series
and the aggregate unemployment rate. As predicted by the theory, the average effective price index
declines sharply relative to the posted price index when the U.S. unemployment rate rises, while the
reverse happens when the unemployment rate declines. Hence, this figure illustrates how, even after
aggregating across all regions and product categories, the effects of consumer reallocation across retailers
leads to a non-trivial mis-measurement of the household consumption price index.
Furthermore, the quantitative magnitudes implied by the series shown in the figure are in line
with the predictions of the model. At our baseline parameters, the elasticity of the difference between
effective prices and posted prices

with respect to the output gap is approximately 0.15.

Between 2001 and 2003, the U.S. unemployment rate rose by approximately 2 percentage points, which
via Okun’s Law, translates to an approximate 4 percentage point decline in the output gap. The theory
predicts that such a decline in the gap would be associated with a decline in the effective price index of
0.60 percentage points relative to the posted price index. The figure points to a decline in this price
differential which is very close to this value. Thus, both the qualitative and quantitative implications of
this dimension of the model appear to be consistent with the data.
The potential for mismeasurement by fixed-expenditure-weight prices indexes of the effective
prices paid by households due to store-switching has long been recognized by the literature on inflation
measurement (e.g. Boskin Commission Report 1996, Shapiro and Wilcox 1996, Reinsdorf 1993, Triplett
2003, Hausman and Leibtag 2007) but little progress has been made in quantifying it. Our model and
27

empirical estimates suggest that the cyclical mismeasurement is relatively large. Because it would be
difficult for statistical agencies to construct time-varying expenditure weights across retailers in real-time,
one implication of these results is that better measurement of the “cost-of-living” should focus on tracking
the prices paid by households rather than those charged by specific retailers, as suggested in Triplett
(2003).
A second approach to assessing the store-switching channel and its effect on relative prices is to
focus on quantities purchased rather than prices. In our model, the relative quantities purchased at “local”
retailers versus “discount” retailers follow
(6.20)
such that when the output gap is low, households will tend to purchase relatively more goods from lowprice stores than high-price stores. Again, this reallocation of expenditures will reflect the higher degree
of shopping effort when economic activity is low. Given that the relative posted prices at the two stores
are constant in the model, the cyclical reallocation in goods purchased will be mirrored in terms of
relative dollar expenditures across the two retailers. Specifically, defining the share of total revenues
going to “local” retailers as

,

≡

,

,

/

,

,

,

,

, the cyclicality of the revenue share of

high-price retailer is
̌

,

.

(6.21)

To evaluate this additional prediction, we construct the share of total retailer revenues going to “highprice” retailers in our data-set, where “high-price” retailers are defined as in section 4.1 and have the rank
above 0.5. Panel B of Figure 2 plots the time series for this share, aggregated across all metropolitan areas,
as well as the unemployment rate. Consistent with the prediction of the model, the revenue share of “highprice” retailers declined sharply during the 2001-2003 recession, before gradually recovering. Thus, the
cyclical behavior of relative revenues of “high-price” and “low-price” retailers in the data is also consistent
with the predictions of the model with time-varying shopping effort and store-switching. One caveat is
that the figure also illustrates how the revenue share of “high-price” retailers never recovers fully after the
2001-2003 recession, which reflects the trend growth of discount retail stores in the U.S. during this time
period.
The third approach is with respect to the slope of the Phillips curve, i.e. the relationship between
inflation and real economic activity. While the New Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC) is unchanged in
the presence of endogenous shopping effort when expressed in terms of input prices, the relevant measure
from households’ point of view is the price of the final consumption bundle. We can rewrite the NKPC
in terms of consumption price inflation as
̃

1

.

(6.22)

28

such that consumption price inflation depends on expected inflation in the next quarter, the current output
gap, as well as the previous period’s gap and the next quarter’s expected gap. The presence of shopping
effort increases the coefficient on the contemporaneous output gap, which suggests a steeper short-run
Phillips curve relationship between effective price inflation and real economic activity. This seems
intuitive since the ability of households to reallocate their expenditures across stores suggests that the
effective price of consumption goods paid by consumers should be more flexible than that of input prices.
To assess the manner in which the relationship between inflation and real economic activity is
affected by store-switching, we first simulate the model with time-varying shopping effort. We then plot
the unconditional relationship between CPI inflation
measured effective price inflation

and employment, as well as that between

, in Panel A of Figure 3. The lines show the slopes of the average

relationship between employment and each measure of inflation in the model: as suggested by the
coefficients on the output gap in the NKPC, the slope is steeper when using effective consumption prices
rather than CPI measures.
Panel B of Figure 3 shows the equivalent unconditional correlations between each form of
inflation and unemployment from aggregating our monthly micro-level data. Specifically, Figure 3 plots
posted price inflation

and effective price inflation

. In each case, the inflation measures are

constructed as weighted (by expenditure shares) averages of

and

across metropolitan areas

and categories. The figure reveals that, with higher aggregate levels of unemployment, both fixedweighted inflation and effective price inflation measures are lower, but the decline is larger for effective
price inflation measures as predicted by the model with store substitution, with the difference between the
two being statistically significant at the 1% level.
In short, these results suggest that the key predictions of the model with store-switching and
shopping effort are apparent not only in micro-data but also in more aggregate series. The countercyclicality of consumer shopping effort leads to effective prices paid by consumers that are
countercyclical with respect to standard price measures such as the CPI index, reallocation of consumer
expenditures toward low-price outlets during economic downturns, and steeper Phillips curves in terms of
effective prices paid by consumers than typically found.

6.3

Business Cycle and Policy Implications of Store-Switching

In this section, we turn to the implications of shopping effort and store-switching for business cycle
dynamics and policy in the model. We focus on three questions: 1) how does the presence of shopping
effort and store-switching affect the degree of monetary neutrality, 2) how does it affect the relative
importance of stabilizing inflation and output gap volatility for welfare, and 3) does it matter whether
monetary policy-makers target traditional inflation measures or are there welfare gains from targeting
29

“effective” price measures which incorporate store-switching on the part of households? We address each
question in turn.

6.3.1

Effective Price Flexibility and the Degree of Monetary Non-Neutrality

The first question is whether, with prices being effectively more flexible than suggested by posted
prices, the degree of monetary neutrality will be lower than expected from the degree of price stickiness.
This logic was suggested by Chevalier and Kashyap (2011) in the context of sales, but store-switching
similarly generates flexibility in the effective prices paid by households which could potentially undo the
stickiness in regular price changes. To assess the implications of store-switching for the degree of
monetary neutrality, we consider the dynamic effects of a contractionary monetary policy shock in our
model. Panel A in Figure 4 plots the impulse responses of inflation and the output gap from our model
after a contractionary monetary policy shock.
Keynesian model without store-switching

The responses include those from a standard New
0 , as well as in the case of endogenous shopping effort

0.3 . These responses illustrate a key implication of endogenous shopping effort: an equivalent
contractionary monetary policy shock has smaller real effects in the presence of store-switching. At our
baseline parameter values, the reduction in real effects for a monetary policy shock is approximately
10% on impact. This reflects the reduced elasticity of output with respect to real interest rates in the
dynamic IS equation (6.17). The higher real interest rate after a contractionary monetary policy shock
contracts contemporaneous demand for consumption goods and therefore leads to a decline in labor
demand and wages. Because households want to equalize the return to shopping effort and labor, the
lower return to labor leads to an increase in shopping effort and a reallocation of consumption
expenditures across retailers which reduces the effective prices faced by consumers. With effective
prices lower than they would be in the absence of store-switching, consumption does not fall by as much
as in the model without store-switching. The reduced effect on output then also implies smaller effects
on inflation via the NKPC.
In addition, Panel A plots the impulse responses of inflation and the output gap in the model
without store-switching and the levels of price flexibility from Bils and Klenow (2004): θ = 0.40 such that
firms update prices every five months on average. This is a useful benchmark because it illustrates
dynamics when sales are treated as regular price changes. Hence, the figures allow us to assess the
relative importance of the two results from section 3: sales are not like regular price changes (so prices are
less flexible than implied by average frequencies) and store-switching on the part of households is present
(so effective prices are more flexible than implied by posted prices). The former implies larger real
effects of monetary policy while the latter suggests smaller real effects. On balance, the results in Figure
3 suggest that incorporating both less flexible posted prices and store switching leads to approximately
30

the same contemporaneous response of the output gap as in the more flexible-price model without storeswitching. However, the dynamic response of the output gap is much more persistent than with more
flexible prices and no store switching. Thus, the medium-run effects of monetary policy shocks on real
economic activity are much more affected by the increased price stickiness when sales are not being
treated like regular price changes than by the household’s store-switching/shopping-effort
mechanism.22,23
Panel B of Figure 4 illustrates how store-switching affects relative consumption across retailers in
the baseline case of

0.3. While consumption at “local” stores falls very sharply, consumption at

“discount” stores is nearly unaffected. This pattern reflects the extent of consumer reallocation of
household expenditures in response to economic conditions. This pattern is also consistent with the
empirical response of the growth rate of revenue in high- and low-price stores to the local unemployment
rate reported in Table 3. Panel B also illustrates the response of different price and inflation measures to
the contractionary monetary policy shock. The price of the final consumption bundle
more sharply on impact than CPI/input prices
of effective prices

declines much

as a result of the increased shopping effort. Our measure

tracks the price of final consumption bundle

closely. In terms of inflation rates,

shopping-effort/store-switching leads to a dramatic difference in the behavior of inflation rates: final good
inflation drops substantially on impact but is very low in subsequent periods. A simple way to gauge how
much more flexible final goods prices are than posted prices is to note that, in the period of the shock,
posted prices

fall by only 1/6th of the cumulative decline in prices while almost 1/2 of the cumulative

adjustment in final goods prices

happens in the first quarter. Despite this much greater flexibility in

the effective prices paid by households due to store-switching than would be expected from the
underlying degree of price stickiness, the implications for monetary neutrality are limited. In this sense,
our results are in the same spirit as Eichenbaum et al. (2011), Kehoe and Midrigan (2010) and Guimaraes
and Sheedy (2011), but whereas they focus on sales pricing as a sources of effective price flexibility for
households, our results stem from the shopping effort and store-switching margins. But the common
finding is that even with high effective price flexibility for households, the degree of monetary neutrality
in the models hinges primarily on the underlying degree of rigidity in regular prices.

22

Appendix Figure 1 illustrates how the size of the contemporaneous response and the average response of the
output gap to monetary policy shocks are increasing in the elasticity of substitution across retailers and the elasticity
of iceberg costs to shopping effort.
23
The similarity of impulse responses however should not mean that one can ignore endogenous variations in
shopping effort. Specifically, the interpretation of estimated relationships in terms of structural parameters depends
on whether consumers can re-allocate their spending across stores. For example, if one ignores store switching, one
could erroneously interpret the reduced sensitivity of output gap to posted-price inflation as a low inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution.

31

6.3.2

Welfare Objective Function with Endogenous Shopping Effort and Store-Switching

The difference between posted and effective price movements induced by the shopping effort and storesubstitution margins also implies that standard approximations of household welfare in New Keynesian
models will be affected.

The most common approach to quantifying welfare is through 2nd order

approximations of utility, as in Woodford (2003), which deliver a loss function in terms of inflation and
output gap volatility. But since household welfare with shopping effort depends on effective prices rather
than posted prices, this suggests that the relative importance of the two forms of volatility will be
affected. To formally assess this effect, we derive the 2nd order approximation to utility in the model and
express it in terms of posted inflation volatility and output gap volatility (Appendix C):
,
≡

(6.23)

,

≡

.

Panel C of Figure 4 illustrates how the coefficients on inflation and output gap volatility vary with the
elasticity of costs to shopping time . Higher elasticities systematically lower the coefficient on inflation
volatility, i.e.,

0. The latter reflects the elasticity of leisure with respect to price dispersion: without

shopping effort, high price dispersion requires high levels of labor supply and therefore less leisure,
which reduces welfare. However, when shopping effort is present and countercyclical, higher levels of
labor supply associated with price dispersion are offset by fewer hours spent shopping, so the sensitivity
of leisure to inflation volatility is reduced. The coefficient on output gap volatility reflects the loss from
volatility in leisure, which depends on the variance in labor supply, shopping effort, the covariance
between the two, and changes in the dispersion of consumption across the two retailers. The interaction
of these effects is nonlinear, such that low elasticities of shopping reduce the cost of a given level of
output gap volatility but this effect is reversed at high elasticities. The overall effect is to make welfare
relatively more sensitive to output gap volatility relative to inflation volatility as the steady-state level of
shopping effort increases.

Thus, the presence of store-switching and shopping effort suggests that

stabilizing output gap volatility should play a more prominent role in the objective function of
policymakers than implied by standard models omitting this channel.

6.3.3

What Price Measure Should Policymakers Target?

A third question of practical interest implied by the model is whether policymakers should focus on standard
fixed-expenditure weight price measures or one that reflects the shopping effort, and therefore expenditurereallocation, activities of households. While household welfare is explicitly associated with the price of the
32

, the fact that these prices are effectively more flexible than posted prices

final consumption good

might suggest that responding to the latter will be welfare-improving via the logic of Aoki (2001).
To address this question, we quantify household welfare (6.23) when the central bank responds
either to posted price inflation

in the standard interest rate rule, final good price inflation

closely related expenditure-weighted final goods inflation rate

or the

holding the other parameters in the

model (including those in the policy rule) constant. The resulting inflation and output gap variances are
plotted in Panel A of Figure 5 for different long-run inflation response coefficients
posted price inflation

. Responding to

, as assumed in our baseline, leads to lower volatility in posted price inflation but

higher levels of output gap volatility, with the latter effect being particularly strong when the inflation
response is high. Given that inflation volatility is more heavily weighted in the loss function, these results
lead to utility being higher in most cases when the central bank targets posted price inflation rather than
final goods price inflation or the expenditure-weighted inflation measure. Thus, this result suggests that,
even in the presence of store-switching and time-varying shopping effort, policy-makers may be better
served by responding to traditional measures of inflation than to measures of effective price inflation.
However, this result appears to be specific to inflation targeting. For example, this result does not
obtain if we consider price-level targeting (PLT) regimes, which—as we know from Woodford (2003),
Gorodnichenko and Shapiro (2007), Coibion et al. (forthcoming), and others—are closer to replicating the
optimal policy under commitment than inflation targeting. Specifically, we replace the baseline interest
rate rule with one that allows for responses to deviations of price-levels from their targets:
1
where

∆

denotes the deviation of posted prices

∆

, final goods prices

(6.24)
, or expenditure-weighted prices

from a target path. Panel B of Figure 5 plots the implied inflation and output volatilities for different
response coefficient

to each price level, as well as expected utility losses for different values of

.

While output gap volatility is still higher when the central bank responds to posted prices, posted price
inflation volatility is now also higher in this case. This reflects the fact that much of the price response is
immediate for

and

and more delayed for

. Under price level targeting, the large immediate

decline in effective prices after a disinflationary shock must be reversed when the central bank targets the
level of effective prices. This requires significant declines in nominal and real interest rates on the part of
monetary policy-makers, which will tend to immediately raise contemporaneous output gaps via the
dynamic IS curve relative to how they otherwise would have responded. This, in turn, offsets some of the
initial disinflation via the New Keynesian Phillips Curve. As a result, both inflation and output gap
volatility will be significantly reduced when the central bank targets the “effective” or final consumption
price level. This effect does not occur under inflation-targeting because the latter does not require the

33

policy-maker to undo the immediate decline in effective prices and therefore does not require the
significant declines in nominal and real interest rates which serve to stabilize both inflation and output
volatility under PLT. Hence, expected utility is now strictly greater when the central bank targets
deviations of effective final goods price deviations rather than posted price levels.

VII

Conclusion

A key question for macroeconomists is quantifying both the degree of price rigidities and the implications
of these rigidities for macroeconomic dynamics. How to interpret temporary sales is a central ingredient
in characterizing whether price-stickiness is large enough to qualitatively affect business cycle dynamics.
We shed new light on this question by studying the cyclicality of sales and regular price changes using
detailed micro-level data. We find that sales are pro-cyclical: higher unemployment rates lead to declines
in both the frequency and absolute size of sales, as well as to declines in the share of goods bought on
sale. This suggests that sales prices differ in a fundamental way from regular price changes, and are
therefore unlikely to undo the high levels of price-stickiness apparent among regular price changes.
At the same time, we show that actual prices paid by households for a given good are
significantly more flexible than what is implied by the behavior of posted prices. This pattern reflects
store-switching on the part of households in light of changing economic conditions. In a simple model of
shopping effort and store-switching, the ability of consumers to reallocate their expenditures across
retailers charging different prices provides an additional force toward price flexibility which leads to
smaller real effects of monetary policy shocks.

Furthermore, store-switching by households can

rationalize the pro-cyclicality of sales: economic downturns increase the incentive of households to search
for bargains at low-price retailers, thereby reducing the incentive of high-price retailers to try and attract
these households via sales. However, despite the increased flexibility in the prices that households
actually pay in light of store-switching, the quantitative implications of store-switching for monetary
neutrality are relatively small. Thus, our results are similar in spirit to those of Eichenbaum et al. (2011),
Kehoe and Midrigan (2010), and Guimaraes and Sheedy (2011), but whereas they focus on the role of
sales in generating increased flexibility in prices paid by households, we focus on the store-switching
margin for effective price flexibility. Nonetheless, store-switching does have non-trivial implications for
the relative importance of stabilizing output gap versus inflation variation in welfare calculations, the
question of which price measures should be targeted by policymakers, and the interpretation of estimated
relationships in terms of structural parameters.
Another implication of store-switching and time-varying shopping effort is that there is a cyclical
mismeasurement of the price of households’ final consumption basket in standard aggregate inflation
measures. This points towards a need for statistical agencies to devote more resources toward measuring
34

the reallocation of household expenditures, not just across goods as commonly emphasized with respect
to the substitution bias, but also across retailers. While the construction of time-varying expenditure
weights in real-time is unlikely to be feasible for statistical agencies, one approach would be to track the
prices paid by households in real-time rather than the prices charged by a fixed set of retailers, as
suggested by Triplett (2003). To this end, scanner price data, which provide prices and quantities, may be
a useful tool for constructing cost-of-living indexes although a number of challenges remain to be
addressed in this area (see Feenstra and Shapiro (2003)).
A related implication is that the ideal price index in the presence of time-varying shopping effort
should measure not only the reallocation of expenditures across stores but also the shopping effort
intensity of households, since this represents a component of the cost of the consumption basket. Further
work on how this could be measured in practice would be of immediate practical relevance. One
implication of our results, however, is that shopping effort and store-switching are closely related, so that
a price-measure which incorporates the reallocation of expenditures across retailers will generally capture
most of the missing cyclical variation in the final consumption price index.
Another fruitful extension would be to consider the impact of the rise in online retailing: the latter
likely reduces shopping costs substantially and therefore facilitates the reallocation of expenditures across
retailers by households. With online retailing growing rapidly, expenditure-reallocation across retailers is
likely to become increasingly important. Just as Walmart reshaped the retailing industry in the U.S., the
rise of Amazon.com and other online retailers will similarly transform household expenditure decisions.
Our results suggests that the ways in which households reallocate their expenditures, as well as the
intensity of their shopping search, will not be innocuous for macroeconomic dynamics and optimal policy
responses to economic fluctuations.
One may also use this idea to shed new light on the puzzle of the missing disinflation during the
2007-2009 downturn. As documented in Ball and Mazunder (2011), the magnitude of the output gap in
the recent recession would have been expected to lead to significantly more disinflation than actually
occurred, based on historical Phillips curve correlations. One potential explanation is that the slope of the
Phillips curve is non-linear, becoming flatter at low levels of economic activity and inflation levels. This
could follow from downward wage rigidity, for example. Such a result could also follow from cyclical
changes in price rigidities. For example, if prices become increasingly rigid due to store-switching as
economic conditions worsen, as suggested by the results in Table 2, then this could lead to a flattening of
the Phillips curve at lower levels of economic activity. Estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve during
regular times would therefore lead to an over-prediction of the decline in inflation during periods of
economic crisis.

35

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2005. “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy,
113(5), 919-948.
Anderson, Eric, Emi Nakamura, Duncan Simester, and Jón Steinsson, 2012. “Decomposing Variation in
Retail Prices,” manuscript.
Aoki, Kosuke, 2001. “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 48(1), 55-80.
Ball, Lawrence and Sandeep Mazumder, 2011. “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 337-381.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow, 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal of
Political Economy 112(5), 947-985.
Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. Jorgenson, 1996. “Toward a More
Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,” Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee, Dec. 4.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Michael W. Kruger, and Carl F. Mela, 2008. “Database Paper: The IRI Marketing
Data Set,” Marketing Science 27(4), 745-748.
Calvo, Guillermo, A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 12(3), 383-398.
Carlton, Dennis W., 1986. “The Rigidity of Prices,” American Economic Review 76(4), 637-658.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., 1986. “The Frequency of Price Adjustment: A Study of the Newsstand Prices of
Magazines,” Journal of Econometrics 31, 255–274.
Chevalier, Judith A., and Anil K Kashyap, 2011. “Best Prices,” NBER Working Paper 16680.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, 1999. “Monetary Policy Shocks: What
Have We Learned, and To What End,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary
Economics.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661-1707.
Cleeren, Kathleen, Frank Verboven, Marnik G. Dekimpe, and Katrijn Gielens, 2010. “Intra- and
Intermarket Competition among Discounters and Supermarkets,” Marketing Science 29(3) 456-473.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the Great
Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation,” American Economic Review 101(1), 341-70.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland, forthcoming. “The optimal inflation rate in
New Keynesian models,” Review of Economic Studies.
Diewart, Erwin, John Greenlees and Charles Hulten, 2009. Price Index Concepts and Measurement. The
University of Chicago Press
Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay, 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation With Spatially
Dependent Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4), 549-560.
Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011. “Reference Prices and Nominal Rigidities,”
American Economic Review 101(1), 234-262.
Feenstra, Robert, and Matthew Shapiro, 2003. Scanner Data and Price Indexes. University of Chicago Press.
Gali , Jordi, and Mark Gertler, 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 44, 195–222.
Gali, Jordi, 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle. Princeton University Press.
Glandon, Philip J., 2011. “Sales and the (Mis)Measurement of Price Level Fluctuations,” Manuscript.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 2007. “Monetary Policy When Potential Output Is
Uncertain: Understanding the Growth Gamble of the 1990s,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 11321162.
Guimaraes, Bernardo and Kevin Sheedy, 2011. “Sales and Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review
101, 844-874.
Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leibtag, 2007. “Consumer Benefits from Increased Competition in
Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Effect of Wal-Mart,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22, 1157-77.
36

Kashyap, Anil, 1995. “Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
110, 245-274.
Kehoe, Patrick J. and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2010. “Price Are Sticky After All,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Research Department Staff Paper 413.
Knotek, Edward S. II, 2007. “How Useful Is Okun’s Law?” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Review, Fourth Quarter, 73-103.
Kumar, V. and Robert P. Leone, 1988. “Measuring the Effect of Retail Store Promotions on Brand and
Store Substitution,” Journal of Marketing Research 25(2) 178-185.
Lal, Rajiv, and Ram Rao, 1997. “Supermarket Competition: The Case of Every Day Low Pricing,”
Marketing Science 16, 60-80.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, 2008. “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1415-1464.
Reinsdorf, M. 1993. “The effect of outlet price differentials on the U.S. Consumer Price Index” in Price
Measurements and Their Uses. M. Foss, M. Manser, and A. Young (eds.). NBER Studies in Income
and Wealth, Vol. 57. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rhee, Hongjai, and David R. Bell, 2002. “The Inter-Store Mobility of Supermarket Shoppers,” Journal
of Retailing 78, 225-237.
Roberts, John M., 2006. “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,” International Journal of Central
Banking 2, 193–230.
Romer, Christina, and David H. Romer, 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
Implications,” American Economic Review 94, 1055-1084.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and David W. Wilcox, 1996. “Mismeasurement in the Consumer Price Index: An
Evaluation,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, eds. Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Triplett, Jack E., 2003. “Using Scanner Data in Consumer Price Indexes: Some Neglected Conceptual
Issues,” in Scanner Data and Price Indexes, eds. Robert C. Feenstra and Matthew D. Shapiro,
University of Chicago Press.
Walters, Rockney G., 1991. “Assessing the Impact of Retail Price Promotions on Product Substitution,
Complementary Purchase, and Interstore Sales,” Journal of Marketing 55, 17-28.
Warner, Elizabeth J., and Robert B. Barsky, 1995. “The Timing and Magnitude of Retail Store Markdowns:
Evidence from Weekends and Holidays” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2), 321-352.
Williams, John C., 2006, “The Phillips Curve in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations,” Working
Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Woodford, Michael, 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
University Press.

37

Table 1. Descriptive statistics.
Dependent variable

Equal weights
to all UPCS
(1)

Sales
Frequency

Use expenditure shares as
weights to aggregate UPCs
City specific
Common
(2)
(3)

mean
s.d.

0.195
(0.079)

0.237
(0.108)

0.237
(0.107)

mean
s.d.

-0.251
(0.077)

-0.249
(0.088)

-0.252
(0.089)

mean
s.d.

0.238
(0.100)

0.319
(0.146)

0.317
(0.142)

mean
s.d.

0.048
(0.031)

0.047
(0.036)

0.048
(0.038)

Positive

mean
s.d.

0.032
(0.025)

0.031
(0.028)

0.031
(0.029)

Negative

mean
s.d.

0.016
(0.012)

0.016
(0.015)

0.017
(0.015)

mean
s.d.

0.035
(0.046)

0.034
(0.043)

0.035
(0.044)

Positive

mean
s.d.

0.120
(0.053)

0.100
(0.055)

0.102
(0.057)

Negative

mean
s.d.

-0.121
(0.084)

-0.089
(0.069)

-0.091
(0.071)

Size

Share of goods bought on sales
Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All

Size
All

Notes: The table reports basic statistics about sales and regular price changes at the city/category level at the weekly
frequency from 2001 to 2007.

38

Dependent variable

Table 2. Cyclical properties of selected moments of price changes.
Use expenditure shares as
weights to aggregate UPCs
Equal weights to all UPCS
City specific
Common
City×Category
City×Category City×Category
City×Category
Pooled OLS
Month
Month
Month
Fixed effects
Fixed effects
Fixed effects
Fixed effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Sales
Frequency
Size

Share of goods bought on sales
Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
Positive
Negative
Size
All
Positive
Negative

Inflation of posted prices
Inflation of effective prices

0.785***
(0.235)
0.245***
(0.086)

0.327
(0.550)
0.321**
(0.145)

-0.365***
(0.120)
0.256**
(0.120)

-0.422***
(0.153)
0.183
(0.137)

-0.475***
(0.141)
0.224*
(0.128)

1.126***
(0.237)

0.512
(0.587)

-0.461***
(0.133)

-0.563***
(0.171)

-0.629***
(0.161)

0.083
(0.097)
0.015
(0.056)
0.067
(0.042)

-0.066
(0.222)
-0.126
(0.128)
0.060
(0.097)

-0.100**
(0.044)
-0.053*
(0.032)
-0.047***
(0.019)

-0.097
(0.065)
-0.058
(0.040)
-0.040
(0.029)

-0.070
(0.064)
-0.050
(0.041)
-0.020
(0.028)

-0.122
(0.098)
0.024
(0.046)
0.051
(0.092)

-0.292
(0.196)
0.142**
(0.072)
-0.014
(0.216)

-0.095
(0.062)
-0.155*
(0.092)
-0.004
(0.129)

-0.008
(0.053)
-0.020
(0.079)
-0.026
(0.101)

-0.005
(0.052)
-0.027
(0.080)
-0.023
(0.101)

-0.077***
(0.020)
-0.221***
(0.034)

-0.081
(0.054)
-0.470***
(0.076)

0.007
(0.034)
-0.208***
(0.045)

-0.0273
(0.036)
-0.258***
(0.064)

-0.034
(0.039)
-0.263***
(0.060)

Notes: The table reports estimated coefficients on local seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate in specification (3.2). Number of observation is 127,224.
Estimated specification is given by equation (1). Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and
0.10 levels.

39

Table 3. Cyclicality of pricing moments by store rank.
Dependent variable

Sales
Frequency

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(1)
(2)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(3)
(4)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(5)
(6)

-0.046
(0.155)
0.087
(0.102)

-1.398***
(0.177)
-0.181
(0.150)

0.052
(0.154)
0.123
(0.100)

-1.578***
(0.190)
-0.251
(0.175)

0.119
(0.156)
0.137
(0.099)

-1.709***
(0.193)
-0.277
(0.196)

Share of goods bought on
sales,

0.225
(0.163)

-1.677***
(0.210)

0.332**
(0.168)

-1.874***
(0.227)

0.412***
(0.170)

-2.030***
(0.235)

Growth rate of revenue

0.266
(0.231)

-0.620***
(0.089)

0.432*
(0.225)

-0.919***
(0.086)

0.605***
(0.218)

-1.251***
(0.111)

0.019
(0.081)
0.010
(0.050)
0.009
(0.037)

-0.157***
(0.052)
-0.067**
(0.035)
-0.090***
(0.020)

0.026
(0.084)
0.016
(0.052)
0.010
(0.037)

-0.173***
(0.061)
-0.081**
(0.041)
-0.093***
(0.023)

0.031
(0.084)
0.019
(0.052)
0.012
(0.037)

-0.183***
(0.066)
-0.087**
(0.043)
-0.096***
(0.026)

-0.121**
(0.055)
-0.140
(0.091)
0.310***
(0.079)

0.034
(0.034)
-0.105***
(0.039)
-0.039
(0.056)

-0.125**
(0.056)
-0.146
(0.095)
0.320***
(0.084)

0.041
(0.036)
-0.094**
(0.046)
-0.058
(0.070)

-0.123**
(0.057)
-0.139
(0.097)
0.308***
(0.089)

0.037
(0.039)
-0.107**
(0.049)
-0.036
(0.082)

Size

Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
Positive
Negative
Size
All
Positive
Negative

Notes: The table reports estimates of specification (4.1). Number of observation is 144,270. UR is the local seasonally-adjusted
unemployment rate. Rank is the rank of the store in terms of level of prices (
, ). Ω indicates what universe of goods is
used to rank stores. Expenditure shares are used to aggregate ranks across UPCs. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors
are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels. See text for further details.
40

Table 4. Rank of the shore where households shop as a function of local unemployment rate.

(1)

Goods are weighted by
expenditure shares
(2)

-9.298***
(3.221)

-13.090***
(3.796)

Ω

-9.210***
(3.006)

-14.237***
(3.751)

Ω

-10.585***
(3.238)

-4.908**
(2.382)

Sample of UPCs
used in ranking
stores
Ω

Equal weights to all goods

Notes: The table reports estimates of specification (4.3). The dependent variable is the average rank of stores
where a household shops in a given month. The table reports estimated coefficients on the local seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate. Each regression has 471,615 observations. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard
errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.

41

Table 5. Rank of the shore where households shop as a function of local unemployment rate and
household’s income.
Sample of
UPCs used in
ranking stores
Ω

Weights for
aggregation of UPCs
Equal
Expenditure shares

Ω

Equal
Expenditure shares

Ω

Equal
Expenditure shares

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-8.961***
(3.149)
-12.735***
(3.820)

-0.671***
(0.174)
-0.744***
(0.238)

-0.556**
(0.240)
-0.632**
(0.314)

-0.631
(0.425)
-0.516
(0.511)

0.025
(0.818)
-0.007
(0.779)

-8.817***
(2.923)
-13.830***
(3.725)

-0.739***
(0.188)
-0.704***
(0.218)

-0.604***
(0.250)
-0.737***
(0.275)

-0.688
(0.439)
-0.677
(0.437)

-0.117
(0.846)
-0.047
(0.785)

-10.160***
(3.160)
-4.808**
(2.321)

-0.828***
(0.194)
-0.430**
(0.205)

-0.715***
(0.257)
-0.312
(0.285)

-0.742*
(0.392)
-0.306
(0.343)

-0.019
(0.822)
0.533
(0.689)

Notes: The table reports estimates of specification (4.4). The dependent variable is the average rank of stores
where a household shops in a given month. The table reports estimated coefficients on the local seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate. Dg is the dummy variable equal to one if a household is in gth income quintile and
zero otherwise. Each regression has 471,615 observations. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.

42

Table 6. Within category substitution.

Substitution within broad categories

Substitution within narrower categories

Equal weights
for all stores
(1)
-0.454*
(0.251)
-0.377*
(0.211)

Sales shares to
aggregate stores
(2)
-0.611**
(0.265)
-0.475*
(0.250)

Notes: The table reports estimates of specification (5.2). The dependent variable is the within-category effective
inflation rate. The table reports estimated coefficients on the local seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate.
Number of observations is 94,851. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.

43

Figure 1. Correlations between key moments
Panel B

.5

Panel A

fzpizza
fzdinent saltsnck
hotdog
coldcer

.2

frequency of sales
.3
.4

carbbev

photo
razors
laundet
coffee
diapers
toitisu
factiss
spagsauc
yogurt
paptowl
shamp
toothbr
toothpa
milk
deodmayo
margbutr
soup
mustketc
peanbutr
hhclean

beer

frequency of regular price changes
.04
.06
.08
.1

milk
cigets

beer
toitisu
carbbev
razors
coffee
diapers
peanbutr
blades
factiss
margbutrpaptowl
mayo
laundet
fzpizza
mustketcspagsauc
fzdinent
yogurt coldcer
soup
sugarsub
hotdog
saltsnck
hhclean

.1

sugarsub

-.35

-.3

-.25
-.2
size of sales, log point

-.15

cigets

deod
toothpa

.02

blades

toothbr
photo
shamp

-.1

.05

.1
.15
absolute size of regular price changes, log points

Panel D
.5

.5

Panel C

.2

carbbev

frequency of sales
.3
.4

share of goods sold on sale
.2
.3
.4

carbbev

fzpizza

fzdinent
saltsnck
hotdog
photo
razors
laundet diapers
factisscoffee
spagsauc

blades

.1

sugarsub

.1
.2

.3
.4
frequency of sales

.5

.6

.02

.04

cigets

.06
.08
frequency of regular price changes

.1

Panel F
.5

Panel E
-.1

milk

blades

cigetssugarsub

.1

toitisu beer

yogurt
coldcer paptowl
shamp
toothbr
toothpa
mayo
deod
margbutr
soup
hhclean mustketc peanbutr

.2

saltsnckfzdinent
hotdog
razors
photo
coffee laundet
diapers
factiss
beer
spagsauctoitisu
yogurt paptowl
coldcer
shamp
toothbr
toothpa
milk
mayo
deod
margbutr
soup
peanbutr
mustketc
hhclean

fzpizza

cigets
beer

diapers
sugarsub
peanbutr

frequency of sales
.3
.4

milk

razors

blades
hhclean

shamp
photo

.2

mustketc
margbutr
yogurt
toitisu
paptowl
coffee
factiss
carbbev
laundet
spagsauc
toothpa
saltsnck
mayo
fzpizza
soup
fzdinent

-.3

size of sales, log points
-.25
-.2
-.15

carbbev

deod

fzpizza
fzdinent
saltsnck
hotdog
razors
laundet
coffee
diapers
toitisu
factiss
beer
spagsauc
yogurt
coldcer
paptowl
toothpa
milk
mayo
margbutr
soup
peanbutr mustketchhclean

photo
shamp

toothbr
deod

toothbr

-.35

blades

.05

.1
.15
absolute size of regular price changes, log points

sugarsub
cigets

.1

coldcer
hotdog

.2

.05

.1
.15
absolute size of regular price changes, log points

Notes: Figures report average (across time and goods) moments at the category level. Expenditure shares are
used as weights to aggregate goods. Red line shows the best fit linear projection. See section 2 for details.
44

.2

Figure 2. Economic Conditions and the Reallocation of Consumption Expenditures across Retailers.

.04

-.04

.045

log price differential
-.035
-.03

.05
.055
.06
Unemployment rate

.065

-.025

Panel A: The Cyclicality of the Gap between the Effective Price Index and the Posted Price Index

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Effective price - Average posted price
Unemployment rate (right scale)

.4

.04

.045

.45

Share

.05
.055
urate_agg

.5

.06

.55

.065

Panel B: The Cyclicality of the Share of Total Retailer Revenues Coming from High-Price Retailers

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Share of high-price stores in total revenue
Unemployment rate (right scale)

Notes: Panel A plots the difference between the “effective” price index and the “posted” price index. The latter is a fixedexpenditure-weighted average of all UPC prices in each store and metropolitan areas in the data, where weights are average
expenditure share of each UPC in each geographic area relative to total household expenditures. The former is the fixedexpenditure-weighted average of average price paid by households for each UPC across all retailers in a metropolitan area.
Panel B plots the share of total retailer revenues arising from revenues at high-price retailers in the data. “High-price”
retailers are defined as in the text for each metropolitan area. Total share is a fixed expenditure-weighted average across
metropolitan areas of shares in each metropolitan area. See section 6.2 for details.

45

Figure 3. Correlation between unemployment rate and measures of inflation.
Panel A: Unconditional correlations in the model with endogenous shopping effort and store switching
0.04
CPI Inflation
Effective Price Inflation

0.03
0.02

Inflation

0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04

-0.1

-0.05

0
0.05
Negative Employment Gap

0.1

.04

Panel B: Unconditional correlations in the data

-.02

inflation rate
0
.02

b1 = -1.56
(0.50)
b2 = -0.69
(0.38)
b1-b2 = -0.86
(0.18)

.045

.05
unemployment rate
Effective price

.055

.06

Posted price

Notes: The top figure plots the unconditional relationship between the negative employment gap (
) and both posted (CPI)
inflation and “effective” price inflation, both annualized, from simulating the model in section 6.1. The solid lines plot the
estimated linear relationship between each. The bottom figure presents relationships between the unemployment rate the
same two measures of inflation in the data. See section 6.2 for details.

46

Figure 4. Business Cycle and Policy Implications of Endogenous Shopping Effort and Store-Switching.
Panel A: Dynamic Responses to Monetary Policy Shock with and without Endogenous Shopping Effort
Inflation Rate ()

Output Gap (X)

Shopping Effort (S)

0

0

5

-1

4

-2

-0.5

3
-3
2
-1

-4

= 0.40,  = 0.0
= 0.70, = 0.0
= 0.70, = -0.3

-5
-1.5

5

10

15

20

-6

5

10

1

15

20

0

5

Price Levels

0

15

20

0.3

Panel B: Substitution Effects after Monetary Policy Shock
Inflation Rates

10

Consumption

0

0
C

P
-0.2
-0.4

-1

-0.6

-1.5

-1

PE
P

-0.5

-2
-3
-4
-5

C


-0.8

E




-2

-1
1

5

10

15

20

-2.5
1

5

10

15

20

-6

CA

-7

CB
C

-8
1

5

10

15

20

Panel C: Welfare Implications of Endogenous Shopping Effort
Coefficient on Inflation Volatility (c )

Coefficient on Output Gap Volatility (cX )

1600
1400

Relative Weight on Output Gap Volatility (cX /c

4.5

0.012

4

0.01

1200

0.008

1000

3.5

800

3

0.006
0.004

600
2.5

0.002

400
200
-0.6

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3


-0.2

-0.1

0

2
-0.6

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3


-0.2

-0.1

0

0
-0.6

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3


-0.2

-0.1

Notes: The top panel displays impulse responses of inflation, output gap and shopping effort to a contractionary monetary policy
shock in the model described in section 6.1. is the degree of price stickiness and is the elasticity of iceberg costs to shopping
effort. The middle panel plots the impulse responses of inflation rates for final consumption goods ( ), effective prices ( ), and
posted prices ( ) in the left figure, price levels for consumption goods ( ), effective prices ( ) and posted prices ( ) in the middle
figure, and total consumption ( ), consumption at the high-price retailer ( ) and consumption at the low-price retailer ( ) in the
right figure. The bottom panel plots the coefficients on inflation volatility (left) and output gap volatility (middle) from the secondorder approximation to utility in the model of section 6.1 and the right figure plots the ratio of the two. See section 6.3 for details.

47

0

Figure 5. Which Inflation Measure Should Policymakers Target?
Panel A: Inflation Targeting
-6

4

-4

Var()

x 10

6


E

3.5
3

x 10

-3

Var(X)

2

-0.5

C

4

2.5

3

1.5

-1


E

2

1

-1.5
1

0.5
0

Welfare Loss


E

5

C

x 10

0

1

2

3

4

5



6

7

8

9

10

0

C
1

2

3

4

5



6

7

8

9

10

-2

1

2

3

4

5



6

7

8

9

10

Panel B: Price-Level Targeting
Var()

-6

2.5

x 10

-4

7

-3

Var(X)

x 10

0

P
2

Welfare Loss

x 10

P

P

E

P

C

-0.2

PE

6

P

C

-0.4

5
1.5

-0.6
4
-0.8

1
3

P

-1

PE

0.5

0

2

0

0.2

0.4

p

0.6

0.8

1

1

PC

-1.2

0

0.2

0.4

p

0.6

0.8

1

-1.4

0

0.2

0.4

p

0.6

0.8

Notes: The top panel displays the variance of inflation (left) and the variance of the output gap (middle) for different longrun responses to inflation by the central bank when the central bank responds to either posted price inflation ( ), effective
price inflation ( ), or inflation of final goods prices ( ). The right panel shows expected utility loss in each case. The
bottom panel plots equivalent figures in the case of price-level targeting when the central bank responds to either posted
prices ( ), effective prices (
), or final consumption goods prices (
). See section 6.3 for details.

48

1

APPENDIX MATERIAL

49

APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL TABLES AND FIGURES.
Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics by category.
Sales
Category

beer
blades
carbonated beverages
cigarettes
coffee
cold cereals
deodorants
diapers
facial tissue
frozen dinner
frozen pizza
household cleaning
hot dog
laundry and detergents

Frequency
(1)
0.152
(0.069)
0.144
(0.038)
0.257
(0.055)
0.069
(0.046)
0.203
(0.069)
0.210
(0.066)
0.198
(0.053)
0.242
(0.065)
0.219
(0.071)
0.283
(0.081)
0.306
(0.084)
0.173
(0.062)
0.229
(0.074)
0.233
(0.063)

Size
(2)
-0.122
(0.035)
-0.267
(0.059)
-0.239
(0.039)
-0.122
(0.051)
-0.237
(0.048)
-0.314
(0.059)
-0.316
(0.055)
-0.185
(0.039)
-0.265
(0.058)
-0.308
(0.065)
-0.282
(0.050)
-0.243
(0.054)
-0.336
(0.060)
-0.272
(0.046)

Share of
goods
bought on
sales,
(3)
0.171
(0.077)
0.160
(0.042)
0.310
(0.063)
0.071
(0.047)
0.236
(0.076)
0.278
(0.081)
0.226
(0.059)
0.269
(0.072)
0.279
(0.083)
0.373
(0.098)
0.395
(0.094)
0.198
(0.071)
0.314
(0.090)
0.307
(0.076)

Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
(4)
0.052
(0.032)
0.051
(0.022)
0.058
(0.022)
0.137
(0.073)
0.053
(0.025)
0.038
(0.018)
0.043
(0.019)
0.058
(0.028)
0.043
(0.024)
0.040
(0.018)
0.044
(0.021)
0.035
(0.017)
0.034
(0.018)
0.044
(0.017)

Size

Positive

Negative

(5)
0.034
(0.023)
0.036
(0.017)
0.036
(0.015)
0.102
(0.069)
0.035
(0.020)
0.027
(0.013)
0.026
(0.013)
0.030
(0.019)
0.027
(0.018)
0.027
(0.012)
0.029
(0.014)
0.022
(0.013)
0.025
(0.014)
0.028
(0.012)

(6)
0.017
(0.012)
0.016
(0.010)
0.022
(0.009)
0.035
(0.020)
0.018
(0.009)
0.012
(0.007)
0.016
(0.010)
0.027
(0.016)
0.016
(0.010)
0.013
(0.008)
0.015
(0.009)
0.012
(0.009)
0.010
(0.007)
0.016
(0.008)

All
(7)
0.028
(0.032)
0.032
(0.044)
0.041
(0.024)
0.026
(0.035)
0.037
(0.037)
0.045
(0.029)
0.030
(0.055)
0.008
(0.037)
0.040
(0.049)
0.051
(0.036)
0.052
(0.033)
0.035
(0.052)
0.065
(0.045)
0.037
(0.031)

Positive

Negative

(8)
0.077
(0.030)
0.119
(0.036)
0.132
(0.028)
0.079
(0.032)
0.126
(0.039)
0.112
(0.041)
0.171
(0.048)
0.100
(0.033)
0.116
(0.053)
0.138
(0.053)
0.140
(0.047)
0.121
(0.050)
0.134
(0.051)
0.118
(0.042)

(9)
-0.063
(0.025)
-0.165
(0.087)
-0.113
(0.030)
-0.090
(0.039)
-0.119
(0.050)
-0.092
(0.047)
-0.219
(0.089)
-0.107
(0.053)
-0.093
(0.060)
-0.120
(0.060)
-0.119
(0.051)
-0.129
(0.084)
-0.105
(0.063)
-0.104
(0.048)
50

margarine and butter

0.177
-0.256
0.229
(0.063)
(0.068)
(0.076)
mayonnaise
0.143
-0.246
0.178
(0.055)
(0.069)
(0.064)
milk
0.133
-0.181
0.156
(0.057)
(0.043)
(0.065)
mustard and ketchup
0.152
-0.212
0.173
(0.061)
(0.056)
(0.067)
paper towel
0.204
-0.253
0.273
(0.055)
(0.050)
(0.065)
peanut butter
0.156
-0.204
0.200
(0.060)
(0.065)
(0.071)
photo
0.200
-0.285
0.221
(0.055)
(0.069)
(0.059)
razors
0.226
-0.222
0.238
(0.071)
(0.069)
(0.074)
salt snacks
0.210
-0.258
0.251
(0.052)
(0.037)
(0.062)
shampoo
0.198
-0.283
0.220
(0.044)
(0.044)
(0.047)
soup
0.173
-0.296
0.225
(0.079)
(0.074)
(0.104)
spaghetti sauce
0.211
-0.262
0.267
(0.072)
(0.064)
(0.085)
sugar and substitutes
0.100
-0.193
0.114
(0.052)
(0.076)
(0.061)
toilet tissue
0.208
-0.255
0.306
(0.060)
(0.048)
(0.074)
tooth brush
0.204
-0.337
0.232
(0.058)
(0.061)
(0.067)
tooth paste
0.197
-0.287
0.233
(0.052)
(0.046)
(0.062)
yogurt
0.224
-0.254
0.291
(0.072)
(0.063)
(0.088)
Notes: UPCs have equal weights when aggregated to the category level.

0.041
(0.023)
0.045
(0.024)
0.055
(0.032)
0.044
(0.020)
0.043
(0.022)
0.046
(0.024)
0.046
(0.026)
0.061
(0.034)
0.031
(0.013)
0.053
(0.021)
0.044
(0.019)
0.049
(0.023)
0.035
(0.022)
0.051
(0.024)
0.044
(0.017)
0.039
(0.016)
0.036
(0.020)

0.029
(0.019)
0.032
(0.020)
0.038
(0.028)
0.031
(0.016)
0.028
(0.017)
0.030
(0.019)
0.025
(0.017)
0.039
(0.026)
0.021
(0.008)
0.032
(0.013)
0.031
(0.015)
0.033
(0.016)
0.025
(0.018)
0.032
(0.019)
0.025
(0.012)
0.024
(0.011)
0.024
(0.015)

0.012
(0.007)
0.012
(0.009)
0.017
(0.011)
0.013
(0.009)
0.015
(0.009)
0.016
(0.011)
0.021
(0.017)
0.023
(0.020)
0.010
(0.005)
0.021
(0.011)
0.012
(0.007)
0.016
(0.010)
0.010
(0.010)
0.019
(0.009)
0.019
(0.010)
0.015
(0.008)
0.012
(0.008)

0.042
(0.035)
0.038
(0.035)
0.029
(0.020)
0.042
(0.046)
0.039
(0.035)
0.026
(0.033)
0.004
(0.095)
0.010
(0.076)
0.055
(0.027)
0.019
(0.047)
0.047
(0.037)
0.042
(0.039)
0.032
(0.061)
0.030
(0.029)
0.030
(0.064)
0.037
(0.041)
0.037
(0.036)

0.091
(0.039)
0.093
(0.038)
0.071
(0.024)
0.114
(0.037)
0.103
(0.040)
0.079
(0.034)
0.171
(0.078)
0.119
(0.059)
0.134
(0.033)
0.161
(0.038)
0.122
(0.040)
0.119
(0.042)
0.095
(0.055)
0.096
(0.036)
0.206
(0.060)
0.153
(0.043)
0.098
(0.041)

-0.064
(0.040)
-0.083
(0.051)
-0.055
(0.024)
-0.113
(0.066)
-0.082
(0.050)
-0.065
(0.040)
-0.227
(0.131)
-0.186
(0.136)
-0.110
(0.037)
-0.213
(0.075)
-0.117
(0.060)
-0.109
(0.058)
-0.099
(0.096)
-0.078
(0.035)
-0.256
(0.089)
-0.178
(0.073)
-0.075
(0.043)

51

Appendix Table 2. Moments for all (sales and regular) price changes.
Category

Total

beer
blades
carbonated beverages
cigarettes
coffee
cold cereals
deodorants
diapers
facial tissue
frozen dinner
frozen pizza
household cleaning
hot dog
laundry and detergents
margarine and butter
mayonnaise
milk
mustard and ketchup
paper towel
peanut butter
photo

Changes of all prices
Frequency
All
Positive Negative
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.224
0.116
0.108
0.002
(0.085)
(0.046)
(0.046)
(0.039)
0.163
(0.083)
0.179
(0.047)
0.302
(0.072)
0.182
(0.083)
0.220
(0.072)
0.222
(0.073)
0.235
(0.065)
0.292
(0.077)
0.241
(0.076)
0.306
(0.079)
0.336
(0.087)
0.173
(0.060)
0.277
(0.079)
0.263
(0.072)
0.206
(0.065)
0.170
(0.062)
0.180
(0.070)
0.147
(0.055)
0.231
(0.064)
0.180
(0.063)
0.219
(0.057)

0.088
(0.045)
0.097
(0.027)
0.155
(0.039)
0.122
(0.073)
0.114
(0.042)
0.115
(0.039)
0.119
(0.034)
0.141
(0.043)
0.121
(0.042)
0.155
(0.042)
0.171
(0.046)
0.087
(0.032)
0.143
(0.043)
0.133
(0.039)
0.108
(0.038)
0.092
(0.036)
0.097
(0.042)
0.080
(0.032)
0.118
(0.037)
0.094
(0.036)
0.107
(0.032)

0.075
(0.041)
0.082
(0.027)
0.147
(0.036)
0.060
(0.032)
0.106
(0.037)
0.107
(0.037)
0.117
(0.036)
0.151
(0.044)
0.120
(0.041)
0.151
(0.043)
0.166
(0.045)
0.086
(0.035)
0.133
(0.042)
0.130
(0.037)
0.099
(0.035)
0.078
(0.033)
0.083
(0.036)
0.067
(0.031)
0.113
(0.033)
0.086
(0.034)
0.112
(0.037)

0.008
(0.027)
0.005
(0.042)
0.005
(0.019)
0.016
(0.036)
0.006
(0.035)
0.003
(0.029)
0.002
(0.041)
-0.010
(0.030)
-0.004
(0.041)
0.003
(0.035)
0.003
(0.026)
-0.004
(0.048)
0.009
(0.045)
0.003
(0.027)
0.005
(0.038)
0.007
(0.044)
0.006
(0.023)
0.008
(0.044)
0.002
(0.028)
0.004
(0.038)
-0.015
(0.061)

Size
Positive Negative
(5)
(6)
0.208
-0.223
(0.069)
(0.074)
0.100
(0.029)
0.215
(0.043)
0.198
(0.035)
0.086
(0.032)
0.201
(0.042)
0.246
(0.055)
0.283
(0.048)
0.161
(0.034)
0.221
(0.052)
0.259
(0.060)
0.238
(0.047)
0.207
(0.042)
0.281
(0.058)
0.229
(0.041)
0.205
(0.061)
0.185
(0.053)
0.139
(0.037)
0.167
(0.041)
0.205
(0.046)
0.157
(0.051)
0.253
(0.055)

-0.104
(0.031)
-0.251
(0.057)
-0.201
(0.037)
-0.105
(0.042)
-0.209
(0.045)
-0.263
(0.059)
-0.300
(0.054)
-0.172
(0.039)
-0.229
(0.052)
-0.266
(0.063)
-0.243
(0.050)
-0.225
(0.052)
-0.292
(0.062)
-0.236
(0.043)
-0.217
(0.064)
-0.207
(0.062)
-0.149
(0.041)
-0.187
(0.053)
-0.213
(0.047)
-0.167
(0.057)
-0.276
(0.070)
52

razors

0.238
0.124
0.114
-0.009
(0.077)
(0.046)
(0.049)
(0.060)
salt snacks
0.210
0.107
0.103
0.002
(0.061)
(0.032)
(0.031)
(0.021)
shampoo
0.232
0.117
0.115
-0.006
(0.058)
(0.030)
(0.033)
(0.034)
soup
0.197
0.105
0.092
0.009
(0.081)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.052)
spaghetti sauce
0.232
0.121
0.111
0.007
(0.070)
(0.038)
(0.038)
(0.037)
sugar and substitutes
0.115
0.061
0.053
0.004
(0.056)
(0.032)
(0.031)
(0.055)
toilet tissue
0.256
0.131
0.125
0.000
(0.071)
(0.040)
(0.036)
(0.026)
tooth brush
0.231
0.114
0.117
-0.003
(0.068)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.048)
tooth paste
0.220
0.111
0.109
0.000
(0.064)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.033)
yogurt
0.273
0.138
0.135
0.002
(0.079)
(0.043)
(0.041)
(0.031)
Notes: UPCs have equal weights when aggregated to the category level.

0.180
(0.052)
0.216
(0.036)
0.249
(0.036)
0.235
(0.063)
0.217
(0.055)
0.151
(0.056)
0.205
(0.044)
0.307
(0.054)
0.255
(0.040)
0.207
(0.062)

-0.222
(0.072)
-0.224
(0.038)
-0.273
(0.044)
-0.254
(0.068)
-0.227
(0.060)
-0.174
(0.071)
-0.215
(0.045)
-0.326
(0.059)
-0.269
(0.045)
-0.212
(0.064)

53

Appendix Table 3. Alternative standard errors.

Dependent variable

Equal weights to
all UPCs
Point estimate
(1)

Standard errors
DriscollKraay
(2)

Cluster by
category/city
(3)

Cluster by
month
(4)

Sales
Frequency
Size

-0.365
0.256

(0.120)***
(0.120)**

(0.085) ***
(0.084)***

(0.076) ***
(0.070)***

Share of goods bought on sales

-0.461

(0.133)***

(0.098)***

(0.082)***

Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
Positive
Negative
Size
All
Positive
Negative

-0.100
-0.053
-0.047

(0.044)**
(0.032)*
(0.019)***

(0.027)***
(0.020)***
(0.014)***

(0.033)***
(0.026)**
(0.013)***

-0.095
-0.155
-0.004

(0.062)
(0.092)*
(0.129)

(0.042)**
(0.064)***
(0.093)

(0.053)*
(0.056)***
(0.082)

Inflation of posted prices

0.007

(0.034)

(0.024)

(0.020)

(0.045)***

(0.045)***

(0.027)***

Inflation of effective prices

-0.206

Notes: The table shows the baseline point estimate (column 1) and standard error (column 2) which
correspond to results presented in column 3 of Table 1. Columns 3 and 4 show alternative estimates of
standard errors associated with column (1). Column (3) clusters standard errors by city and category
(1550 clusters) which allows for arbitrary collation of errors across time. Column (4) clusters standard
errors by month (84 clusters) which allow for arbitrary cross-sectional correlation. *,**,*** indicates
statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent.

54

Appendix Table 4. Cyclical Behavior of Price Changes at the Category Level.

Sales
Category

beer
blades
carbonated beverages
cigarettes
coffee
cold cereals
deodorants
diapers
facial tissue
frozen dinner
frozen pizza
household cleaning
hot dog
laundry & detergents
margarine and butter
mayonnaise

Frequency

Size

(1)
-0.440***
(0.184)
-0.493***
(0.186)
-0.048
(0.248)
0.119
(0.346)
-1.262***
(0.397)
0.120
(0.262)
0.016
(0.244)
0.601**
(0.267)
-1.014***
(0.302)
-0.577
(0.370)
0.237
(0.487)
-0.799***
(0.234)
-0.496
(0.406)
-0.681***
(0.212)
-0.944***
(0.274)
-1.111***
(0.243)

(2)
-0.100
(0.159)
0.284*
(0.149)
0.001
(0.231)
0.339*
(0.193)
0.080
(0.210)
-0.240
(0.326)
0.835***
(0.245)
-0.550***
(0.212)
-0.318
(0.302)
-0.338
(0.253)
-0.468
(0.338)
0.789***
(0.247)
1.617***
(0.274)
-0.200
(0.216)
1.046***
(0.353)
0.115
(0.317)

Changes of regular prices

Inflation

Share of
goods
bought on
sales,

All

Positive

Negative

All

Positive

Negative

posted
prices

effective
prices

(3)
0.008
(0.218)
-0.614***
(0.209)
0.219
(0.271)
-0.008
(0.396)
-1.466***
(0.403)
-0.274
(0.315)
-0.042
(0.268)
0.792***
(0.336)
-1.024***
(0.376)
-0.660
(0.424)
0.643
(0.566)
-1.149***
(0.252)
-1.381***
(0.419)
-0.749***
(0.275)
-1.248***
(0.351)
-1.976***
(0.298)

(4)
-0.460***
(0.176)
-0.105
(0.119)
-0.368***
(0.140)
0.273
(0.224)
0.130
(0.110)
-0.219**
(0.097)
-0.010
(0.086)
-0.419***
(0.118)
-0.154
(0.176)
-0.160*
(0.090)
-0.606***
(0.141)
0.097
(0.085)
0.208*
(0.111)
-0.187*
(0.100)
-0.248**
(0.106)
-0.054
(0.114)

(5)
-0.307***
(0.102)
-0.004
(0.092)
-0.246***
(0.071)
0.195
(0.199)
0.091
(0.087)
-0.173***
(0.056)
0.005
(0.068)
-0.226***
(0.074)
-0.114
(0.122)
-0.035
(0.050)
-0.328***
(0.085)
0.041
(0.066)
0.153*
(0.083)
-0.089
(0.071)
-0.210***
(0.081)
-0.154
(0.101)

(6)
-0.153*
(0.084)
-0.101**
(0.051)
-0.122
(0.075)
0.078
(0.086)
0.039
(0.042)
-0.046
(0.050)
-0.015
(0.029)
-0.193***
(0.070)
-0.041
(0.067)
-0.126***
(0.047)
-0.278***
(0.063)
0.055**
(0.028)
0.054
(0.050)
-0.097***
(0.040)
-0.037
(0.048)
0.100**
(0.048)

(7)
-0.037
(0.077)
0.007
(0.120)
-0.054
(0.092)
0.096
(0.116)
-0.007
(0.117)
0.199
(0.174)
-0.220
(0.139)
0.269**
(0.131)
-0.086
(0.263)
0.296*
(0.166)
0.331***
(0.128)
-0.040
(0.098)
-0.122
(0.263)
0.064
(0.121)
-0.257*
(0.140)
-0.260*
(0.138)

(8)
0.073
(0.086)
-0.121
(0.102)
0.004
(0.095)
-0.092
(0.158)
-0.213
(0.179)
0.456*
(0.239)
-0.270
(0.171)
0.569***
(0.151)
-0.091
(0.237)
0.195
(0.185)
0.579***
(0.178)
-0.127
(0.152)
-0.639**
(0.331)
0.064
(0.160)
-0.192
(0.155)
-0.266*
(0.152)

(9)
-0.036
(0.046)
-0.403
(0.257)
0.053
(0.095)
0.103
(0.103)
0.281
(0.186)
-0.369*
(0.198)
-0.383
(0.319)
-0.384**
(0.199)
0.148
(0.169)
-0.113
(0.184)
-0.210
(0.176)
0.832***
(0.244)
0.168
(0.298)
0.193
(0.188)
-0.056
(0.137)
0.198
(0.151)

(10)
-0.024
(0.070)
0.036
(0.059)
0.137
(0.118)
-0.001
(0.133)
0.209
(0.162)
-0.289***
(0.086)
0.107**
(0.048)
-0.085
(0.094)
-0.655***
(0.173)
-0.031
(0.097)
0.031
(0.154)
-0.020
(0.076)
0.270**
(0.132)
0.159**
(0.071)
-0.286***
(0.102)
-0.189*
(0.113)

(11)
-0.059
(0.101)
0.126
(0.081)
-0.530***
(0.155)
0.226
(0.198)
-0.658***
(0.263)
-0.688***
(0.089)
-0.222**
(0.115)
-0.414***
(0.109)
-0.539**
(0.250)
-0.316***
(0.091)
0.085
(0.101)
0.313*
(0.171)
-0.395*
(0.209)
-0.563***
(0.152)
-0.939***
(0.172)
-0.077
(0.160)

Frequency

Size

55

milk
mustard and ketchup
paper towel
peanut butter
photo
razors
salt snacks
shampoo
soup
spaghetti sauce
sugar and substitutes
toilet tissue
tooth brush
tooth paste
yogurt

0.665
(0.658)
-0.692***
(0.218)
-0.898***
(0.250)
-0.536***
(0.224)
-0.545*
(0.303)
-0.217
(0.324)
-0.689***
(0.232)
0.353*
(0.199)
-0.866***
(0.236)
-0.563
(0.354)
-0.827***
(0.333)
-0.612***
(0.252)
0.529**
(0.229)
-0.076
(0.190)
-1.342***
(0.317)

0.200
(0.282)
0.116
(0.365)
-0.511***
(0.199)
0.477
(0.396)
-0.023
(0.237)
0.593***
(0.205)
-0.503*
(0.292)
0.113
(0.190)
0.551*
(0.312)
0.673**
(0.306)
0.914***
(0.334)
-0.587***
(0.151)
0.515***
(0.214)
0.565***
(0.218)
-0.319
(0.271)

0.188
(0.732)
-1.260***
(0.297)
-0.566**
(0.259)
-0.902***
(0.323)
-0.555
(0.345)
-0.325
(0.374)
-0.525**
(0.260)
0.196
(0.219)
-1.509***
(0.330)
-0.862***
(0.360)
-0.611
(0.388)
-0.586**
(0.299)
0.541**
(0.238)
-0.301
(0.227)
-1.455***
(0.417)

0.080
(0.278)
-0.200**
(0.095)
-0.395***
(0.145)
0.310**
(0.139)
0.075
(0.128)
0.071
(0.118)
-0.360***
(0.101)
0.057
(0.077)
-0.046
(0.103)
-0.087
(0.128)
0.029
(0.081)
-0.098
(0.157)
0.183*
(0.104)
-0.015
(0.077)
-0.341***
(0.091)

0.126
(0.175)
-0.125*
(0.067)
-0.193*
(0.104)
0.130
(0.096)
0.027
(0.091)
0.044
(0.086)
-0.183***
(0.053)
0.048
(0.060)
-0.059
(0.080)
-0.059
(0.086)
-0.025
(0.067)
-0.086
(0.097)
0.153**
(0.070)
0.014
(0.057)
-0.204***
(0.069)

-0.046
(0.156)
-0.075*
(0.040)
-0.201***
(0.052)
0.180***
(0.060)
0.048
(0.060)
0.027
(0.053)
-0.177***
(0.054)
0.009
(0.033)
0.013
(0.037)
-0.028
(0.055)
0.054
(0.047)
-0.012
(0.073)
0.030
(0.044)
-0.029
(0.028)
-0.137***
(0.048)

-0.164**
(0.078)
0.046
(0.152)
0.198
(0.144)
-0.276***
(0.095)
-0.624***
(0.262)
-0.147
(0.205)
0.292
(0.187)
0.098
(0.158)
-0.186
(0.138)
-0.077
(0.167)
0.012
(0.205)
0.126
(0.101)
0.034
(0.223)
0.239
(0.148)
0.010
(0.118)

-0.245**
(0.119)
0.110
(0.155)
0.205
(0.202)
-0.406***
(0.143)
0.109
(0.327)
-0.190
(0.254)
0.623***
(0.179)
-0.026
(0.187)
-0.559***
(0.203)
-0.128
(0.165)
-0.481**
(0.212)
0.351**
(0.157)
-0.144
(0.166)
0.079
(0.157)
0.143
(0.148)

-0.004
(0.095)
-0.117
(0.208)
0.022
(0.165)
0.186*
(0.101)
-0.832***
(0.339)
0.347
(0.367)
-0.743***
(0.154)
0.022
(0.237)
0.554***
(0.146)
-0.018
(0.151)
0.410
(0.378)
-0.299**
(0.131)
0.114
(0.283)
-0.263
(0.239)
-0.213***
(0.086)

0.288*
(0.170)
-0.152**
(0.065)
0.198*
(0.111)
-0.129
(0.098)
0.036
(0.105)
-0.024
(0.119)
-0.031
(0.063)
0.035
(0.056)
-0.162*
(0.092)
-0.171
(0.131)
0.158**
(0.082)
0.060
(0.116)
-0.041
(0.053)
0.004
(0.059)
-0.265***
(0.105)

0.142
(0.228)
-0.319**
(0.160)
-0.107
(0.137)
-0.281
(0.224)
-0.718***
(0.282)
0.006
(0.174)
-0.363***
(0.137)
-0.262**
(0.122)
-0.214*
(0.116)
-0.552**
(0.277)
0.256***
(0.098)
-0.658***
(0.158)
-0.193
(0.162)
0.148
(0.104)
-0.238
(0.201)

Notes: City-specific weights are used to aggregate across UPCs (corresponds to column 4 in Table 2).

56

Appendix Table 5. Cyclicality of pricing moments by store rank, alternative aggregation across UPCs.
Dependent variable

Sales
Frequency

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(1)
(2)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(4)
(5)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(7)
(8)

-0.069
(0.141)
0.175*
(0.092)

-1.213***
(0.143)
-0.197
(0.141)

0.015
(0.140)
0.208**
(0.091)

-1.368***
(0.154)
-0.259
(0.166)

0.085
(0.142)
0.217***
(0.091)

-1.503***
(0.157)
-0.276
(0.183)

Share of goods bought on
sales,

0.225
(0.163)

-1.677***
(0.210)

0.332**
(0.168)

-1.874***
(0.227)

0.412***
(0.170)

-2.030***
(0.235)

Growth rate of revenue
(month on month)

0.351
(0.226)

-0.779***
(0.088)

0.379*
(0.221)

-0.825***
(0.088)

0.414*
(0.223)

-0.893***
(0.098)

-0.024
(0.072)
-0.008
(0.048)
-0.017
(0.029)

-0.129***
(0.043)
-0.036
(0.029)
-0.093***
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.074)
-0.002
(0.049)
-0.011
(0.030)

-0.151***
(0.050)
-0.047
(0.034)
-0.104***
(0.019)

-0.005
(0.074)
0.005
(0.049)
-0.009
(0.030)

-0.168***
(0.053)
-0.060*
(0.036)
-0.108***
(0.020)

-0.098*
(0.055)
-0.165*
(0.090)
0.306***
(0.078)

0.043
(0.036)
-0.118***
(0.035)
-0.032
(0.053)

-0.110**
(0.055)
-0.172*
(0.093)
0.313***
(0.083)

0.066*
(0.038)
-0.105***
(0.040)
-0.046
(0.067)

-0.110*
(0.058)
-0.163*
(0.095)
0.296***
(0.088)

0.067
(0.042)
-0.122***
(0.044)
-0.015
(0.078)

Size

Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
Positive
Negative
Size
All
Positive
Negative

Notes: This table corresponds to Table 3 in the text. The difference is that equal weights are used to aggregate ranks
across UPCs. See the note to Table 3.

57

Appendix Table 6. Use Price Differentials to Construct Relative Price Ranks of Stores: Store-Level Results.
Dependent variable

Sales
Frequency

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(1)
(2)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(4)
(5)

UPC rank sample: Ω
UR
UR×rank
(7)
(8)

-0.864***
(0.189)
-0.014
(0.134)

-8.285***
(0.785)
-0.533
(0.672)

-0.811***
(0.202)
-0.009
(0.133)

-12.074***
(1.050)
-0.298
(0.972)

-0.876***
(0.216)
-0.012
(0.137)

-15.767***
(1.068)
-0.554
(1.262)

Share of goods bought on
sales,

-0.755***
(0.178)

-9.907***
(1.021)

-0.693***
(0.193)

-14.067***
(1.323)

-0.764***
(0.205)

-17.678***
(1.396)

Growth rate of revenue

0.055
(0.233)

-0.239***
(0.084)

0.171
(0.228)

-0.424***
(0.075)

0.237
(0.218)

-0.541***
(0.079)

-0.072
(0.084)
-0.029
(0.049)
-0.043
(0.039)

-0.898***
(0.223)
-0.419***
(0.149)
-0.479***
(0.091)

-0.067
(0.084)
-0.027
(0.049)
-0.040
(0.039)

-0.998***
(0.369)
-0.394
(0.239)
-0.604***
(0.144)

-0.073
(0.085)
-0.030
(0.049)
-0.043
(0.039)

-1.310***
(0.514)
-0.638*
(0.338)
-0.672***
(0.194)

-0.103**
(0.050)
-0.198***
(0.083)
0.286***
(0.069)

-0.026
(0.206)
-0.253
(0.182)
-0.361
(0.245)

-0.103**
(0.050)
-0.196***
(0.084)
0.289***
(0.070)

0.165
(0.262)
-0.626***
(0.230)
-0.334
(0.362)

-0.103**
(0.050)
-0.200***
(0.084)
0.286***
(0.070)

-0.016
(0.297)
-0.747***
(0.204)
-0.624
(0.421)

Size

Changes of regular prices
Frequency
All
Positive
Negative
Size
All
Positive
Negative

Notes: The table corresponds to Table 3 in the paper. The rank of the store is calculated using the percent deviation of a given UPC’s price in a
given store from the median price of the UPC in a given market and month. These percent deviations are aggregated across UPCs using equal
weights or expenditure shares. This table is constructed using equal weights. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **,
* denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels. See text and the note for Table 3 for further details.
58

Appendix Table 7. Use Price Differentials to Construct Relative Price Ranks of Stores: HouseholdLevel Results.
Sample of UPCs
used in ranking
stores
Ω

Equal weights to all goods
(1)

Goods are weighted by
expenditure shares
(2)

-0.994***
(0.354)

-0.611
(0.575)

Ω

-0.790**
(0.358)

-0.548
(0.588)

Ω

-0.561**
(0.292)

-0.567
(0.555)

Notes: The table corresponds to Table 4 in the paper. The rank of the store is calculated using the percent
deviation of a given UPC’s price in a given store from the median price of the UPC in a given market and
month. These percent deviations are aggregated across UPCs using equal weights (column 1) or
expenditure shares (column 2). Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels. See text and the note for Table 4 for further details.

59

Appendix Figure 1. Sensitivity of Output Gap Response to Contractionary Monetary Policy Shock
-4

-1.1

-4.25

-1.15

-4.5

-1.2

-4.75

-1.25

-1.3

-5

Mean response over 5 years

Contemporanous response

Contemporanous response
Mean response over 5 years (right axis)

-1.35

-5.25

-5.5

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-1.4
0

-0.1


-4.25

-1.15

-4.5

-1.2

-4.75

-1.25

-5

-5.25
1.5

-1.3

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

Mean response over 5 years

Contemporanous response

Contemporanous response
Mean response over 5 years (right axis)

-1.35
6.5



Notes: This figure shows the sensitivity of output gap response to a nominal shock as a function of two
parameters (elasticity of iceberg cost with respect to shopping effort) and (elasticity of substitution
across stores). The mean response is the average response of output gap over 20 periods.
60

APPENDIX B: A MODEL OF STORE-SWITCHING AND PRO-CYCLICAL SALES
In this section, we introduce a simple model of sales that allows us to understand how the frequency and
depth of sales can be pro-cyclical as well as rationalize why stores may have different level of prices.
We use Lal and Rao (1997) which provides a popular model of sales. In Lal and Rao (1997), there are two
possible pricing strategies defined by the frequency of sales the retailer chooses to implement. The first
type of pricing strategy is having no sales at all times while offering the lowest (regular) price in the
market at all times. Such pricing strategy is called “every day low prices” or EDLP pricing. The second
type of pricing strategy introduces temporary price cuts or sales for certain periods while maintaining the
regular price at other times. Such pricing strategy is called “HiLo” or promotional pricing. To assess the
cyclical patterns of sales, we incorporate a setting where there are two types of retailers, EDLP and HiLo,
in the economy. While we assume the coexistence of the HiLo (high-price) and EDLP (low-price)
retailers, Lal and Rao (1997) show that the coexistence of the EDLP and HiLo retailers is a unique Nash
equilibrium.
The two stores compete over two different types of consumers: bargain hunters and loyal (or time
constrained) consumers. These consumers differ in their transportation costs and in whether they observe
sales prices. Bargain hunters have low transportation costs and always observe all prices, hence they buy
a single unit from the store that offers the lowest cost that period (including transportation cost). Loyal
consumers have higher transportation costs and do not observe current prices. As a result, they buy a
single unit from the retailer which offers the lowest price (net of transportation costs) in expectation.
The purpose of our model is twofold: first, to describe the equilibrium pricing strategies in the
given environment; second, to understand how optimal pricing strategies correlate with the changes in the
economic conditions.

Setup
The setup of the model builds on Lal and Rao (1997). We abstract from various extensions considered in
Lal and Rao (1997) to focus on the core properties relevant for our analysis.
Stores
There are two types of retailers that provide the same good: (1) Hi-Lo Retailer and (2) Every-day-lowprices (EDLP) retailer. The HiLo retailer periodically sets a low discount price to attract “bargain
hunters” (or consumers who would prefer to search for price discounts and buy goods at a lower price).
The other type of retailer maintains the ‘every day low price’ (hereafter, EDLP) pricing strategy. The
EDLP retailer sets a constant price to appeal to the “loyal/time-constrained” consumers, who have high
opportunity cost and do not shop opportunistically. The rationale is based upon the idea that retailers use
different pricing strategies to segment the market and maximize their profits, and consumers self-select
based on their shopping preferences.
Both retailers sell exactly the same goods. However, the pricing strategies for each retailer differ:
the EDLP offers low prices on any given good and it does not have sales. Denote the size of this basket
discount at the EDLP store with . The HiLo store offers occasional sales (or promotions) for certain
length of time, while keeping the price at a pre-discounted (regular) price at other times. During the times
of sales, the difference between the regular price and the sales price is D. We assume that the frequency
of promotions is equal to ½ so that sales happen every other period.24
There is a price level R (“regular price”) of the good that is recommended by the manufacturer.
The price R is fixed and taken as given by all agents in the economy. Without loss of generality, we
follow Lal and Rao (1997) and assume that the stores have zero marginal cost of getting a good from a
manufacturer.
We assume that there are two stores located on a unit interval with EDLP store located at 0 and
with HiLo store located at 1.
24

One can readily extend the model to the case where the HiLo randomizes sales with frequency f.

61

Buyers
As mentioned above, there are two types of buyers: bargain hunters and loyal consumers. Bargain hunters
buy any given good in the store that offer the cheapest price. On the other hand, loyal consumers buy any
given good in the “closest” retailer, since they have high opportunity cost of searching. Buyers are
uniformly distributed on the [0,1] interval. The cost of travel distance ‘x’ to a store is given by / 2
for bargain hunters and loyal consumers. One may reasonably assume that
. Each
and / 2
buyer can purchase only one unit of good. We assume that the share of bargain hunters in total population
is . To capture variation in the price sensitivity of consumers over the business cycle, we will vary so
that high values of could be interpreted as recession times.

Demand
Decision where to buy
Loyal customers choose the store which offers the lowers cost (travel + price of a good). The marginal
buyer at local is indifferent between EDLP and HiLo:
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
is the total cost of shopping in EDLP,
is the total cost of
where
shopping in HiLo and
Hence,

is the expected prices paid by a loyal consumer in the HiLo store.
.

The choice of bargain hunters depends on whether there is a sale in HiLo or not. With the sale in place,
the marginal bargain hunter at location s satisfies:
1
1
⇒
.
2
2
2
Without a sale, the marginal bargain hunter at location k satisfies:
1
1
⇒
2
2
2
Demand levels
The demand for the HiLo store with a sale is given by
1
1
1
1
The demand for the HiLo store without a sale is given by
1
1
1
1
The (expected) demand for the EDLP store is given by
1
1
Profits
The expected profit for the HiLo store is given by
1 2
The expected profit for the EDLP store is given by

.

1

.
.

1
1

1

1

.

.

.
62

Optimality conditions
The first-order conditions with respect to

and

1

for HiLo and EDLP respectively are:
1

2

1
∗

Solving for

and

∗

1

5

3 1
2

3

2

1

0

∗

1
,

1
7

∗

1
3 1

7

2

1

In order for 0

2

0

, we can find that
∗

∗

1

3 1

1

3 1

6

5

∗

1

to hold, the following conditions should hold
3
1
3 1
1
2

∗

.

.

Comparative statics
Here, we check how the optimal size of discount is related to underlying economic conditions. We
capture the state of economic conditions in the share of bargain hunters in the economy. We want to
know how the optimal size of discounts depend on the share of bargain hunters:
∗
21
1
3
9
3 1
7
1 (which could be just a normalization),
If
store decreases as there are more bargain hunters.
∗

∗

3 1
6

5
1

∗

0 which means that the size of sales in the HiLo

∗

3

1

∗

The second term in

∗

is unambiguously positive and thus the sign of

the first and second terms. However, because
∗

depends on the relative sizes of

1 and the second term is positive, it is

∗

clear that
. One may interpret this result as suggesting that the size of the discount in the EDLP
store is less sensitive to changes in the business conditions.

63

APPENDIX C: SECOND ORDER APPROXIMATION TO UTILITY WITH ENDOGENOUS
SHOPPING EFFORT AND STORE-SWITCHING
The second-order approximation to utility is:
log

log 1

log ̅

̅
̅

̅
̅

̅

̅

log 1
̅
̅

̅

̅
̅

̅
̅

. . .

. . .
. . .
1

. . .
where

≡

,
̅

. . .

1
̅

≡

when ̅
̅

, and following Woodford (2003),

.
From the derivation of the model in the text with ̅
. Given the production function
/

⇒

, we have
, it follows that
/

/

and

/

/

⇒
⇒
where

≡

log

. From the labor market clearing conditions, we have

⇒

. It follows that
1

1

log

Also, one can show (see Gali 2008) that
Δ ≡ var log

Δ

var log

. Define

. Woodford (2003) shows that
Δ

Hence,

1

. Thus,

Δ

1
.

64

/

Finally, for the link between consumption and output, given
,

,

, and
̅

Φ where Φ ≡

, we have

,

Φ

Φ

,

̅

Φ

1
1
2

0

,

,

,

1 . So
Φ
̅

̅

Note that steady-state levels with ̅

are given by Φ
̅

Φ

2

0

0, and

,

0

Φ

, so

̌

̌

⇒

Now substituting into our approximation to utility yields
log
log 1
. . .

1

1

. . .

. . .

. . .
. . .

1

. . .
Therefore expected utility is

. . .

. . .

which after rearranging yields the expression in the text.

65

APPENDIX D: CONSTRUCTION OF DATA MOMENTS
This appendix describes how we constructed moments for the empirical analysis in sections II through IV.
Frequency of sales. The IRI data set provides a flag to indicate whether a given good was on sale in a
given store in a given week. In addition to this flag, we use filters as in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
Specifically, if a price is reduced temporarily (up to three weeks) and then returns to the level observed
before the price cut, we identify this episode as a sale. When we apply this filter, we use two approaches
to identify a price spell. In the first approach (approach “A”), we treat missing values as interrupting price
spells. In other words, if a price was $4 for two weeks, then price was missing for a week, and then again
observed at $4 for another three weeks, we treat the data as reporting two price spells with durations of
two and three weeks. In the second approach (approach “B”), missing values do not interrupt price spells
if the price is the same before and after periods of missing values. For example, in the previous example,
approach “B” yields one price spell with the duration of five weeks. To identify the incidence of sales, we
use the union of sales flags that we obtain from the IRI data set directly and from applying approaches
“A” and “B”. In the end, using approaches “A” and “B” does not materially change the incidence of sales
identified by the sales flag provided in the IRI data set. The frequency of sales is computed at the weekly
frequency as the fraction of weeks in a month when a good is identified by the sales flag as being on sale.
Size of sales. The size of the sale is computed as the (log) difference between the sales price (the
incidence of a sale is identified by the sales flag) and the price preceding the sale. Since one may have
more than one sale in a month, we take the average size of sales in a month.
Share of goods sold on sale. The share of goods sold on sale for a given good in a given city (or store) in
a given month is calculated as the following ratio. The numerator is the number of units sold during
episodes identified as sales by the sales flag. The denominator is the total number of sold units.
Frequency of regular price changes. A price change in a given week is identified as regular if the
following criteria are satisfied: i) the sales flag does not identify this week as a period when a good is on
sale; ii) the sales flag does not identify the preceding week as a period when a good is on sale; iii) the
price change is larger than one cent or one percent in absolute value (or more than 0.5 percent for prices
larger than $5). The last criterion removes small price changes which could arise from rounding errors
and the like. Again, we use approaches “A” and “B” to identify the price in the preceding period. The
incidence of regular price changes is the union of incidents identified by “A” and “B”. The frequency of
regular price changes is computed at the weekly frequency as the fraction of weeks in a month when a
good is identified as having a regular price change.
Size of regular price change. The size of the regular price change is computed as the (log) difference
between the price in the period identified as having a regular price change and the price in the preceding
period (using approach “A” and “B” to identify the preceding period). Since one may have more than one
regular price change in a month, we take the average size of regular price changes in a month.
Weighting. To aggregate across goods to the category level, we employ three weighting schemes: i)
equal weights; ii) expenditure shares for a given city and year (“city specific”); iii) cross-city expenditure
shares for a given year (“common”). The city-specific expenditure share weights are calculated as

66

∑
∑ ∑
and the common expenditure share weights are calculated as
∑ ∑
∑ ∑ ∑
where m, s, c, t, and j index markets, stores, product categories, time, and UPC, and
revenue from selling good j in the year covering month t.

is the

To aggregate across goods and categories to the store level, we employ two weighting schemes: i) equal
weights; ii) expenditure shares for a given store, good and year. The expenditure share weights are
calculated as
∑ ∑
where

is the revenue from selling good j in the year covering month t.

67

