                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DEFYING GRAVITY:
     HOW LONG WILL JAPANESE GOVERNMENT BOND PRICES REMAIN HIGH?

                                             Takeo Hoshi
                                             Takatoshi Ito

                                         Working Paper 18287
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18287


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012

The research started when both authors were visiting researchers at the Research Department of the
IMF in the summer of 2011. We thank Olivier Blanchard and the research department for financial
support and comments on earlier drafts as well as for hospitality during our stay. We also benefited
from the seminar participants at the IMF, University of California at San Diego (IR/PS), Columbia
University (Center for Japanese Economy and Business), Indiana University (Economics), the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, Japan Economic Association annual meeting, and NBER Japan
Project meeting. We are especially grateful to comments by Olivier Blanchard, John Cochrane, Takero
Doi, Mitsuhiro Fukao, Robert Hodrick, Kenneth Kang, Anil Kashyap, Eric Leeper, Phillip Lipscy,
Hugh Patrick, Eric Rasmussen, Kiichi Tokuoka, Masaya Sakuragawa and David Weinstein. We thank
Cathleen Cimino for editorial assistance. Remaining errors are our own.

Hoshi is an author of thereports “Why Did Japan Stop Growing?” and “Policy Options for Japan’s
Revival” that are commissionedby National Institute of Research Advancement (NIRA). Hoshi is
also an independent director ofUnionBanCal Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of Tokyo
Mitsubishi UFJ. Ito hasat various times in the last five years made compensated presentations at meetings
hosted by variousfinancial institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and donot
necessarily reflectthe views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Takeo Hoshi and Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Defying Gravity: How Long Will Japanese Government Bond Prices Remain High?
Takeo Hoshi and Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 18287
August 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. E62,H63,H68,J11,O47,O53

                                             ABSTRACT

Recent academic papers have shown that the Japanese sovereign debt situation is not sustainable. The
puzzle is that the bond rate has remained low and stable. Some suggest that the low yield can be explained
by domestic residents’ willingness to hold Japanese government bonds (JGBs) despite its low return,
and that as long as domestic residents remain home-biased, the JGBs are sustainable. About 95% of
JGBs are currently owned by domestic residents. This paper argues that even with such dominance
of domestic investors, if the amount of government debt breaches the ceiling imposed by the domestic
private sector financial assets, the JGB rates can rapidly rise and the Japanese government can face
difficulty rolling over the existing debt. A simulation is conducted on future paths of household saving
and fiscal situations to show that the ceiling would be breached in the next 10 years or so without a
drastic fiscal consolidation. This paper also shows that the government debt can be kept under the
ceiling with sufficiently large tax increases. The JGB yields can rise even before the ceiling is hit,
if the expectation of such drastic fiscal consolidation disappears. This paper points out several possible
triggers for such a change in expectation. However, downgrading of JGBs by credit rating agencies
is not likely to be a trigger, since past downgrades have not produced any change in the JGB yield.
If and when the JGB rates rapidly rise, the Japanese financial institutions that hold a large amount
of JGBs will sustain losses and the economy will suffer from fiscal austerity, financial instability, and
inflation.


Takeo Hoshi
School of International Relations and Pacific StudLHV
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
thoshi@ucsd.edu

Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
tito@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1. Introduction

It is well-known that Japan has the highest debt to GDP ratio among OECD countries. Many
academic papers written in the last decade have concluded that the current Japanese government
deficits and debts are not sustainable. But anyone who had thought the sovereign crisis would
come to Japan has been proven wrong so far. 1 In some occasions, the yield on the 10-year JGB
jumped by 100 basis points within a few months (1998 and 2003), but it soon came back down to
a low level. Downgrades by credit rating companies in the last thirteen years did not bring down
Japanese bond prices. Even the ongoing sovereign debt crisis in Europe has not rattled the JGB
yields. If anything, the turmoil outside Japan has lowered the JGB yields even further. Japanese
government bond prices appear to defy the law of gravity.

        Almost all recent papers on Japanese government debt reach the same conclusion: the
current course of fiscal debt dynamics is not sustainable. For example, Doi (2009), Doi, Hoshi,
and Okimoto (2011), Doi and Ihori (2009), Sakuragawa and Hosono (2011), Ito (2011), Ito,
Watanabe, and Yabu (2011), and Ostry et al. (2010) all find that without a drastic change in
fiscal policy, the Japanese government debt to GDP ratio cannot be stabilized. Imrohoroğlu and
Sudo (2011) find that an unlikely high jump in productivity growth would be necessary to
stabilize the debt to GDP ratio without changing fiscal policy. These results are a stark contrast
to those of Broda and Weinstein (2005), which conclude that a reasonable increase in the tax rate
can stabilize the debt to GDP ratio, using the data available in 2003. This suggests the situation
has deteriorated substantially in less than 10 years.

        The fiscal problem of Japan has been highlighted by the IMF as well. For example, IMF
(2011) reports “stabilizing the net debt ratio by 2016 and reducing it to around 135% of GDP by
2020 would require a reduction of the primary fiscal deficit by 10 percent of GDP over a 10 year
horizon” (IMF 2011, p.11). Without such substantial adjustment, the net debt to GDP ratio is
predicted to grow without bound and to exceed 200% by 2023.

        In many papers, Japan’s fiscal policy is regarded as sustainable if the debt to GDP ratio is
expected to come back down to where it is now in some distant future. No attention is paid
however, to how high the debt to GDP ratio goes before it starts to fall. This paper differs from
many previous analyses, in considering an explicit ceiling that the government debt should not
exceed at any point of time. Such a ceiling is given by the amount of financial assets held by the
domestic private sector. We show that even under an extreme assumption that all the private
sector savings from now on are invested in government debt, the debt eventually will exceed the
amount of private sector financial assets. 2 When the market believes the point when the debt

1
  We do not claim a credit for the analogy of Japanese debts to defying gravity. From serious press to financial
newsletters, descriptions like “Mt. Fuji” of Japanese government bonds and government bonds “defy gravity” have
been very popular.
2
  IMF (2009), Tokuoka (2010), and Oguro and Kobayashi (2011) all discuss the ceiling of private sector savings and
provide simple calculations. This paper provides refinements over these earlier attempts by considering the
dynamics carefully under several alternative scenarios.

                                                        3
exceeds the domestic private sector financial assets is close, the yield will have to rise. This
paper also points out such a change can be sudden and unpredictable, and describes possible
scenarios of the economic impacts of such a debt crisis.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 starts by reviewing the various
definitions of Japanese government debt and clarifying our preferred definition used in this paper.
Section 3 describes and explains the reasons for the persisting low and stable JGB rates. Section
4 simulates the expected paths for government debt and private sector financial assets under the
assumption that the fiscal policy stance of the Japanese government does not change in the future.
We find that the amount of government debt is expected to exceed the private sector financial
assets in the next 10 years. The simulations depend on several important assumptions. Section 5
discusses how the results are sensitive to those assumptions. Section 6 starts out by identifying
an alternative future tax path that would keep the future government debt below the private
sector financial assets. Thus, if the market believes that Japan can still embark on such fiscal
consolidation in the not so distant future, the low JGB yields are understandable. If and when
the expectation changes, however, a fiscal crisis can be triggered even before the government
debt hits the ceiling of the private sector financial assets. Section 6 discusses what would trigger
such a change in expectation. Section 7 examines the impacts of financing reconstruction costs
of the earthquake/tsunami damages on the possibility of a debt crisis. Section 8 considers the
likely consequences of such a debt crisis. Section 9 concludes by summarizing the paper’s
findings.



2. Defining Japanese Government Debt

When one discusses the amount of Japanese government debt, it is useful to clarify the assumed
definition because there are several different definitions of Japanese government debt, and
depending on which definition is used, the amount can be very different. Table 1 shows the
three definitions of Japanese government debt that are often used and how they differ.

                                           <Table 1> about here

        The first column shows the definition of Japanese government debt as reported to the
IMF. This definition captures the liabilities incurred by the central government. It includes the
total outstanding of JGBs including FILP (Fiscal Investment and Loan Program) bonds, other
long-term borrowings, Financial Bills, and (explicit) government guarantees. As of the end of
fiscal year 2010, the amount of JGBs including FILP bonds amounted to about 750 trillion yen
(about 150% of GDP).

       FILP bonds are the JGBs issued to finance some government agencies covered by the
FILP, such as the Japan Finance Corporation, the Urban Renaissance Agency and others. Local
governments are also major recipients of the FILP funds. Before the FILP reform of 2001, the

                                                  4
FILP was financed by the Trust Funds Bureau of the Ministry of Finance that collected funds
from the postal savings and the national pension funds in the form of deposits. After the reform
of 2001, the postal savings and national pension funds were no longer required to deposit their
funds to the Ministry of Finance. The agencies in the FILP are encouraged to raise the funds in
the market by issuing FILP Agency Bonds, but those that have trouble raising sufficient funds in
the market can rely on the Fiscal Loan Funds (created by reorganizing the Trust Fund Bureau),
which are funded by FILP bonds (Zaito bonds). The distinction between the regular JGBs and
the FILP-JGBs is purely accounting. 3

         In addition to the JGBs and FILP bonds, the central government has long-term
borrowings of about 60 trillion yen and short-term Financing Bills (FBs) of about 110 trillion
yen. Financing Bills (FBs) are issued primarily to fund foreign reserves that are held in a special
account of the government. They are rolled over every 3 months and have offsetting entries on
the asset side of the balance sheet (foreign reserves).

        The central government also guarantees bonds issued by some government agencies such
as the Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Development Bank of Japan, and Japan Highway
Corporation. The total guaranteed liabilities amount to about 45 trillion yen. In total, the
government debt according to this definition was about 970 trillion yen as of the end of fiscal
2010 (March 2011).

       The second column of Table 1 shows another definition of Japanese government debt,
which covers both central and local governments. Compared with the definition in the first
column, this definition adds bonds issued by local governments, but excludes the FILP bonds,
Financial Bills (FBs), and government guarantees. According to this definition, Japanese
government debt was forecasted to be about 890 trillion yen as of the end of fiscal 2011.

        The third column of the table shows the definition used in national income accounting.
Compared with the second column, this definition adds FBs as well as the government
guarantees back into the debt calculation, but excludes FILP bonds (Zaito bonds). Moreover,
this definition adds the liabilities in the social security funds, which are included in the general
government sector in the national income accounting. Altogether, the Japanese government debt
at the end of fiscal 2009 was 1,023 trillion yen (214% of GDP) according to this definition.

       In this paper, we adopt the definition in the third column of the table – the national
income accounting definition. Thus, our definition excludes the FILP bonds. To the extent that
the government has contingent liabilities to support those government agencies financed by FILP
bonds, we are underestimating the degree of government indebtedness.


3
  For more details on the FILP, see MOF (2010). The FILP bonds are physically indistinguishable from JGBs, but
they are excluded from some definitions of government liabilities because they are supposed to be redeemed by
future revenues of the FILP agencies rather than tax revenues. The idea that the taxpayers would not be called on to
pay for the losses in FILP agencies is questionable at best as Doi and Hoshi (2003) points out.

                                                          5
        The national income accounting definition is also the one used by the OECD. Figure 1
shows the debt to GDP ratios for G7 countries reported by the OECD. The figure shows that
Japan has moved from around the middle to the highest in debt to GDP ratio among the G7
countries during the last two decades. OECD also reports the net debt number, which subtracts
the financial assets that the government owns from the gross debt number. Figure 2 shows the
net debt to GDP ratios for the G7 countries and also tells the same story. Japan had one of the
lowest net debt to GDP ratios in the beginning of the 1990s, but Japan’s net debt ratio climbed to
the highest by the end of the 2000s.

                                     <Figure 1 > about here

                                      <Figure 2> about here



        In comparing the government debt to the amount of private sector financial assets, it is
sensible to exclude government debt that is held by the government itself from the definition of
debt that we use. Thus, we use the concept of adjusted net debt as advocated by Doi (2008). The
adjusted net debt is defined as the gross debt of the government sector in the national income
accounting minus the government sector financial assets that are considered to be readily
disposable. Thus, different from the standard definition of the net debt, some financial assets
such as the fiscal adjustment funds of local governments are not subtracted. These financial
assets are held as a buffer for unexpected losses and not expected to be used to redeem the
government debt.



3. Why is the JGB yield so low?

        Economic research has been accumulating overwhelming evidence against the fiscal
sustainability of Japan. Many international financial institutions, credit rating agencies, and
private-sector analysts agree over this assessment. Yet, the JGB interest rate has been low and
stable. The 10-year JGB rate has been below 2% since 1999, and between 0.8% and 1.5% in the
last few years. The rate is much lower than the bond rate of other advanced countries. This is
despite the fact that Japan has a higher debt to GDP ratio than the European countries that have
suffered from sovereign debt crises in the last two years—Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and
Italy. JGB yield actually fell as the Japanese debt to GDP ratio increased in the 1990s and
2000s as Figure 3 shows. Why has the JGB yield not risen?

                                         <Figure 3 > about here

       Several factors are identified to have contributed to the low and stable JGB yield (see Ito
(2011), for example). This paper focuses on the oft-stated explanation that the JGB yields are
low because there are high private savings in Japan that continue to be invested into government

                                                 6
bonds. Thus, one does not have to worry about increasing bond yields as long as the massive
amount of private savings is there.

        Indeed most of Japanese government debt is held by Japanese residents. Table 2 shows
the distribution of JGB ownership by type of investor from 2005 to 2010. Looking at the column
for 2010, the largest share of 39% is owned by Japanese commercial banks, including the Japan
Post Bank. The insurance companies hold about 20% of the total and other private-sector
financial institutions own about 10%. The government social security fund (Government
Pension Insurance Fund or GPIF) also owns about 10%. The Bank of Japan holds about 8%. An
additional 5% is held by the households directly, and about 3% is held by other domestic
investors. Thus, in total more than 95% of JGBs are owned by domestic residents.

                                         <Table 2 > about here

        The large amount of private savings does not necessarily imply that it has to be used to
purchase low yielding domestic government bonds. The savings could chase higher returns and
move abroad on a massive scale. Indeed this happened to some extent as Japan accumulated
foreign assets over time. However, a large proportion of the savings stayed domestic, despite the
persistent difference of returns in recent years. The proportion of yen-denominated domestic
assets for Japan is extremely high as compared to investors in other advanced countries.

        What is important here is the home bias of the institutional investors. As Table 2 shows,
the direct holdings of government bonds by households and non-financial corporations are not
that large. Private savings are mostly deposited into the banks, and the banks buy Japanese
government bonds.

        Banks find the JGBs attractive because the investment does not involve currency risk,
which has been historically high for foreign bonds. The capital adequacy requirements (Basle I,
II, and III) also make JGBs desirable for banks: JGBs (and sovereign debts of advanced
countries) are assigned zero weights in calculating the risk-weighted assets, either by regulation
or by internal models, that determine the minimum amount of capital banks must hold. Pension
funds and insurance companies seem to also be content with holding a large amount of long-term
JGBs because their liabilities are also in the yen.

        The stagnation of the Japanese economy also makes JGBs attractive to banks. The
returns from alternative investments such as corporate loans have been quite low. The sustained
near-zero interest rate policy of the Bank of Japan was another reason for low rates of return in
general. Finally, continued deflation means that the real yields of JGBs for Japanese consumers
have been higher than the nominal yields.

       The regression analysis by Tokuoka (2010) finds that the low yields of JGBs may be
indeed related to its ownership predominantly by Japanese residents. Table 3 shows a
representative regression result. The results show that high household and corporate net savings

                                                7
are associated with low JGB yield. The regression results also show that high foreign ownership
of the JGB is associated with high bond yield. One percentage point increase of foreign
ownership of JGBs pushes up the yield by 11 basis points. When these two factors are controlled
for, a standard negative relation between the debt to GDP ratio and the government bond yield
re-emerges for Japan. The point estimate suggests that the bond yield rises by 2 basis points for
each one percentage point increase in the debt to GDP ratio.

                                                  <Table 3 > about here



4. Sustainability calculation

        If the growth of private savings decelerates and government debt continues to increase,
the amount of government debt will eventually exceed the amount of private savings. At that
point, even if all the private sector financial assets are invested in the JGBs, leaving nothing for
private sector credit, at least some JGBs must be held by foreign investors. As soon as the
market sees that the current course definitely leads to such a situation, the government will have
trouble selling new JGBs at low interest rates. In this paper, we call such a situation a “crisis.”
In a crisis, new JGBs cannot be sold at low interest rates and the interest rate would rise.

        There is good reason to believe that household saving will decline, which will slow down
the growth of the private sector financial assets. The baby boomer generation will retire in the
next ten years and they will start consuming out of their financial assets. Further, the working-
age population is expected to decline by 8% over the next ten years.

        To get an idea about when the government debt is expected to catch up with the private
savings in the absence of fiscal reform, we carry out the following calculation. The government
debt is assumed to follow the following dynamics:

                                                 1  rt
                                       bt 1           bt  gt   t                             (1)
                                                 1  t

where bt is the government debt to GDP ratio at the beginning of period t, rt is the real interest
rate, ηt is the real GDP growth rate, gt is the government expenditures including transfers divided
by GDP in period t, and τt is the tax rate (relative to GDP). For the initial value of the debt to
GDP ratio, we use 153%, which is the amount of adjusted net debt calculated by Doi, Hoshi, and
Okimoto (2011). The future government expenditure series also comes from Doi, Hoshi, and
Okimoto (2011). The series is based on the 2008 estimates of healthcare and long-term care
expenditures by the National Congress on Social Security and the 2009 estimates of social
security related expenditures by the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare and assumes no
drastic future reform. The sum of total tax revenues and social security contribution is assumed
to stay at 30% of GDP, the approximate level for fiscal 2010.

                                                      8
           We consider three alternative assumptions for the interest rate.

R1: Interest rate is equal to the larger of the growth rate (ηt) and the level in 2010 (1.3%).

R2: Interest rate rises by 2 basis points for every one percentage point that the debt to GDP ratio
at the beginning of the period exceeds the 2010 level (153%) (rt = 1.3% + 0.02*(bt-1.53)).

R3: Interest rate rises by 3.5 basis points for every one percentage point that the debt to GDP
ratio at the beginning of the period exceeds the 2010 level (153%) (rt = 1.3% + 0.035*(bt-1.53)).

R1 is motivated by the fact that the average yield on 10 year JGBs over the last several years has
been about the same as the GDP growth rate, but constrains the interest rate not to be lower than
the current rate even when the GDP growth rate declines further. R2 and R3 assume that the
interest rate rises as the government accumulates more debt. Many empirical studies have
demonstrated such a relation. R2 (2.0 basis points increase) uses the finding of Tokuoka (2010)
for Japan. R3 (3.5 basis points increase) assumes the coefficient estimate used by Gagnon
(2010) and is the median estimate from studies of various advanced economies. In both cases,
the interest rate is assumed to respond linearly to increases in the debt to GDP ratio. This is a
conservative assumption in the light of some evidence that suggests the interest rate increases at
a higher rate once the debt to GDP ratio exceeds certain a threshold, as Ardagna, Caselli, and
Lane (2004) find.

        The debt calculated by (1) is compared to the amount of domestic private financial assets
that can be potentially used to finance government debt. As the measure of such domestic
private savings, we consider:

           Net financial assets of the household sector – Value of shares and other equities held by
           the household sector + Cash, deposits, government bonds, and public corporation bonds
           held by the private nonfinancial sector

The private savings thus defined was 261.3% of GDP at the end of fiscal year 2010.4

        Starting from this initial value of the private financial assets, we assume the future private
financial assets will evolve according to the following equation.

                                                  1  rt
                                        at 1           bt  max(at  b t , 0)  st               (2)
                                                  1  t

where at is the private financial assets to GDP ratio at the beginning of time t, st is the (flow)
saving divided by GDP in year t. The dynamics assume that all the government debt is held by
the private sector and that the portion of the private financial assets grows at the rate of the



4
    The data on the financial assets are taken from the Bank of Japan Flow of Funds Data.

                                                              9
interest on the government debt. The rest of the private financial assets are assumed to grow at
the rate of GDP growth.

       The aggregate saving rate is a function of the demography. Appendix 1 describes how
we estimate the aggregate saving rate from 2010 to 2050. The result is shown in Figure 4. The
saving rate starts out above 3% in 2010, but quickly goes below 2% by 2017. It then holds
steady and start to decline again in the 2030s, falling almost to -3% by the end of the 2040s.

                                       <Figure 4> about here

        The upper-bound for the debt to GDP ratio is defined as the level when the new issue of
government bonds exceeds the total (flow) saving of that year and the amount of the private
sector financial assets that are not in the form of the government debt yet. Thus, in order to
avoid the upper bound, the debt must satisfy the following constraint.

                                    Bt  Bt 1  St 1  ( At 1  Bt 1 )                     (3)

Or rewriting this in terms of the ratios to GDP,

                                                    st 1  at 1
                                             bt                                               (4)
                                                     1  t 1

        We consider several different future growth rates. We start by a simple, but
unrealistically optimistic assumption that Japan’s GDP will grow at 2% annually for the next 40
years. This is an assumption often used by the Japanese government for future economic
projections. Figure 5 shows the path of the debt to GDP ratio under the alternative scenarios on
the interest rate. The series DebtX (X=1, 2, 3) is the path of the debt to GDP ratio under the
interest rate scenario RX. The figure also shows the right hand side of the constraint (4) as
MaxDebtX (X=1, 2, 3). For every scenario on the interest rate, the figure shows that the
government debt exceeds MaxDebt in 2023 at the latest.

                                       <Figure 5> about here

         The assumption of 2% real GDP growth indefinitely is probably too optimistic. The
assumption ignores the tremendous shift in demography, namely the shrinking working-age (age
20-65) population. A more reasonable assumption may be that GDP per working-age population
rather than GDP itself will grow at a constant rate.

       Note that:

                                                      wPOP rGDP
                                 rGDP  POP *             *     ,                              (5)
                                                       POP wPOP




                                                     10
where rGDP is the (level) of real Gross Domestic Product, POP is total population, and wPOP is
the working-age population. In terms of the growth rate, we have:

                                                               wPOP    rGDP
                                   rGDP  POP                         ,                                      (6)
                                                                POP    wPOP

where Δ is the growth rate operator, Δx = {x(t)-x(t-1)}/x(t-1). Thus, the real GDP growth rate, ⊿
rGDP, is the sum of the population growth rate, ⊿POP, the growth rate of the ratio of working-
age population to population, ⊿(wPOP/POP), and the growth rate of GDP per working-age
person, ⊿(rGDP/wPOP). The last term, the growth rate of GDP per working-age person, can be
roughly regarded as the rate of labor productivity growth. Thus, we refer to this term as the labor
productivity growth for short.5 Table 4 demonstrates the demographic growth decomposition for
the years 1955 to 2010.

                                             <Table 4 > about here

       During the rapid growth period from 1955 to 1970, the average annual growth rate was
9.7%. This is the left-hand side of equation (6). The right hand side of equation (6) breaks down
the growth rate of GDP into several contributing factors; population growth (1%), increase in the
proportion of working-age population (1.0%), and growth rate of GDP per working-age person
(7.7%). The boost in the overall growth rate by the population factor is called demographic
dividend.6 The overall growth rate fell over time as all of these sources of growth declined. The
growth rate of GDP per working-age person, however, seems to have stabilized after the 1990s.

       Future projection of demographic growth decomposition requires the expected future
demographic changes as inputs. We take the (mid-point) future projection of the total population
and working-age population from the National Institute of Population and Social Security
Research (IPSS). 7 This produces the first two terms of the right-hand side of the equation (6).

       Given these expected demographic changes, how much growth of GDP per working-age
person is necessary to maintain the GDP growth of 2%? Table 5 gives the answer. The 2% real
economic growth implies that the growth rate of GDP per working-age person must be at around
3% in the next twenty years (2011-2030) and at 3.5% for the following twenty years (2031-2050).
The productivity growth rate of 3% and above has not been observed for Japan since the 1980s.
It seems implausible that the Japanese economy can repeat the miraculous growth of the 1970s
and 1980s in the next 40 years.

5
  The number of actual workers who engage in production is the working-age population times the labor
participation rate, plus anyone who may be working in the retired age group (age 65 and over). The decline in
working-age population can be alleviated if the participation rate increases, or more elderly participate in the labor
market. This paper ignores these possibilities.
6
  For demographic dividend in general, see Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla (2003), and for application of demographic
dividend to Japan, see Komine and Kabe (2009).
7
  For the IPSS population forecasts, see http://www.ipss.go.jp/pp-newest/e/ppfj02/top.html.

                                                          11
                                          <Table 5 > about here

        Thus, a more reasonable approach is to assume the growth rate of GDP per working-age
person to be similar to that of the 1990s and the 2000s. We consider two alternative growth rates
of GDP per working-age population. The low growth scenario assumes 1.05% (average of 1994-
2010) and the high growth scenario assumes 2.09% (average of 2001-2007).8 Table 6 shows the
growth decomposition under the assumption of 1.05% growth rate of GDP per-working-age
person.

                                          <Table 6> about here

       The result for the debt sustainability calculation under the low growth scenario is
reported in Figure 6 and is very similar to the one in Figure 5. The upper bound for the debt
accumulation is reached by 2024 at the latest.

                                          <Figure 6> about here

Table 7 shows the growth decomposition under the high growth scenario. The growth rate will
be close to 1% for the next twenty years until 2030, then falls to 0.6% in the 2030s and the 2040s.
The result of the dynamics for government debt and private sector saving shown in Figure 7,
again is pretty much the same as the one in the previous figure. The Japanese government is
expected to run out of room to sell more bonds domestically by 2024 at the latest.

                                          <Table 7> about here

                                          < Figure 7> about here

         In the calculations for Figures 6 and 7, we use future GDP growth rates that are different
from the government projection of 2% per year. The future government expenditure to GDP
ratios, however are still based on the government projection of 2% GDP growth. This procedure
is correct if the government expenditure falls at the same rate as GDP when the GDP growth rate
falls below 2%. If government expenditure does not fall as much, our procedure results in
underestimation of the future government expenditure to GDP ratio. To see the impact of this
potential misspecification, we calculated the dynamics for government debt under an alternative
extreme assumption: the level of government expenditure does not depend on the GDP growth
rate, so that the government expenditure to GDP ratio at year t when the GDP growth rate is x (x
< 2%) is given by (the government estimates under 2% growth assumption) * (1.02) / (1+x). The
result (not reported here) shows that the government debt can exceed the MaxDebt sooner, but
not by more than one year.



8
 The years 2001-2007 roughly correspond to the years when Junichiro Koizumi was the Prime Minister. Junichiro
Koizumi became Prime Minister in April 2001. He resigned as Prime Minister in September 2006, succeeded by Mr.
Shizo Abe, who was widely regarded as a protégé of Koizumi. Prime Minister Abe lasted only one year in office.

                                                     12
       The results in Figures 5 through 7 suggest that the year when the Japanese debt would
exceed the private financial assets does not depend very much on the growth rate, which is
adversely affected by the aging of the Japanese population. This does not mean that the
population dynamics do not matter for the sustainability of the fiscal situation. On the contrary,
expected increases in social security related spending in the future as a result of aging, which is
also embedded in all of the simulations above, is at the heart of the sustainability problem.

        Appendix 2 provides a simple example to show the power of population dynamics that
could make a previously solvent pay-as-you-go pension system unsustainable. It is a simple
stylized example of the current Japanese situation, where the government finances, especially the
social security system, have not adjusted to the reality of declining population. Appendix 3
extends the analysis by using a continuous time version of the overlapping generation model
developed by Blanchard (1985).

5. Sensitivity to different assumptions

        The above simulations are based on several assumptions. First, we assume that the
outstanding balance of corporate savings will remain constant for the forecast horizon. Given
that corporate saving has been positive (balance has been increasing) in recent years, this
assumption may appear too conservative. If Japanese corporations continue to save and increase
their deposits, then absorption of the JGB by domestic financial institutions may continue forever.
However, high corporate saving may have been motivated by potential large investment in the
near future. Direct investment and M&A activities abroad that draw down corporate savings may
occur in the future. Indeed some corporations seem to have stepped up their efforts on overseas
investment taking advantage of the appreciated yen. When any sign of JGB vulnerability
appears, corporate savings are more likely to find alternative investment outlets other than
household savings. Thus, assuming corporate savings to remain constant seems to be reasonable.

         Second, our simulations assume that the private financial assets already outside Japan
would not be called back to be invested in the JGBs. In other words, the Japanese investors that
already invested substantially in foreign assets are assumed to be free from the home bias. In
this sense, these Japanese investors would behave similarly to foreign investors. They would
repatriate foreign assets to hold the JGBs only when the JGB interest rate rises significantly to
match the yields of foreign assets. Thus, for our calculation of the ceiling of domestic financial
assets, ignoring foreign assets owned by Japanese residents seems to be justifiable.

        Third, for the new flow of household and corporate saving, we assume that all of these
savings can be invested into the JGBs with no outflow to hold foreign assets. If this assumption
does not hold, the government debt would catch up with the domestic private financial assets
sooner.

       What is important is the amount of private sector savings that exhibit substantial home
bias. This reasoning casts a doubt on an oft-heard argument that a fiscal crisis cannot happen as

                                                 13
long as the current account is in surplus. The current account deficit is neither a necessary nor
sufficient condition for a fiscal crisis. Government debt may become unsustainable even when
the current account is still in surplus if domestic savers refuse to purchase JGBs at a low rate and
shift their portfolio to hold other domestic or foreign assets. On the contrary, a fiscal crisis may
not happen even when the current account turns to a deficit if the current account deficit is a
result of large capital inflow to Japan.

        Finally, our analysis does not deal with the exchange rate explicitly. Exchange rate
fluctuations that anticipate fiscal problems in the future can influence the fiscal crisis in several
ways. On the one hand, a threat of fiscal crisis may lead to yen depreciation before a fully
developed crisis. This may help export-oriented manufacturing firms in Japan and lead to an
increase in government revenues. This may also postpone the fiscal crisis to a later date than our
analysis suggests. On the other hand, the currency depreciation may be quicker and more violent,
which was the case in many currency crises in emerging economies. Domestic investors may
shift their assets abroad, intensifying the fiscal crisis.



6. Triggers of the Crisis

        The simulations above suggest that Japanese government debt will soon exceed private
sector financial assets. As soon as the market expects this, we would expect the interest rate on
government debt to start increasing, but the JGB yields do not seem to behave as if a crisis is
expected in the next 10 years or less. One explanation is that the market participants believe the
government will implement a drastic fiscal reform to restore fiscal sustainability well before
government debt exceeds the private sector financial assets. A source of such expectation may
be the fact that the total tax burden to GDP ratio for Japan is still low at around 30% (including
payment into the social security system). 9 Japan may be able to eliminate fiscal deficits if it
increases the tax burden to a level that is comparable to many European countries. For example,
the deficit of the central government was 44 trillion yen in fiscal year 2011. Using the widely
used estimate that a marginal 1% increase in the consumption tax rate brings in additional
revenue of 0.5% of GDP (about 2.5 trillion yen), an 18% increase in the consumption tax rate
would increase the government revenue by 45 trillion yen. 10 Thus, if the consumption tax rate is
raised from the current 5% to 23%, the entire deficit can be eliminated. Most European countries
have a VAT rate more than 15% and some as high as 25% (e.g. Sweden), so the 23%
consumption tax may not be outrageous. Thus, at least in theory, Japan has huge room for
increasing the consumption tax rate.

9
  The tax burden ratio for fiscal 2011 is estimated to be 29.2%
(http://www.mof.go.jp/budget/fiscal_condition/basic_data/201104/sy2302n.pdf).
10
   To be precise, one percent out of five percent increase of consumption tax will be given to local governments, so
that only 80% of the consumption tax increase is reserved for the central government tax revenue. However, if the
central government reduces the transfers to the local government by the same amount of consumption tax revenue
increase for local governments, the central government ends up receiving 100% of the consumption tax increase.

                                                         14
       We can use the simple simulation model described above to see what kind of future tax
rates would make the fiscal situation sustainable. We start from the expected tax rates for the
next several years that are implied by the latest plan for the integrated reform of social security
and tax systems, which is being debated in the Diet as of June 2012. One percentage point
increase of the consumption tax rate is assumed to increase the tax revenue by 0.5% of GDP.
Thus, the tax rate increase of 3% planned for April 2014 would raise the tax and social security
contribution to GDP ratio (hereafter, tax burden ratio) in fiscal 2014 from the current 30% to
31.5%. For fiscal 2015, the planned mid-year increase of the consumption tax rate of 2% would
increase the tax revenue by another 0.5% to 32% of GDP. The tax burden ratio for fiscal 2016
would be 32.5%.

         For each assumption about the interest rate R1, R2, and R3, we find a path for the future
tax burden ratio that starts with these and eventually brings down the debt to GDP ratio to 153%
(the initial value in 2010). Such a path is not unique, but Figure 8 shows one possible path for
each interest rate assumption that makes the debt process sustainable. Here the growth rate of
GDP divided by working-age person is assumed to be 1.05% (the average for 1994-2010).

                                                  <Figure 8> about here

         Under R1, the tax burden ratio increases from 32% in 2015 to 33% in 2016, and increases
by 1% a year until it reaches 46% in 2029. The ratio stays at 46% until 2070 and then gradually
falls to 43%. This tax burden ratio path brings the debt to GDP ratio down to 153.9% by 2100 as
Figure 9 shows.

                                                  <Figure 9 > about here

         Under R2 or R3, the 1% tax rate increase each year would take the tax rates to an
unrealistically high level before the debt to GDP ratio starts falling. Looking at the tax and
social security collection to GDP ratio across OECD countries, no country has a ratio above 50%.
The highest rate observed ratio between 2003 and 2010 is 50.8% for Denmark in 2005.11 Thus,
we search for a tax burden ratio path that does not go over 50%. For R2, this implies that the tax
burden ratio needs to increase by 3% a year from 2016 to 2020. The tax burden ratio reaches
50% in 2023 and stays there for 3 years. Then, the ratio can gradually fall to 47% by 2100.
Figure 9 shows that the tax policy brings the debt to GDP ratio down to 153.5% by 2100.

        The sustainable tax burden ratio under R3 must jump by 9% in 2016 and another 8% in
2017. The tax burden ratio reaches 50% as early as 2018 and stays there for 24 years until 2041.
Eventually the tax rate falls gradually to 47% by 2100. The tax policy brings the debt to GDP
ratio down to 153.4% by 2100 as Figure 14 shows.

        Figure 10 provides another way to look at the debt dynamics under the sustainable
policies. The figure shows the path of the ratio of government debt to the maximum amount of
11
     http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/taxation/total-tax-revenue_20758510-table2

                                                          15
government debt that the private sector can absorb by using the current financial assets and the
new saving (MaxDebt) for each interest rate scenario. For all interest rate scenarios, the ratio
never exceeds 100%, suggesting that the amount of government debt continues to be below the
private financial assets.

                                          <Figure 10> about here

        If the market participants expect future tax increases such as the ones in Figure 8, it is
quite understandable why we have not yet observed high yields on JGBs. We know, however,
that the market expectation can change quickly. If and when market participants are convinced
that tax increases are unlikely to come, it can trigger a crisis.

        One can consider several potential triggers for such a change in the expectation. First, a
change in the expectation may be triggered by some events in the financial market. An example
is a downgrade by credit rating agencies. Investors may revise their assessment of bonds and re-
balance portfolios based on (unexpected) changes in credit rating. The past experience of
downgrades in Japan, however, suggests that a downgrade is not likely to be an important trigger,
as we discuss further below.

         Second, a change in the expectation may be triggered by a political event. For example,
if the bill for integrated reform of social security and tax systems fails to pass in the Diet, the
public may conclude that the government is less likely to achieve fiscal consolidation in the
future. Another example is a change in the policy of government financial institutions to buy
JGBs. In 1998, some confusion over how many government bonds the Fiscal Investment and
Loan Program (FILP) would buy led to a sudden rise of the JGB yield by more 100 basis points
in less than three months.

        Third, contagion from a foreign country that is experiencing a debt crisis may trigger a
change in the expectation for Japan. For example, the debt crisis in Greece has spread to other
highly indebted countries in the euro area, including Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy. One
cannot rule out the possibility that such a contagion may influence countries outside the euro
area, such as Japan.

         Fourth, a change in the expected future interest rates may trigger a crisis. Such a change
in the interest expectation may be a consequence of an unexpected monetary policy action. For
example, high energy price inflation can prompt the Bank of Japan to tighten monetary policy by
raising the interest rate. With a higher future interest rate path, the expected fiscal policy may
not be sustainable anymore. On the contrary, if the Bank of Japan does not tighten when the
energy prices rise, this may also raise future interest rates by raising the future inflation
expectation. Thus, on both accounts a sustained rise in energy prices can put the Bank of Japan
in a tough place.



                                                 16
         An event in the summer of 2003 illustrates how a small rise in the JGB yield can be
amplified quickly. The yield of 10-year JGB went up from 0.5% in June to 1.6% in September
in 2003. A sudden price decline raised the VaR (value at risk) of the JGB, and many financial
institutions sold JGBs to reduce the risk. This behavior, which was individually prudent,
resulted in depressing the JGB price further.

        As we argued previously, a JGB downgrade by a credit rating agency is a potential
trigger of a crisis. Japan’s past experience suggests, however, that the credit rating agencies are
not likely to be a trigger. The JGB has already undergone a series of downgrades by Moody’s,
S&P and Fitch in the late 1990s to the beginning of 2000s, and again recently. Looking back at
these experiences, we can judge the likelihood that credit rating agencies would pull the trigger
for the Japanese sovereign debt crisis. The history of the above-mentioned changes in credit
rating is summarized in Figure 11 and Table 8.

                                   < Figure 11 and Table 8> about here

        If a downgrading of JGB influences the expectations of investors and makes them more
reluctant to hold JGBs, we should expect the bond yield to rise, the yen to depreciate, and the
stock prices to decline. In order to see whether these reactions have been observed at the time of
downgrading in the past, market reactions in various event windows (from 1 to 150 days) are
examined. Figure 12 shows such results. Panels 1 to 3 show the reaction of the JGB bond rate to
S&P downgrades and negative watch announcements (Panel 1); to Moody’s downgrade and
negative watch announcements (Panel 2); and to Moody’s down- and up-grades with opposite
signs (Panel 3). The vertical axis is the interest rate change (percentage point changes), and the
horizontal axis is the window of changes from day t-k to t, or from t to t+k, where k=1, 5, 25, 75,
150. Since other news and events influence the bond yield, immediate changes (k=+1 and +5) are
more appropriate in evaluating the impact of credit rating changes. The changes before the credit
rating change are shown in order to check whether there were significant trends before the credit
rating downgrade, either for rationally anticipating credit rating changes or for other reasons,
which may carry over to the post-event days. In any panel, the changes in the bond yields
around the event date are hardly positive. If anything, downgrades tend to lower the yields.
Similarly, Panels 4 to 6 show the reactions of the yen/dollar rate to various categories (S&P,
Moody’s, and Moody’s including upgrades) of credit rating changes. The (+) means yen
depreciation and the unit is in percentage changes. These panels suggest that the yen/dollar rate
has been unpredictable before or after the credit rate changes, but downgrades do tend to be
followed by slight yen appreciation, if any. With respect to a stock price index, Panels 7 (S&P
downgrades), 8 (Moody’s downgrades) and 9 (Moody’s including upgrades) suggest that the
stock price index tended to fall both before and after the downgrades, as the changes are mostly
below 0 in the vertical axis, which measures the percentage change in the stock price index.
Downgrades tended to occur in the phase of negative market trend, but in sum, we do not find
evidence that any of the expected reactions occurred when the JGB was downgraded.


                                                 17
        The most dramatic downgrade event so far was the 2-notch downgrading by Moody’s on
May 31, 2002. The Ministry of Finance was quite upset and wrote an open letter to Moody’s
questioning the judgment. The market remained calm, however, sending the bond yield actually
lower. Thus from such evidence, it seems safe to conclude that credit rating agencies are not
likely actors capable of pulling a trigger for a crisis, at least for Japan. 12 This assessment has
been confirmed by what followed after the downgrading by Moody’s on August 24, 2011 and the
most recent one by Fitch on May 22, 2012. The downgrades were more or less expected and the
JGB yield did not change at all following the announcements.

                                             <Figure 12> about here

        Another possible trigger in the financial market may be a hike in the Credit Default Swap
(CDS) spread. Figure 13 shows that the CDS spread for the JGB has been trending upward since
late 2007. It peaked at around 100 basis points (bp) after the Lehman failure. Although it went
down to about 40 bp in mid-2009, it started to climb again to 90 bp in 2011, and spiked up again
immediately after the March 11 earthquake/tsunami. The CDS spread reflects the default
probability assessment by the market. Figure 13 suggests that the market assessment of the
default probability for the JGB increased over the last three years. Although the level of spread
for Japan is still low compared to some European countries that have experienced fiscal crises in
2010-11, the upward trend is obvious. Just for comparison, CDS spreads for Spain and Italy
were at around 100 bp in November/December 2009, before rising higher than 100 in 2010, and
then above 300 in the summer of 2011.

                                                   <Fig 13 > about here



7. Implications of the earthquake/tsunami

       The strong earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan on March 11, 2011 may turn out to be
important because it can affect the expectation on future fiscal consolidation. The government
decided to issue Reconstruction Bonds to finance the reconstruction costs. The Third
Supplementary Budget for Fiscal 2011 included the issue of 11.6 trillion yen (about 2.4% of
GDP) of Reconstruction Bonds. According to the government plan, an additional 12.7 trillion
(about 2.6% of GDP) yen of Reconstruction Bonds are slated to be issued in fiscal year 2012.
Although the Reconstruction Bonds are supposed to be redeemed using the revenues from
income tax surcharge for 25 years and categorized in the special account, they add to the real
burden of government debt until it is fully redeemed. In addition, decontamination of nuclear

12
  Because Japan has not experienced any crisis despite repeated downgrading by credit rating agencies, some
compare the credit rating agencies to “a boy who cried wolf” in Aesop’s fable. A relevant lesson from the fable,
however, is that a wolf eventually showed up and the people in the village were not prepared. Thus, whether the
evidence that credit downgrading so far has not triggered a crisis does not imply the crisis itself would not happen,
with or without warnings.

                                                          18
substances and compensations for nuclear-accident-related businesses and evacuation are
estimated to be as much as 20-30 trillion yen (about 4-6% of GDP).13

        Although these are large expenditures, the amount seems to be relatively small compared
to more than 1,000 trillion yen of outstanding debt. The simple simulation model in the last
section can be used to examine the impacts of the reconstruction financing on the debt dynamics.
For the interest rate scenario, we consider R2. Let us start from the sustainable debt path in
Figure 10. The path assumes the tax rates shown in Figure 8. Figure 14 shows the debt to GDP
ratio divided by the MaxDebt under this scenario as defined by the series “sustainable”. Note
that the ratio is well below 100%, which suggests the private savings ceiling is never breached
under the “sustainable” policy. The series “With Reconstruction Expenses” shows the path of the
debt-to-MaxDebt ratio when the government expenditure is increasing by 2.4% of GDP in 2011
and 2.6% of GDP in 2012. The ratio still stays well under 100%. Thus, we confirm that
additional debt of a few percentage of GDP does not change the sustainability condition very
much.

                                                <Figure 14> about here

        An important assumption here is that the tax increase proceeds as it has been expected. If
the tax increase is delayed during the reconstruction period, the debt dynamics can change
substantially. The debt path “With Reconstruction and Delayed Tax Increase” in Figure 18
shows what happens if the start of the tax increase was delayed by five years from 2014 to 2019
(in addition to increased bond issues in 2011 and 2012). The debt to MaxDebt ratio comes
dangerously close to 100% in the early 2020s.

        Figure 15 repeats the same exercise by adding 1% of GDP as additional expenses each
year from 2012 to 2015 to clean up the aftermath of the nuclear accident and to compensate for
victims. With these additional costs, the delay becomes critical. In 2023, the debt exceeds the
MaxDebt even with the tax policy that used to be sufficient to achieve the sustainability.

                                                <Figure 15> about here

        Thus, how to finance the public costs of reconstruction can be important in the
sustainability question. It could become either the last straw to large debts that break the back of
the Japanese economy or the first step toward the right direction.

       The year 2012 is expected to be a boom year supported by the reconstruction demand.
The people will reason that if the government is unable to raise taxes in a boom year, it will
never raise taxes. The loss of this confidence can trigger a crisis. Alternatively, if the

13
   Estimates widely vary depending on how much coverage one may consider. The 30 trillion estimate includes
compensation for those households affected in the 20-30km radius, businesses that were affected by the accident,
and costs to decommission the reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi. See a Japanese article in Diamond:
http://diamond.jp/articles/-/12436

                                                        19
government starts the necessary fiscal consolidation process by financing a substantial portion of
the reconstruction expenditure in the form of taxes, this will boost the confidence that the
government is serious about the long-term fiscal health and equitable intergenerational burden
sharing. Then Japan may even have a chance of avoiding a fiscal crisis.



8. Consequences of a crisis

         If and when the fiscal crisis occurs, how will the crisis evolve? First, the rise in JGB
yields will raise other interest rates, such as the mortgage rate and corporate bond rate, and
increase the cost of funds for households, firms and banks. This will reduce the consumption of
non-durables and durables at least temporarily, and hurt corporate investment. The magnitude of
the impacts on consumption and investment, however, may not be large. Muellbauer and Murata
(2011), for example, find that consumption in Japan did not increase at all when the interest rate
fell during the 1990s and 2000s. They even find that consumption responded positively to a rise
in the interest rate in some specifications. Similarly, many large corporations have substantial
corporate saving and do not feel constrained by the cost of funds. Small and medium firms that
have been helped by the low interest rate environment and forgiving lending attitude by banks
under the Act to Facilitate Financing for SMEs may suffer from higher cost of funds. This would
exacerbate the crisis.

        Second, the crisis would have a large adverse impact on financial institutions, because the
majority of long-term government bonds are held by Japanese banks and insurance companies.
When the interest rate rises, they suffer valuation losses. For example, Japanese banks
collectively hold about 142 trillion yen of central and local government bonds as of the end of
March 2010. This is about 32% of total bank loans. The interest rate risk is large, too.
According to Bank of Japan (2010), 100 basis points increase in JGB yields is estimated to cause
about 4.7 trillion yen of losses for Japanese banks collectively (BOJ 2010, Chart 3-2-3, p.39).
This is about 11.7% of the Tier I capital at the end of March 2010 and about twice as much as the
income before tax for the accounting year ending on March 31, 2010. The interest rate risk as of
March 2008 was estimated to be around 3.5 trillion yen. This may not reduce regulatory capital
immediately because the banks are not required to mark all the securities to the market, but many
will none the less tighten their credit provision.

        Third, if the short-term interest rate rises sharply, along with the long-term bond rate, this
would cause another serious problem. The foreign exchange special account is where most of
foreign reserves are held. On the asset side of the special account, U.S. Treasuries are held as
international foreign reserves; and on the liability side of the special account, short-term
government securities (FBs) are issued to the market. In the last 20 years, the interest rate of the
U.S. treasuries exceeded the short-term yen interest rate. However, if the yen interest rate
becomes higher than the U.S. interest rate, the difference incurs the cash flow from the regular


                                                  20
budget to the special account. Ito (2003) showed how much profit the Japanese authority made
from the interest rate differential between the U.S. and Japan. The size of FBs outstanding is
about 110 trillion yen. If the yen interest rate becomes higher than the dollar interest rate by 2
percentage points, it would require 2 trillion yen of interest income subsidy from the general
account to the special account.

       Finally, the crisis will force the government to respond. Here we list some likely
responses of the government and the central bank.

        First, to the extent that the government still has room for tax increases when the crisis
happens, the government can implement emergency tax increases. That may impress the market
and the yield may come down. Since it takes time for the debt to GDP ratio to come down,
however, the reduction in the yield may be very limited. Thus, a drastic tax hike alone may not
be sufficient to end the crisis by this time. Even worse, the higher tax rate may further depress
the aggregate demand, resulting in actually lower tax revenue. Whether the tax increases save
the economy or destroy the economy depends on some factors that this paper does not consider,
such as the elasticity of the aggregate demand to a tax increase.

        Second, the government is likely to be forced to cut expenditures as well. Because a
substantial part of the increase of government expenditure in recent years and in the near future
comes from the increased liability of the national pension system and the healthcare system, cuts
in these areas would have maximum impacts financially. Cutting the benefits of retirees is in the
direction toward correcting the intergenerational imbalance that currently exists in the public
transfers. For example, Keen, Pradhan, Kang, and de Mooij (2011) find “those over age 60 as of
2003 are expected to receive about 100 million yen more in net social benefits over their lifetime
than are those not yet born” (p.16).

        Third, the government may try to force domestic financial institutions to roll over the
debt or to accept restructuring of the debt. The government may be especially effective in
arranging such a deal with the Japan Post Bank, which is still owned by the government and is a
large holder of the government bonds. The forced restructuring, however, will impose losses on
the financial institutions and may cause a financial crisis.

         Fourth, instead of negotiating with the private sector financial institutions, the
government may pressure the Bank of Japan to buy government bonds, including newly issued
bonds. The Bank of Japan has been clear that they do not endorse such a monetization policy
because it undermines the fiscal discipline. However, at the time of crisis, the central bank may
find it as the option that is least destructive to the financial system. If such money financing is
used to respond to the liquidity crisis, it will lead to very high inflation, which will depreciate the
yen. This will partially stimulate the economy via an export boom, provided that Japan does not
suffer a major banking crisis at the same time.



                                                  21
        Unexpected inflation will result in the redistribution of wealth from lenders to borrowers.
This is also redistribution from the old generations to young generations, since the older
generation has much higher financial assets whose value might decline, or would not rise at the
same pace with the inflation rate. However, this may not have such detrimental impacts on the
economy, since many who participate in production and innovation (corporations and
entrepreneurs) are borrowers rather than lenders.



9. Concluding remarks

        The Japanese government debt is clearly unsustainable without a drastic change in fiscal
policy. The interest rates of Japanese government bonds, however, have been low. Market
participants do not seem to worry about the problem of high and rising debts. The continuing
low JGB yields may reflect the market’s view that the ample amount of private sector financial
assets in Japan will always be there to absorb additional JGBs, but the current calm situation is
not likely to continue. The rapid aging of the Japanese population means that the growth of
private sector savings is slowing down and eventually will turn negative. The Japanese
government cannot rely on the private sector to continue buying JGBs beyond a certain point.
Thus, the hope for fiscal consolidation can be abruptly dashed with some trigger of a crisis.

           In order to avoid its debt hitting an absolute ceiling of private saving, the government
may raise taxes to close the deficit gap in time. Since the Value Added Tax (consumption tax)
rate is still 5%, a gradual increase in the tax rate can bring the debt dynamics to a sustainable
path. If the government fails to act, the market is likely to force some reforms on the government
during a crisis.

          This paper formalizes the above ideas into a simulation model. If the government
successfully increases taxes in time, the debt becomes sustainable in the sense that it does not
breach the ceiling of the private sector financial assets. If the government fails to implement
fiscal reform, however, a crisis of high bond yield will unfold. At that point, it may be too late to
avert serious consequences of a drastic cut in government services (like European countries in
the current ongoing crisis), a drastic cut in living standards caused by depreciation, and a high
rate of inflation that results from the central bank financing of government debt.

          The tsunami and nuclear disaster in March 2011 made it necessary for the government
to issue more debt to finance reconstruction. The disaster may become the last straw on the back
of the Japanese government finance, or it may prompt the government to take a first step towards
the right direction. It is up to the Japanese government and the public to decide to implement
fiscal reform before it is too late.




                                                 22
References

Ardagna, Silvia, Francesco Caselli, and Timothy Lane (2004). “Fiscal Discipline and the Cost of
      Public Debt Service: Some Estimates for OECD Countries,” NBER Working Paper No.
      10788.Bank of Japan (2010). Financial System Report.

Bloom, David E.; David Canning; Jaypee Sevilla (2003). The Demographic Dividend: A New
      Perspective on the Economic Consequences of Population Change, Santa Monica, CA.:
      Rand Corporation.

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (2005). “Happy News from the Dismal Science:
       Reassessing Japanese Fiscal Policy and Sustainability,” in Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick,
       and David E. Weinstein (Eds.) Reviving Japan’s Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       40-78.

Doi, Takero (2008). “Simulation Analysis of Policies to Ensure Japan’s Fiscal Sustainability,”
       Mita Journal of Economics, 100(4), 131-160.

Doi, Takero (2009). “Zaisei Shutsudo no Utage no ato ni,” in Takatoshi Ito and Naohiro Yashiro
       (Eds.) Nihon Keizai no Kassei-ka (Revitalizing Japan’s Economy). Tokyo, Japan: Nihon
       Keizai Shimbun-sha, 155-189.

Doi, Takero, and Takeo Hoshi (2003). “Paying for the FILP,” in Magnus Blomström, Jennifer
       Corbett, Fumio Hayashi, and Anil Kashyap (Eds.) Structural Impediments to Growth in
       Japan. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 37-69.

Doi, Takero, Takeo Hoshi, and Tatsuyoshi Okimoto (2011). “Japanese Government Debt and
       Sustainability of Fiscal Policy,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
       25(4), 414-433.

Doi, Takero and Toshihiro Ihori (2009). The Public Sector in Japan: Past Developments and
       Future Prospects. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Gagnon, Joseph E. (2011). “The Global Outlook for Government Debt over the Next 25 Years:
      Implications for the Economy and Public Policy,” Petersen Institute for International
      Economics, Policy Analyses in International Economics, 94.

Imrohoroğlu, Selahattin, and Nao Sudo (2011). “Will a Growth Miracle Reduce Debt in Japan,”
      The Bank of Japan IMES Discussion Paper No. 2011-E-1.

International Monetary Fund (2009). “Japan: Selected Issues,” IMF Country Report No.09/211.

International Monetary Fund (2011). “Japan: 2011 Article IV Consultation,” IMF Country
        Report No. 11/181.


                                               23
Ito, Arata, Tsutomu Watanabe, and Tomoyoshi Yabu (2011). “Fiscal Policy Switching in Japan,
        the U.S., and the U.K.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 25(4),
        380-433.

Ito, Takatoshi (2003). “Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective?: the Japanese experiences
        in the 1990s" in Paul Mizen (ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rates and Financial
        Markets, Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart, Volume 2, CheltenhamU.K.; Edward
        Elgar Pub. 2003: 126-153.

Ito, Takatoshi (2011). “Sustainability of Japanese Sovereign Debt,” ERIA project.

       http://eria.org/research/y2010-no1.html

Keen, Michael, Mahmood Pradhan, Kenneth Kang, and Ruud de Mooij (2011). “Raising the
      Consumption Tax in Japan: Why, When, How?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/13.

Komine, Takao and Shigesaburo Kabe, (2009). “Long-term Forecast of the Demographic
     Transition in Japan and Asia,” Asian Economic Policy Review, vol. 4, no. 1, June: 19-38.

Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Jun I. Kim, and Mahvash S. Qureshi (2010). “Fiscal Space,”
        IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/11.

Sakuragawa, Masaya, and Kaoru Hosono (2011). “Fiscal Sustainability in Japan,” Journal of the
      Japanese and International Economies, 25(4), 434-446.

Tokuoka, Kiichi (2010). “The Outlook for Financing Japan’s Public Debt,” International

       Monetary Fund, Working paper, WP/10/19, January.




                                                 24
Appendix 1. Estimation of aggregate saving rate: 2010-2050

Let sit be the saving per capita in year t for the generation who were born at year i. The
aggregate saving in year t is given by:
                                                 t
                                           St   Nit sit ,
                                                i 0


where Nit is the number of people who were born at year i. Thus, the aggregate saving to GDP
ratio is:
                                 t
                                     Nit
                                N
                           St i  0 t
                                       sit     t
                                                  N                   s
                                            it it , where it  it
                           Yt    Yt / Nt     i 0 Nt               Yt / Nt

Thus, the aggregate saving rate is the weighted average of the generational saving rate measured
as the saving per capita divided by GDP per capita, which we denote as θit. If we have θit and
Nit/Nt, we can calculate the aggregate saving rate for year t.

        We use the data from Family Income and Expenditure Survey to calculate the saving rate
for each age bracket. The survey reports the income and expenditure for 11 age brackets
according to the age of the head of the household: 24 or younger, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-
49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70 or older. The survey covers a sample of households with two
or more members. Thus the survey does not cover single households. The income and
expenditure items are collected for the sample of households whose heads are employees, but
only expenditure items are collected for all other households, which include not only retirees but
also self-employed. Using the tabulation for all the households and another tabulation for the
employee households only, we construct the saving rate in the following way.

       First, we estimate the number of households headed by retirees and the number of
households headed by non-employees (self-employed, farmers, etc.). We have the following
information from the survey for each age bracket.

NT:    Total number of all types of households in the sample
HT:    Average number of household members for all types of households
WT:    Average number of household members who earn income for all types of households
NE:    Total number of employee households in the sample
HE:    Average number of household members for employee households
WE:    Average number of household members who earn income for employee households

Let NR be the number of retiree households and NS be the number of the other households (self-
employed and others). Assuming the proportion of the household members who earn income is



                                                 25
the same for both employee households and other households, but zero for retiree households, we
know:

                                                WE     W
                                  ( NE  Ns )       NT T , and
                                                HE     HT

                                       N E  N S  N R  NT

By solving these, we can calculate NS and NR.

      Next, we calculate the per capita income for each generation by multiplying the average
household income for employee households by N E+NS. The assumption here is that the average
income is the same for both employee households and other non-retiree households. The
consumption for each generation is calculated by multiplying the average consumption for all
households by the number of all sample households.

         Finally, the saving is calculated by subtracting consumption from income for each age
bracket. We estimate the number of people covered by the survey by multiplying the number of
all households and the average number of household members. The saving per capita is
calculated by dividing the saving by this estimated number of people in the survey. The saving
rate relative to GDP per capita is calculated by dividing the saving for each age bracket by the
average income per capita. Figure A1 shows the saving rate for each age bracket calculated in
this way for each year from 2000 to 2010. The number for each age bracket did not change very
much over the decade. We take the average saving rate for each age bracket over a 2000-2010
interval and use that as θit for t [2010, 2050] .

                                          <Figure A1>

       The population weight for each generation is calculated from the mid-point projection by
the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research (IPSS). Figure A2 shows the
population distribution for 2010, 2020, 2030, 2040, and 2050. We can see that the Japanese
population is expected to age rapidly.

                                          <Figure A2>




                                                  26
Appendix 2. A simple overlapping generation model with an unexpected shift in the
population growth rate




We consider a pure endowment economy. A consumer lives for two periods. The consumer
receives endowment W when young, and nothing when old. The amount of endowment does not
change over time (no economic growth). The consumer has access to the storage technology that
transforms one unit of endowment this period to one unit of consumption goods in the next
period.

          Let C(t,1) and C(t, 2) denote the consumption when young and when old respectively of a
consumer who was born at the beginning of the period t. The lifetime utility function is assumed
to be U = u(C(t,1)) + u(C(t,2)). The function is concave and there is no time preference: u’ >0,
u”<0. Population of generation j, denoted by P(j), is assumed to grow at rate g: P(j+1) =
(1+g)P(j).




(1) No intergenerational transfer

Without any government pension program, one can show that the following is the equilibrium
consumption pattern.

          C(t,1) = C(t,2) = W/2 for all t.

The consumer consumes one-half in the first period, saves the rest and consumes it in the second
period. The equilibrium lifetime utility is:

          U* = u(W/2) + u(W/2)




(2) Government social security program

The government imposes the tax τ on the endowment to the young with a promise to pay the
social security benefit (1+r)τ when they retire. The τ can be considered as either social
security tax or the offer of government bonds. The system is Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO): all the
                                                27
tax revenues from (or bond sales to) generation t will be distributed to the retired generation t-1.
This government budget constraint implies (1+g)τ = (1+r)τ, or r=g.




The budget constraint for an individual consumer who was born at the beginning of period t is:

        C(t, 1) + C(t, 2) = (1-τ)W + (1+g)τW

              = (1+τg) W

        Saving is S(t, 1) = (1-τ)W – C(t,1)

The optimal consumption pattern for the individual consumer is calculated by maximizing the
lifetime utility with respect to the consumption pattern subject to the following two constraints.

        C(t,1)+C(t,2) = (1+τg) W        (Individual budget constraint)

         (    )   (1-τ)W        (Financial constraint, an individual cannot borrow against the
future government transfer)

        Given τand g, the optimal individual consumption pattern is:

        (A) C(t, 1)= C(t, 2) = ((1+τg)W)/2,            if (1+τg)/2     (1-τ);

        (B) C(t, 1) = (1-τ)W and C(t,2)=(1+r)τW , if (1+τg)/2 > (1-τ)

So, given g, the complete consumption smoothing (A) is possible if and only if τ            (     ).
If τ is too large, an individual ends up spending more when old than when young, but the
consumer cannot borrow against the future transfer. There is a resource constraint for the
economy as a whole: the government cannot collect more than the endowment. Thus, τ

        Note that the lifetime wealth for an individual consumer is increasing in τ. This implies
that higher τ increases the lifetime utility as long as it is not too large to prevent complete
consumption smoothing. Thus, if the government wants to maximize the lifetime utility of every
generation, it is optimal to set τ = 1/(2+g).

Numerical Example:


                                                  28
Suppose τ=0.3, g=r=0.5. Disposable income (1-τ)W = 0.7W. The equilibrium consumption
is C(t,1)= C(t,2) = 0.575W, and private saving is (1-τ)W –C(t,1) = 0.125W. This can be
sustained forever, and every generation is better off than an original situation of no social
security (C(t,1) = C(t,2) = 0.5W).




(3) Social security going wrong when population stops growing

To get an idea about what happens when the population growth rate declines as in Japan and the
government does not adjust the social security system that was introduced by assuming high
population growth, suppose that at generation t=T, the population growth suddenly stops:

       g0>0 for t = 0, 1, 2, …T, and P(t) = (1+g)P(t-1),

          =0, for t=T+1, T+2, …. ; that is, the P (t) = P(t-1) = P (T).

At time T, the government keeps the promise to generation T-1, to pay r=        by adjusting τ for
generation T:      for t= 0, 1, 2, …, T. Then, the government has to adjust the tax rate on
generation T to:

          = (1+ )        ,

with a promise that they will also receive     (1+ ). To do that, the government has to adjust the
tax rate on generation T+1 to:

          = (1+ )        =(       )

The tax rate has to continue increasing to keep the promise, until τ>1, hitting the wall of the
resource constraint.




Numerical Example:

We start from the sustainable example that we calculated above. τ=0.3, g=0.5. Disposable
income (1-τ)W = 0.7 W. The equilibrium consumption is C(t,1)= C(t,2) = 0.575 W and private
saving is (1-τ)W –C(t,1) = 0.125 W.

                                                   29
Now at T+1, population growth goes to zero, but the government will keep r=0.5. The tax rate
for generation T+1 has to be:

                  (        )        0.45.

The rate continues to increase to keep the untenable promise to the previous generation.

                      (        )

                      (         )

And the social security system will become absolutely unsustainable.




                                               30
Appendix3. Blanchard (1986) model of perpetual use with an unexpected decline in the
population growth rate

This appendix extends the analysis of Appendix 2 using a continuous time version of
overlapping generation model developed by Blanchard (1985). In the model, a consumer faces a
constant probability of death each period. Let p denote this probability of death. By buying an
actuarially fair annuity contract that makes the consumer pay the entire amount of wealth, w,
upon his death, and to receive pw when she survives, the consumer can avoid leaving wealth
behind unintentionally. Thus, Blanchard (1985) derives a well-specified aggregate consumption
function that can be analyzed.

        We add the population growth (or decline) to this model to motivate introduction of a
pay-as-you-go social security system. Let β be the growth rate of population and normalize the
size of population at time t=0 to be one. This can be achieved by setting the size of the new born
at time t to be n=
                 t ( p + β )e β t . The case considered in Blanchard (1985) is a special case where
β=0. It is straightforward to confirm:
         t
        ∫=
                                                           t
         ne dss
                      − p (t − s )
                                           e β s − p (t − s ) 
                                         =                        eβ t
         −∞                                                      −∞


       The individual utility function is assumed to be logarithmic. Since the consumer dies
with probability p each period, she maximizes the following lifetime expected utility function:

                                                           Et  ∫ log c( s, v)e(θ + p )(t −v ) dv  ,
                                                                  ∞
                                                                                                                                      (A3.1)
                                                               t                                

where c(s,v) stands for the consumption at time v, of a consumer born at time s. Assuming the
annuity contract that pays pw as long as the consumer lives and collects w when she dies, the
wealth for the individual evolves as:

                                               dw( s, t )
                                                          =[r (t ) + p ]w( s, t ) + y ( s, t ) − c( s, t ) ,
                                                 dt

where y(s,t) is the consumer who was born at time s receives at time t. Thus, the lifetime budget
constraint is given by:
                                         v                                                  v

                       c( s, v)e ∫t                    dv = w( s, t ) + ∫ y ( s, v)e ∫t
                  ∞                 [ r ( µ ) + p ]d µ
                                     −                                   ∞          − [ r ( µ ) + p ]d µ
              ∫   t                                                         t
                                                                                                         dv ≡ w( s, t ) + h( s, t )   (A3.2)

The human capital, h(s,t) is defined to be the present discount value of the future labor income
earned by an individual who was born at time s. Maximization of (A3.1) subject to (2) yields a
familiar consumption function:

                                                                   ( p + θ ) [ w( s, t ) + h( s, t ) ]
                                                        c ( s, t ) =

                                                                                31
             We can calculate a per capita quantity, which we denote in the uppercase text as:

                                                                            1             t
                                                               X (t ) =
                                                                           eβ t       ∫   −∞
                                                                                               x( s, t )ns e − p (t − s ) ds                                                (A3.3)

      Using this notation:

                                                                        ( p + θ ) [ H (t ) + W (t )]
                                                                 C (t ) =                                                                                                   (A3.4)

      Note that the per capita human wealth, H(t), is given by:

                                                                                                     ∞                                    
                                                                                                                            v
         1 t                                     1                                               t               − ∫ [ r ( µ ) + p ]d µ
          β t ∫−∞                                                                              ∫−∞  ∫t y(s, v)e t
=H (t ) =         h( s, t )ns e − p (t − s ) ds                                                                                         dv  ns e − p (t − s ) ds
        e                                       eβ t                                                                                       
                                                                                      v
                      1          ∞
                                      t y ( s, v)n e − p (t − s ) ds e − ∫t [r ( µ ) + p]d µ dv
                 =
                     eβ t    ∫   t    ∫−∞        s
                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                 t
      Assuming the labor income is distributed equally (y(s,v)=Y(v)) and noting                                                              ∫−∞
                                                                                                                                                     ns e − p (t − s ) ds = e β t

                                                                                                         v

                                                                                          Y (v)e ∫t
                                                                                  ∞                 [ r ( µ ) + p ]d µ
                                                                                                     −
                                                                     H (t ) = ∫                                        dv
                                                                                  t


      Taking the derivative with respect to time, the dynamics of H(t) is given by:

                                                                    dH (t )
                                                          H (t ) ≡         =(r (t ) + p ) H (t ) − Y (t )                                                                  (A3.5)
                                                                     dt

              We introduce a pay-as-you-go social security system to this economy. Let us assume the
      government introduces the system that collects z from every consumer younger than age T. Then,
      the total social security collection at time t is given by:
                             t                                   t
                            ∫t −T zns e ds =        ∫t −T z ( p + β )e
                                                                       β s − p (t − s )
                                       − p (t − s )
                                                                                           ze − pT + β (t −T ) e( β + p )T − 1
                                                                                        ds =                                                                                (A3.6)

      If the per capita benefit paid to the consumers who are older than the age T is q, the total benefit
      payment at time t is given by:
                                            t −T                           t −T
                                        ∫                                ∫ q ( p + β )e
                                                                                        β s − p (t − s )
                                                   qns e − p (t − s ) ds =                                  qe − pT + β (t −T )
                                                                                                         ds =                                                               (A3.7)
                                          −∞                              −∞


      To make this pay-as-you-go social security system sustainable, we can set q and z to satisfy:

                                                              =q z e( β + p )T − 1                                                                                      (A3.8)

              Under this pay-as-you-go system, the present discount value of the net lifetime benefit at
      time t for an individual who was born at time s, b(s,t), is given by:

                                                                                               32
                                        s +T − ∫t ( r ( µ ) + p ) d µ
                                                            v                                v

                                                                       dv + ∫ qe ∫s+T
                                                                                    ∞         − ( r ( µ )+ p ) d µ
                                       − ∫t ze                                    s +T
                                                                                                                   dv t − T < s ≤ t
                           b( s, t ) =                                   v
                                                                                                                                       (A3.9)
                                                                      − ∫ ( r ( µ )+ p ) d µ
                                                            ∞

                                                        ∫t qe           t
                                                                                             dv                         s ≤ t −T

      The net benefit is smallest for the generation that is just born (s=t). Even for this generation, one
      can show the benefit is positive if the growth rate of population exceeds the interest rate (β>r(t)).
      Let us see that for the case where the interest rate is constant. If the interest rate is constant at r,
      the equation (A3.9) is simplified to:

                                                     z − ( r + p )(t +T )    z − ( r + p )t    q − ( r + p )(t +T )
                                    b(t , t=
                                           )             e                −      e          +      e                                  (A3.10)
                                                    r+ p                    r+ p              r+ p

      Substituting (A3.8) into (A3.10), we get:

     z − ( r + p )(t +T )      z − ( r + p )t    z − ( r + p )(t +T ) + ( β + p )T    z − ( r + p )(t +T )
        e       b(t , t=
                       )  −          e        +      e                             −      e
   r+ p                      r+ p               r+ p                                 r+ p
                                                                                                                                      (A3.11)
    z − ( r + p ) t ( β − r )T
=      e           e         − 1
  r+ p

      The expression is greater than zero if β > r.

              The value of benefits per capita, B(t), is defined using (A3.3). For the simple case of the
      constant interest rate, one can show, through a tedious calculation using (A3.8), the per capita
      benefits do not change over time:

                                                                      z p + β ( β − r )T
                                 =B(t )                                        e        − 1                                        (A3.12)
                                                                     r+ p β −r 

             With the introduction of the social security system, the lifetime budget constraint for the
      individual who was born at time s changes to:
                                                                v

                                                  c( s, v)e ∫t
                                              ∞            − [ r ( µ ) + p ]d µ
                                          ∫t
                                                                                dv = w( s, t ) + h( s, t ) + b( s, t )                (A3.13)

      Now an individual maximizes (A3.1) subject to (A3.13). The maximization implies:

                                                             (θ p ) [ w( s, t ) + h( s, t ) + b( s, t ) ]
                                                   c( s, t ) =+

      Or in per capita terms,

                                                        C (t ) =(θ + p ) [W (t ) + H (t ) + B (t ) ]                                  (A3.14)




                                                                                33
        We consider a closed economy version of the model. First, let us look at the case where
the pay-as-you-go social security system is working as it was planned. The government collects
from the young exactly the same amount as they distribute to the old, so there is no revenue
shortfall to finance by issuing government bonds. In this case, the only financial asset that the
individuals hold is the claim against the productive capital. Thus, W=K. Following Blanchard
(1985), let us define the net per capita production function:

                                                 f ( K ) F ( K ,1) − δ K ,
                                                 =                                                           (A3.15)

where δ is the depreciation rate. The dynamics of K is given by:

                                                    =K f ( K ) − C                                          (A3.16)

       The dynamics of the per capita consumption is given by:

                                                    C =
                                                       ( p + θ )( H + K )

because B does not change over time. Using (A3.4), (A3.5), and (A3.16), this is simplified to:

                                               C =(r − θ )C − p ( p + θ ) K                                 (A3.17)

          As Blanchard (1985) showed, the equilibrium can be characterized using a phase diagram
on K-C plane. Noting that the interest rate is determined as the marginal product of capital
( r = r ( K ) and r ′( K ) < 0 ), Figure A3 shows the C = 0 curve and K = 0 curve implied by
(A3.17) and (A3.16).

       The K = 0 curve traces the production function and the C = 0 curve asymptotes toward
K=K* such that r ′( K *) = θ . The model has a unique steady state. The equilibrium path is the
saddle path that goes through the steady state denoted by A in the figure.

       Now suppose the population growth drops at time x and the number of new borns at time
t and after becomes ns = pe β x . When this happens, the population eventually converges to e β x ,
the population at time x. The government starts experiencing a revenue shortfall for the social
security program if the same amount z is collected from all individuals younger than T. For time
t (>x), the revenue shortfall is given by:
                            t
                        ∫       z ( p + β )e β s − pe β x  e − p (t −=  ds ze β x e β (t − x ) − 1
                                                                         s)
                         x


After time x+T, the revenue shortfall will be partially offset by reduced payments since the
smaller cohorts now start receiving benefits. The net revenue shortfall for t (>x+T) is:




                                                                 34
                 t                                                          t −T
             ∫t −T
                     z ( p + β )e β s − pe β x  e − p (t − s ) ds − ∫
                                                                         x
                                                                                   q ( p + β )e β s − pe β x  e − p (t − s ) ds
          = ze β x [e β T − 1]

using (A3.8) again. After time x+T, the net revenue shortfall becomes constant. This suggests
that the smaller collection from the young is exactly offset by the lower payments for the old
cohorts as soon as the smaller cohorts start receiving the benefits.

      Suppose the government finance the revenue short fall by issuing bonds. The
government debt starts to accumulate after time x according to the following dynamics.

                                                    =D rD(t ) + M (t )                                                               (A3.18)

M(t) is the revenue shortfall of the social security system and given by:

                                                  ze β x e β (t − x ) − 1           x ≤ t < x +T
                                                                         
                                       M (t ) =                                                                                      (A3.19)
                                                        βx     βT
                                                                        
                                                 ze e − 1                            t ≥ x +T

Now there are two financial assets: the productive capital (K) and the government debt (D), so
W= K + D . The dynamic equation for the consumption changes to:

                                    C = (r − θ )C − p ( p + θ )( K + D) − ( p + θ ) M                                                (A3.20)

Thus, the C = 0 curve in the phase diagram continues to shift upward as long as the revenue
shortfall exists and the debt accumulates. The dynamic equation for the capital also changes
slightly to:

                                                       K F ( K ) − C − D
                                                       =                                                                              (A3.21)

Now the government debt starts to crowd out the capital. The K = 0 curve in the phase diagram
shifts downward as the debt increases.

       Figure A4 shows a possible change in the steady state and the equilibrium caused by a
sudden decline of fertility and the revenue shortfall. The new steady state is characterized by
lower capital and lower consumption. It is not clear if the new equilibrium path lies above or
below the original equilibrium path. If the new equilibrium path is above the original one, the
consumption momentarily increases following the accumulation of the government debt but
eventually the consumption starts to decline as the capital level falls.

       Although the model explored in this appendix is very different from a mechanical
simulation model that we use in the text, it shows the process where the accumulation of
government debt continues to crowd out the productive capital.


                                                                    35
Figure 1.     Gross Government Debt to GDP ratio


             General government gross financial liabilities
                                                                                       Per cent of nominal GDP
                    Canada
  200               Germany
                    France                                   Japan
                    UK
                    Italy
  150               Japan
                                                                                             Italy
                                                                                                           USA

  100                                               Canada
                                                                     France


                                                                                                     Germany
    50

                                                                         UK
     0
         1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
            Source: OECD Economic Outlook 91 database.
                                                                              File: G7DebtGDP(Dec09)_20120626
                                                                                                                 36
Figure 2.   Net Government Debt to GDP ratio



  160
                General government net financial liabilities
                                                     Per cent of nominal GDP
  140
                                                                                Japan
  120
                                                                                                           Italy
  100

   80

   60                                                                          USA

   40
            France
   20                                                                                                   Germany
                                                UK
                                                                                      Canada
    0
                       Canada        Germany           France       UK          Italy      Japan       USA
   -20
         1990   1992    1994    1996     1998    2000       2002    2004       2006     2008   2010     2012
         Source: OECD Economic Outlook 91 database.
                                                                                 File: G7DebtGDP(Dec09)_20120626
                                                                                                                   37
Figure 3: JGB outstanding amount and JGB interest rate




Source: Ministry of Finance.


                                                         38
     Note:
                                    -3%
                                          -2%
                                                -1%
                                                      0%
                                                           1%
                                                                2%
                                                                     3%
                             2010                                         4%
                             2011
                             2012
                             2013
                             2014




     Authors’ calculation.
                             2015
                             2016
                             2017
                             2018
                             2019
                             2020
                             2021
                             2022
                             2023
                             2024
                             2025
                             2026
                             2027
                             2028
                             2029
                             2030
                                                                               Figure 4. Aggregate Saving to GDP Ratio: 2010-2050




                             2031
                             2032
                             2033
                             2034
                             2035
                             2036
                             2037
                             2038
                             2039
                             2040
                             2041
                             2042
                             2043
                             2044
                             2045
                             2046
                             2047
                             2048
                             2049
                             2050
39
Figure 5. Government Debt and Private Sector Financial Assets: 2010-2040 (2% GDP Growth)

    500%


    450%


    400%
                                                                               Debt1
    350%                                                                       Debt2
                                                                               Debt3
    300%                                                                       MaxDebt1
                                                                               MaxDebt2
    250%
                                                                               MaxDebt3

    200%


    150%
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
            2014
            2015
            2016
            2017
            2018
            2019
            2020
            2021
            2022
            2023
            2024
            2025
            2026
            2027
            2028
            2029
            2030
            2031
            2032
            2033
            2034
            2035
            2036
            2037
            2038
            2039
            2040
  Note:   Authors’ calculation.


                                                                                           40
Figure 6. Government Debt and Private Sector Financial Assets: 2010-2040 (1.05% GDP per worker growth)
 850%


 750%


 650%

                                                                                              Debt/GDP
 550%
                                                                                              Debt2
                                                                                              Debt3
 450%
                                                                                              MaxDebt1

 350%                                                                                         MaxDebt2
                                                                                              MaxDebt3
 250%


 150%
           2010
           2011
           2012
           2013
           2014
           2015
           2016
           2017
           2018
           2019
           2020
           2021
           2022
           2023
           2024
           2025
           2026
           2027
           2028
           2029
           2030
           2031
           2032
           2033
           2034
           2035
           2036
           2037
           2038
           2039
           2040
   Note:   Authors’ calculation.


                                                                                                         41
Figure 7. Government Debt and Private Sector Financial Assets: 2010-2040 (2.09% GDP per worker growth)
   850%



   750%



   650%

                                                                                             Debt/GDP
   550%                                                                                      Debt2
                                                                                             Debt3
   450%                                                                                      MaxDebt1
                                                                                             MaxDebt2
   350%                                                                                      MaxDebt3


   250%



   150%
           2010
           2011
           2012
           2013
           2014
           2015
           2016
           2017
           2018
           2019
           2020
           2021
           2022
           2023
           2024
           2025
           2026
           2027
           2028
           2029
           2030
           2031
           2032
           2033
           2034
           2035
           2036
           2037
           2038
           2039
           2040
   Note:   Authors’ calculation.


                                                                                                         42
Figure 8. Sustainable Tax Policy under Each Interest Rate Assumption

   50%
   49%
   48%
   47%
   46%
                                                                                                                                               sustainable
   45%
                                                                                                                                               tax rate
   44%
   43%
                                                                                                                                               under R1
   42%
   41%
   40%
   39%                                                                                                                                         sustainable
   38%                                                                                                                                         tax rate
   37%                                                                                                                                         under R2
   36%
   35%
   34%
   33%
                                                                                                                                               sustainable
   32%
                                                                                                                                               tax rate
   31%
   30%
                                                                                                                                               under R3
          2010

                 2015

                        2020

                               2025

                                      2030

                                             2035

                                                    2040

                                                           2045

                                                                  2050

                                                                         2055

                                                                                2060

                                                                                       2065

                                                                                              2070

                                                                                                     2075

                                                                                                            2080

                                                                                                                   2085

                                                                                                                          2090

                                                                                                                                 2095

                                                                                                                                        2100
  Note:    Authors’ calculation.


                                                                                                                                                             43
Figure 9.      Debt/GDP Ratio with Sustainable Tax Policy

    280%


    260%


    240%


    220%
                                                                                           Debt/GDP (R1)
                                                                                           Debt/GDP (R2)
    200%
                                                                                           Debt/GDP (R3)

    180%


    160%


    140%
           2010         2020       2030   2040   2050   2060   2070   2080   2090   2100

  Note:    Authors’ calculation.


                                                                                                           44
     Note:
                                                                                    100%




                                    30%
                                          40%
                                                     50%
                                                            60%
                                                                  70%
                                                                        80%
                                                                              90%
                             2010
                             2011
                             2012
                             2013
                             2014
                             2015




     Authors’ calculation.
                             2016
                             2017
                             2018
                             2019
                             2020
                             2021
                             2022
                             2023
                             2024
                             2025
                             2026
                             2027
                             2028
                             2029
                             2030
                             2031
                             2032
                             2033
                             2034
                             2035
                             2036
                             2037
                                                                                           Figure 10. Debt to MaxDebt Ratio with Sustainable Tax Policy




                             2038
                             2039
                             2040
                             2041
                             2042
                             2043
                             2044
                             2045
                             2046
                             2047
                             2048
                             2049
                             2050
                                                R3
                                                           R2
                                                                  R1




45
Figure 11.      Credit Rating


                                                                                   Moody's
            Aaa / AAA                                                              S&P
                                                                                   Fitch
            Aa1 / AA+


              Aa2/ AA


            Aa3 / AA-


               A1 / A+


                A2 / A


                A3 / A-1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Source: Bloomberg.

                                                                                               46
Figure 12.    Event Analysis, downgrade on JGB rate

          panel 1 JGB interest                   panel 2 JGB interest            panel 3. JGB interest
          rate(SP, downgrades)                 rate(Moodys. downgrade           rate(Moodys, including
  0.05                                           and negative watch)                  upgrades)
      0                                 0.15                              0.15
                                         0.1                               0.1
 -0.05                                  0.05                              0.05
                                           0                                 0
  -0.1
                                       -0.05                             -0.05
 -0.15                                  -0.1                              -0.1
                                       -0.15                             -0.15
  -0.2




                                                                                      Panel 6. Yen/Dollar
           Panel 4. Yen/Dollar                     Panel 5. Yen/Dollar
                                                rate(Moodys, downgrade              rate(Moodys, including
          rate(SP, downgrades)                                                            upgrades)
  3
                                                  and negative watch)
                                        0.5                                 3
  2
                                                                          2.5
  1                                       0                                 2
  0                                                                       1.5
                                        -0.5                                1
 -1                                                                       0.5
                                          -1
 -2                                                                         0
                                        -1.5                             -0.5
 -3                                                                        -1
 -4                                       -2                             -1.5




                                                                                                             47
Figure 12 (continued).        Event Analysis, downgrade on JGB rate (continued)

       Panel 7. Nikkei 225 stock     Panel 8. Nikkei 225 stock         Panel 9. Nikkei 225 stock
        prices(SP, downgrade)        prices(Moodys, downgrade          prices(Moodys, including
                                        and negative watch)                    upgrades)
   5
                                      2                            4
   0
                                      0                            2
  -5                                 -2
                                     -4                            0
 -10                                 -6                           -2
 -15                                 -8
                                                                  -4
                                    -10
 -20                                -12                           -6




Note: Author’s calculation.




                                                                                                   48
                                  0
                                      20
                                           40
                                                60
                                                     80
                                                          100
                                                                120




 Source:
                        2003.02
                        2003.05
                        2003.08
                        2003.11
                        2004.02




 Authors’ calculation
                        2004.05
                        2004.08
                        2004.11
                        2005.02
                        2005.05
                        2005.08
                        2005.11
                        2006.02
                        2006.05
                        2006.08
                        2006.11
                        2007.02
                                                                      Figure 13. JGB CDS Spreads: 2003-2011 (Weekly)




                        2007.05
                        2007.08
                        2007.11
                        2008.02
                        2008.05
                        2008.08
                        2008.11
                        2009.02
                        2009.05
                        2009.08
                        2009.11
                        2010.02
                        2010.05
                        2010.08
                        2010.11
                        2011.02
                        2011.05
49
Figure 14. Debt to MaxDebt ratio with reconstruction expenditures

   100%



    90%



    80%
                                                                    With Delayed
                                                                    Tax Increase

    70%
                                                                    With
                                                                    Reconstruction
    60%                                                             Expenses
                                                                    Sustainable

    50%



    40%
           2010
           2011
           2012
           2013
           2014
           2015
           2016
           2017
           2018
           2019
           2020
           2021
           2022
           2023
           2024
           2025
           2026
           2027
           2028
           2029
           2030
           2031
           2032
           2033
           2034
           2035
           2036
           2037
           2038
           2039
           2040
           2041
           2042
           2043
           2044
           2045
           2046
           2047
           2048
           2049
           2050
Source: Authors’ calculation
                                                                                     50
Figure 15.        Debt to MaxDebt ratio with reconstruction and nuclear cleanup expenses
      100%
                                                                                    With Delayed

       90%                                                                          Tax Increase



       80%

                                                                                    With
       70%
                                                                                    Reconstructio
                                                                                    nand Nuclear
       60%                                                                          Cleanup
                                                                                    Expenses
                                                                                    Sustainable
       50%



       40%
              2010
              2011
              2012
              2013
              2014
              2015
              2016
              2017
              2018
              2019
              2020
              2021
              2022
              2023
              2024
              2025
              2026
              2027
              2028
              2029
              2030
              2031
              2032
              2033
              2034
              2035
              2036
              2037
              2038
              2039
              2040
              2041
              2042
              2043
              2044
              2045
              2046
              2047
              2048
              2049
              2050
Note: Authors’ calculation.

                                                                                                    51
Figure A1. Saving Rate by Household Age Bracket

  40%

  30%

  20%
                                                                                                       2000
  10%                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                       2002
   0%
                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                       2004
 -10%
                                                                                                       2005

 -20%                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                       2007
 -30%                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                       2009
 -40%                                                                                                  2010


 -50%

 -60%
          ～ 24歳      25 ～ 29 30 ～ 34 35 ～ 39 40 ～ 44 45 ～ 49 50 ～ 54 55 ～ 59 60 ～ 64 65 ～ 69   70歳 ～

Source: Family Income and Expenditure Survey.
                                                                                                              52
Figure A2. Population Distribution

   25%




   20%




   15%
                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                      2020
                                                                                                                      2030
                                                                                                                      2040
   10%
                                                                                                                      2050




    5%




    0%
           20-24     25-29     30-34     35-39     40-44    45-49     50-54     55-59     60-64       65-69   70-79

Source: National Institute of Population and Social Security Research (IPSS), mid-point projection.
                                                                                                                             53
Figure A3. Equilibrium in a Blanchard (1985) type model

                                    C = 0
               C




                                        A


                                                          K = 0




                                                                   K

                                                                       54
Figure A4. When the government starts running deficits

                           C = 0
               C




                                        A

                             B




                                                   K = 0




                                                            K
                                                                55
Table 1.           Different concepts of Government liabilities
National Liabilities: JGB, Borrowings and                  National and Local Government Longterm                     General Government Gross Liability (National Account
Guarantees as reported to IMF                              liability (to be redeemed by mainly future                 concept)
At the end of March                      ratio to          Forecast for March                           ratio to                                                                   ratio to
                          (Trillion yen)                                            (Trillion yen)                    End of March 2000                           (Trillion yen)
2011                                     GDP               2012                                         GDP                                                                        GDP
Longterm Liability of National Government                  Longterm Liability of National Government                  National Government Liabilities
      JGB                        636.3                             JGB                           668.0                   JGB (+)                                        559
      Zaito Bonds                118.2                             Zaito Bonds (**)     Not included                     Zaito Bonds                           Not included
      Others(*)                   59.1                             Others (*)                      24.0                  Others (*)                                      63
Financing Bills (**)             110.8                     Financing Bills (**)         Not included                     Financing Bills and Discount Bonds(+)          149
Government guarantee              44.7                     Government Guarantee Not included                             Government Guarantee (**)                       54
Total                          969.1         202%          Local, Long-term liabil               200.0                Local liabilities                                 183
GDP(2010)                        479.0                     Total                                892.0      186%       Liabilities in Social Security Fund                15
                                                                                                                      Total                                          1,023 214%
                                                                                                                      (Source) Cabinet Office, Economic and Social Research Institute,
(Source) The Ministry of Finance, homepage                 (Source) The Ministry of Finance, homepage
                                                                                                                      http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/jp/sna/kakuhou/kekka/h21_kaku/h21_kaku
http://www.mof.go.jp/jgbs/reference/gbb/data.htm           http://www.mof.go.jp/jgbs/reference/gbb/data.htm
                                                                                                                      _top.html#c1
                                                           (*) Borrowings for accounts to be distributed to local     (+) Short-term discount bonds are excluded from JGB and included
(*) Others includes government bonds that are                                                                         in Financing bills and discount bonds
                                                           governments (Kofu tax), about 34 trillion yen, is
issues as capital of public entities (Kofu Kokusai)
                                                           categorized in the local liabilities instead of National   (*) Others include borrowings for accounts to be distributed to local
and borrowings
                                                           government liabilities                                     governments (Kofu tax), about 34 trillion yen.

(**) Financing Bills are issued primarily to fund the
                                                           (**) Zaito bonds are not included because they are in
foreign reserves that are held in the special account
                                                           theory repaid from income from government investment;
of the government. They are rolled over every 3
                                                           Financing bills are not incuded because they are short-    (**) Government guarantee includes liabilities at the public agencies
months, and considered to be short-term liabilities
                                                           term, and also they are backed by assets (foreign          (Dokuritsu Gyosei Hojin)
that have assets, that is foreign reserves, to match
                                                           reserves); and gouarantee is not included because they
the liabilities. FBs should be excluded from long-
                                                           are only contingent liabilities.
term liabilities, and from "net" government liabilities.




                                                                                                                                                                                              56
Table 2.         Owners of JGBs
                         2005         March   2006         March   2007         March   2008         March   2009         March   2010         March    2010         Dec

                         tril. Yen (%)        tril. Yen (%)        tril. Yen (%)        tril. Yen (%)        tril. Yen (%)        tril. Yen (%)         tril. Yen (%)

 General Government             2.0    0.3%          7.4    1.1%          3.6    0.5%          2.5    0.4%          2.5    0.4%          1.9     0.3%          2.3    0.3%
 Public Pension              57.6      9.0%       61.5      9.2%       68.3 10.1%           78.1 11.2%           80.1 11.8%           76.3 11.2%            74.8 10.3%
 FILP                        48.8      7.6%       39.4      5.9%       23.9      3.6%       10.9      1.6%          1.2    0.2%          0.8     0.1%          0.8    0.1%
 Postal Saving              109.7 17.1%          126.2 18.9%            140 20.8%              －        －           －        －           －         －           －           －
 Postal Insurance            55.1      8.6%       57.0      8.5%       61.0      9.1%          －        －           －        －           －         －           －           －

 Bank of Japan               92.1 14.3%           86.7 13.0%           71.0 10.6%           63.7      9.2%       55.9      8.2%       51.2       7.5%       58.1      8.0%

 Private Financial
                            218.6 34.1%          218.5 32.7%          216.1 32.1%          439.7 63.3%          441.6 64.9%          464.5 68.1%           502.6 69.1%
 Institutions

     banks                  111.6 17.4%          114.5 17.2%          101.6 15.1%          246.4 35.5%          246.2 36.2%          258.7 37.9%           282.7 38.9%
     insurance               54.8      8.5%       58.4      8.7%       61.8      9.2%      129.2 18.6%          135.1 19.8%          139.9 20.5%           147.0 20.2%
   private pension
                             21.3      3.3%       24.0      3.6%       26.2      3.9%       26.8      3.9%       25.6      3.8%       28.0       4.1%       28.2      3.9%
   funds
     others                  31.0      4.8%       21.6      3.2%       26.5      3.9%       37.3      5.4%       34.7      5.1%       37.9       5.6%       44.7      6.1%
 Overseas                    26.4      4.1%       30.2      4.5%       40.2      6.0%       47.4      6.8%       43.9      6.5%       31.6       4.6%       35.1      4.8%

 Household                   21.8      3.4%       28.0      4.2%       33.4      5.0%       36.3      5.2%       36.0      5.3%       34.4       5.0%       33.0      4.5%
 Others                         9.6    1.5%       12.4      1.9%       15.2      2.3%       16.5      2.4%       19.6      2.9%       21.4       3.1%       20.5      2.8%

 Total                      641.8 100.0%         667.3 100.0%         672.7 100.0%         695.0 100.0%         680.9 100.0%         682.1 100.0%          727.1 100.0%
Source:    Ministry of Finance.
                                                                                                                                                                           57
Table 3. Explaining the JGB yield


  Variable        Gross debt       JGB held by      Net financial wealth    Share of foreign      R square
                  including FILP   Bank of Japan    held by household       holdings of JGBs
                                                    and corporate sectors

  Estimate             0.02             0.01                -0.02                   0.11              0.38

  t-stat              (3.52)***        (0.36)               (-3.37)***             (2.06)**

  Tokuoka (2010) Table II.6

  Notes:     FILP is the government investment program, which used to be in the special account that were funded
             by Postal Bank surplus funds, and later became a part of government bond issues.




                                                                                                                   58
Table 4. History of Demographic Dividend




                               ⊿rGDP =                 ⊿POP +                  ⊿(wPOP /POP) +                      ⊿(rGDP /wPOP)


        1955-1970                 9.70%                  1.00%                          1.03%                              7.77%

        1971-1980                 4.46%                  1.22%                          0.01%                              3.46%

        1981-1990                 4.68%                  0.55%                          0.18%                              3.92%

        1991-2000                 1.06%                  0.27%                          0.10%                              0.69%

        2001-2010                 0.72%                  0.09%                          -0.49%                             1.12%

    Notes: Authors’ calculation. Each row does not exactly add up as the equation suggests, due to approximation in ten-year average growth rates
    Data Source: GDP from Cabinet Office, Japan for GDP; and population from National Institute of Population and Social Security Research




                                                                                                                                                    59
Table 5. Implication of 2% growth


                                  ⊿rGDP =            ⊿POP +                  ⊿(wPOP /POP) +                              ⊿(rGDP /wPOP)

      2011-20                     2.00%               -0.31%                         -0.77%                                      3.09%

      2021-30                     2.00%               -0.62%                         -0.15%                                      2.77%

      2031-40                     2.00%               -0.83%                         -0.68%                                      3.51%

      2041-50                     2.00%               -0.99%                         -0.50%                                      3.49%

  Notes: Authors’ calculation. Each row does not exactly add up as the equation suggests, due to approximation in ten-year average growth rates . ⊿POP and
         ⊿(wPOP/POP) are calculated from forecasts of IPSS, then ⊿(rGDP/wPOP) is assumed to be 2.09%, which was the average of 2001-2007. ⊿rGDP was
         derived from the identity;
  Data Source: GDP from Cabinet Office, Japan for GDP; and population from National Institute of Population and Social Security Research (IPSS).
  Source: Authors’ calculation.




                                                                                                                                                             60
Table 6. Growth per worker productivity at 1.05%

                           ⊿rGDP =               ⊿POP +             ⊿(wPOP /POP) +                         ⊿(rGDP /wPOP)


         2011-20                 -0.04%              -0.31%                       -0.77%                                 1.05%

         2021-30                 0.28%               -0.62%                       -0.15%                                 1.05%

         2031-40                 -0.46%              -0.83%                       -0.68%                                 1.05%

         2041-50                 -0.44%              -0.99%                       -0.50%                                 1.05%

   Notes: Authors’ calculation. Each row does not exactly add up as the equation suggests, due to approximation in ten-year average growth rates .
          ⊿POP and ⊿(wPOP/POP) are calculated from forecasts of IPSS, then ⊿(rGDP/wPOP) is assumed to be 1.05%, which was the average of
          1994-2010. ⊿rGDP was derived from the identity;
   Data Source: GDP from Cabinet Office, Japan for GDP ; and population from National Institute of Population and Social Security Research (IPSS).




                                                                                                                                                     61
Table 7. Per-worker labor productivity increase of 2.09%


                             ⊿rGDP =              ⊿POP +              ⊿(wPOP /POP) +                         ⊿(rGDP /wPOP)

          2011-20              0.98%              -0.31%                      -0.77%                                2.09%

          2021-30              1.30%              -0.62%                      -0.15%                                2.09%

          2031-40              0.55%              -0.83%                      -0.68%                                2.09%

          2041-50              0.57%              -0.99%                      -0.50%                                2.09%

    Notes: Authors’ calculation. Each row does not exactly add up as the equation suggests, due to approximation in ten-year average growth rates .
           ⊿POP and ⊿(wPOP/POP) are calculated from forecasts of IPSS, then ⊿(rGDP/wPOP) is assumed to be 2.09%, which was the average of
           2001-2007. ⊿rGDP was derived from the identity;
    Data Source: GDP from Cabinet Office, Japan for GDP ; and population from National Institute of Population and Social Security Research (IPSS)




                                                                                                                                                      62
Table 8: Changes in Credit Rating Changes

             Moody's               S&P                 Fitch
        Date Change to     Date    Change to   Date     Change to
 1993     5/3   Aaa
 1998    7/23 Watch (-)
        11/17   Aa1
 2000    2/17 Watch (-)                        6/29        AA+
          9/8   Aa2
 2001     9/6 Watch (-)     2/22     AA+       11/26           AA
         12/4   Aa3        11/27     AA
 2002    2/13 Watch (-)     4/15     AA-       11/21       AA-
         5/31    A2
 2007     7/4 Watchi (+)    4/22      AA
        10/11    A1
 2008    6/30   Aa3
 2009    5/18   Aa2
 2011                       1/27     AA-
 2012                                          5/22            A+

(*) 2-notch downgrade
Source: Bloomberg




                                                                    63
