NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRICE THEORY OF MONEY, PROSPERO'S LIQUIDITY TRAP, AND SUDDEN STOP:
BACK TO BASICS AND BACK
Guillermo A. Calvo
Working Paper 18285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18285

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

I wish to express my gratitude to Fernando Alvarez, Sara Calvo, Fabrizio Coricelli, Maurice Obstfeld,
Pablo Ottonello, Juan Carlos de Pablo, Carmen Reinhart, and Aaron Tornell for useful and incisive
comments. I would also like to thank Heriberto Tapia for skillful research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Price Theory of Money, Prospero's Liquidity Trap, and Sudden Stop: Back to Basics and
Back
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 18285
August 2012
JEL No. E31,E41,E44,E58,F31,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
Fiat money contains the seeds of its own destruction. It has no intrinsic value and, yet, it can be exchanged
for valuable consumption and production goods. As Hahn (1965) shows, this situation puts fiat money's
market value or liquidity premium at the brink of collapse. In this paper I will argue that (1) sticky
prices, especially when staggered, provide output backing to fiat money, helping to sustain fiat money's
liquidity premium and, thus, lowering the risk of a liquidity meltdown. I call this view the Price Theory
of Money; (2) fixed-income assets linked to fiat money, especially if they are perceived to have low
counter-party risk (like US Treasury bills, AAA bonds or Asset-Backed Securities) can take advantage
of point (1) to become quasi-moneys; (3) this gives incentives to the private sector to create those assets;
(4) however, unless protected by a Lender of Last Resort, the new assets' liquidity premium can quickly
and massively evaporate in what I call (with a wink to the Bard) a Prospero's Liquidity Trap; (5) the
latter lowers the market value of loan collateral and clogs the credit channel, bringing about a credit
event or Sudden Stop, with severe output and employment consequences.

Guillermo A. Calvo
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th St, Room 1303B
MC3332
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gc2286@columbia.edu

"[...] the fact that contracts are fixed, and wages are usually somewhat stable
in terms of money, unquestionably plays a large part in attracting to money so
high a liquidity-premium" Keynes (1961, Chapter 17, p. 236)

I. Introduction
The subprime crisis shattered old certainties, and is prompting economists to revise the notions
of money and liquidity that were taken for granted. The crisis has brought those issues to the
fore only to make us aware of our astounding ignorance. Monetary theory, for instance,
succeeded in obliterating money from its elegant models (for a discussion see Calvo (2011 b)).
Fortunately, the situation is improving noticeably thanks to a veritable flood of new papers that
attempt to bridge the gap between macro and finance – a task that requires taking more
explicit account of financial issues in macro models, but also requires that finance theory
incorporates principal-agent problems of the sort that became apparent in the course of the
present crisis.1
These notes collect some of my thoughts on these issues. Initially, it was an attempt at compte
rendu, but as the text evolved I realized that the pieces of a puzzle generated by a rich literature
on monetary economics – especially material which is relevant for understanding the current
crisis – did not blend with each other in a smooth and faultless fashion. I found some gaps in
the literature that raised long forgotten or simply disregarded questions, which, when taken
into account, shed new light on topical theoretical and policy issues. That is why the subtitle to
the paper starts with the phrase "back to basics." However, if that was the point of destination
of these notes, they would be of interest to other monks that spend their waking hours splitting
hairs, but hardly anyone else. Fortunately, it turns out that a return from the center of the
earth, still blinded by the bright colors, one can make out patterns that are too vague for the
eye accustomed to the lively and colorful prairie. The current events can be seen under a new
perspective, potentially pregnant with new insights – that is why the subtitle ends with the
words "and back."
The general design of the paper is such that current events are the main motivation and pop up
along the text, but instead of exploring every nook and cranny served to us by those events, I
will attempt to keep the analysis tightly linked to the "basics" in the hope that this will
eventually help us to see the layout of the forest in high definition. But, to ensure that the
1

An avowedly partial list would include Allen (2011), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012), Shin (2010 and 2012), Stein
(2012), Calvo (2005).

analysis does not lose touch with reality, I will occasionally employ the intuitions gathered
underground to address some relevant and/or topical policy issues.
Money and liquidity are concepts that cannot be ignored in any credible narrative of current
events. In fact, the intuition that set me off this route is that money and liquidity are
fundamental for sustaining a modern and increasingly globalized economy, but their own
grounds – their fundamentals if you wish – are extremely flaky. If we continue treating money
and liquidity as if they were regular "goods," we run the risk of repeating the same mistakes
that led us to the current crisis. Thus, I will start by discussing a basic question that has
bedeviled economists for many years and that, perhaps out of frustration, the profession tends
to ignore, namely, What makes money valuable in terms of output? A satisfactory answer to
this question must precede any serious attempt to explain financial crisis that exhibits a major
liquidity component.
Hahn (1965) threw a wrench into monetary theory by showing that, if you take your theory
seriously, a barter equilibrium cannot be easily ruled out. In this paper I argue that standard
answers to the riddle leave a lot to be desired, and put forward a conjecture that has strong
support in price-setting mechanisms in modern economies (especially in retailing and labor
markets). I am referring, in particular, to nominal price/wage stickiness. Under nominal
stickiness suppliers broadcast, far and wide, their willingness to take fiat money in exchange for
the wares and services they own. Moreover, they reaffirm their willingness to do so over
extended stretches of time (consider labor contracts in non-inflationary economies, for
example). I will christen this approach the Price Theory of Money (PTM). 2
No doubt, government support in the form of legal-tender regulations and requirements to
defray taxes in fiat money, provide further anchors, but price-setting validates the output worth
of fiat money over the whole expanse of the market, and on a regular, even boring, basis. This
leads me to surmise that price/wage stickiness can do the job even though government's
buttressing is completely absent. True, a full rationale for this conjecture should be able to
identify the factors behind that peculiar way of posting prices and wages. We are still not there
yet, which forces the analysis to take price-setting mechanisms as axioms, determined outside
the model. However, a strong appeal of the PTM is that price/wage stickiness has a strong
empirical support and, perhaps more to the point, that the conventional approach in monetary
theory also relies on assumptions that are ad-hoc in the context of the standard general
equilibrium model (which is grounded on utility and production functions), and that, as shown
in Hahn (1965), the conventional approach is seriously incomplete. Price stickiness, blamed by
2

A germ of this approach can be found in the General Theory. See quotation at the outset.

1

macroeconomists for mass unemployment, can now raise its head in triumph as the savior of
money, nothing less!
Under this optic, for example, one can start answering questions that are high in the public
policy debate. For example, will the euro survive the onslaught of current crisis? The PTM
suggests that, in addition to the EU willingness to keep the euro circulating, its survival may
depend on whether a significant share of European firms and individuals keep posting their
prices in terms of euro. Under those circumstances, and unless fiscal deficits become rampant,
the euro could still hold its own as a reserve currency even though the EU economy dives into
deep recession.3 On the other hand, the ever-present candidate for making a stellar comeback,
i.e., gold, may not succeed in debunking the US dollar, for example, unless gold becomes a unit
of account and, more to the point, a substantial share of prices and wages are quoted in terms
of gold.
Moreover, under this perspective, factors that reduce price stickiness may make fiat money less
"safe" in terms of output.4 Floating exchange rates is a case in point. Financial crises in
Emerging Market economies (EMs) in the 1990s led the IMF and the Washington establishment
to conclude that floating exchange rates should be the choice system for EMs. The basis for
this conclusion is highly debatable, starting from the fact that floating exchange rates are highly
unpredictable (see, e.g., Mussa (1990)). The PTM sheds further doubts on floating exchange
rates, especially if the currency in question does not have global acceptability as a medium of
exchange. I will argue that this may help to give a fundamental rationale for Fear of Floating
(see Calvo and Reinhart (2002)). But, in addition, I will show that if the central bank conducts
monetary policy by employing as an instrument a short-term interest rate and agents are
subject to short-sale constraints, the economy may display multiple equilibriums even though
Hahn’s problem can be ruled out – a fact, by the way, that has not been sufficiently emphasized
in conventional theory.
Fiat money helps to lay the groundwork for payments systems. Means of payments are assets
that help to settle trade and financial obligations. Holders of these assets are, of course,
attentive to their rates of return, but the primary reason for holding these assets is to carry out
3

Borrowing Krugman (2012, chapter 12) neologism – Eurodämmerung might see Europe's high columns and artful
friezes collapse, but euro coins could still be able to shine brightly and unpolluted under the sun, like in the opera!
4

Henceforth, I will somewhat imprecisely employ the word "safe" to indicate assets whose output price are
relatively stable and predictable for a significant set of market agents. This does not rule out assets which output
prices are expected to change over time before expiration, as long as they are highly predictable. Safe assets play
a key role as credit market collateral (see Gorton et al (2012)), an issue that will be discussed in Section IV.

2

"payments" or "transactions." In contrast with standard general equilibrium theory, in real-life
markets the act of "paying" could be very costly, because the payee needs to be able to assess
the market value of the payment instrument. The cost of assessing the market value of a means
of payment can easily overwhelm its rate of return. Therefore, as stressed by Gorton et al
(2012), dominant means of payments tend to be information-insensitive. Fiat money with a
stable output value is a paradigmatic example. Moreover, if fiat money is firmly anchored on
output, it makes it possible to create other means of payment linked to fiat money, e.g., fixedincome assets like short-term bonds and repos denominated in fiat money. New banking
practices have extended the payments system across the world and beyond standard devices
(see Gorton and Metrick (2010), Shin (2012)). Moreover, I will argue that a nascent means of
payment that gradually spreads across sectors and economies may get extra real backing,
beyond that provided by price stickiness: just the expectation that new pockets in the economy
will start employing the new instrument makes the latter more reliable means of payment in
real terms. This implies, somewhat paradoxically, that, as the market for the new instruments
mature and reaches a plateau, their perceived output backing declines, and the instruments
become more vulnerable to runs – which suggests, incidentally, that a possible reason why the
dotcom crisis was just a hiccup, while the subprime carried major consequences was that
“shadow banking” was much more mature in 2007 than in 2001.
Even though fiat money is well anchored to output, this does not preclude assets linked to fiat
money to be subject to runs. This is a fact amply evidenced by a large number of bank-run
episodes along financial history. A bank run destroys liquidity. It is a supply-side destruction of
liquidity that is per se conducive to an excess demand for liquidity, making the reduced-form of
a bank run observationally equivalent to a Keynes's Liquidity Trap, which is a demand-side
phenomenon. However, a bank run is different from the latter and, more importantly, it has
radically different policy implications than a Keynes's Liquidity Trap. Thus, to avoid confusion, I
will coin a new term (with a wink to the Bard): Prospero's Liquidity Trap – defined as a massive
collapse in the nominal price of a significant number of means of payments. Moreover, I will
require that the trap does not result from mischievous animal spirits but is, instead, fully
consistent with rationality.5 Drawing on previous work (e.g., Calvo (2012)), I will argue that a
Prospero's Liquidity Trap has effects on relative prices and, thus, real wealth (which helps to
rationalize the current safe-asset shortage, recently highlighted in IMF (2012), Barclays (2012)).
In particular, it undermines the (output) safety of loan collaterals and, as a result, lowers credit
5

Mischievous animal spirits misguide, rational animal spirits coordinate a true, although possibly "bad,"
equilibrium. Hence, rational animal spirits "live" in models displaying multiple equilibriums. To "kill" them, all
policymakers have to do is to generate conditions that rule out equilibrium multiplicity, ideally only keeping the
"good" equilibrium.

3

flows. This is the point at which Wall Street and Main Street enter into contact. The decline in
credit flows has an immediate effect on output and employment, which cannot be easily
undone, unless, in an act of improbable magnanimity, Prospero restores liquidity illusion, or the
government can replace lost liquidity with a sufficiently large infusion of new safe assets (e.g., a
swap of "toxic assets" for base money, a form of Quantitative Easing).
I will start the paper in Section II with a discussion of Hahn's problem for fiat money. I will
argue that the problem is not confined to fiat money, it also holds for commodity money (e.g.,
gold), and show that 19th century bank notes were an early form of Asset-Backed securities. In
Section III, which contains the most innovative part of the paper, I will argue that staggered
prices and gradual monetization could help to reinforce the output value of money, thereby
enhancing other fixed-income financial assets in their role as means of payments – the central
insight of the Price Theory of Money. Section III will also show that floating exchange rates may
weaken money's output anchor and, realistically, increase exchange rate volatility or sheer
indeterminacy. In Section IV I will show how money that is firmly anchored to output can help
to open up the credit channel, but at the cost of increasing the severity of Prospero's Liquidity
Trap. The latter, in turn, may abruptly close the credit gates and generate a Sudden Stop
episode (see Calvo et al (2008)). I will argue that fixing this situation calls for heterodox policies
in order to bring about a fast and effective reopening of the credit channel. Compared to that,
fiscal expansionary policy may be a temporary palliative, but its effect on the credit channel is
indirect, and likely feeble and time consuming. The paper is closed in Section V (which can be
read right after this section without loss of continuity) with some highly speculative reflections
on the international monetary system. An Appendix presents some empirical evidence on a
phenomenon central to the paralysis of the credit channel in the current crisis, namely, the
massive destruction of "safe" assets.
II. Hahn's Problem
The value of money in terms of goods is an issue that has troubled economists since they
attempted to integrate money into the classical theory of value. Macroeconomists have dealt
with this issue by taking shortcuts like including money in the utility function (e.g., Patinkin
(1965)), or assuming that expenditure is subject to a Clower-Lucas cash-in-advance constraint
(e.g., Lucas (1980)). However, as pointed out in Hahn (1965), these tricks may not be enough to
prevent the existence of barter equilibrium in which money has zero value.
To illustrate, consider the case of fiat money, e.g., dollar bills, that has no intrinsic output value,
i.e., such that if, say, dollar bills are no longer accepted as medium of exchange (MOE), their
equilibrium market value in terms of output would be nil. Let M and Q denote, respectively,
the stock of dollar bills and the price of M in terms of output, i.e., the inverse of the price level.
4

Assume that the utility of money in terms of output (or real monetary balances) is separable
from the utility of goods and denoted by v(MQ);6 function v is defined and twice differentiable
on the non-negative real line, strictly concave, and v'(0) > 0. I further assume that v(0) > -,
and lim v'(MQ) <  as MQ  0. The latter – which I will call "anti-Inada conditions" – are
technical assumptions that have substantive implications, though, as will become apparent in
the ensuing discussion.
Under these conditions, it trivially follows that there is an equilibrium solution in which the
output value of fiat money is zero, i.e., Q = 0. This is so because if Q = 0, then MQ = 0,
independently of M. Thus, money becomes useless as a MOE and, since there is not cost in
holding or disposing of M, the demand for money is undetermined and could be equal to any
non-negative number; in particular, setting M = supply of M shows that equilibrium in the
money market can be achieved for Q = 0. Since the utility of money is separable, equilibrium in
the real side of the economy is invariant to money market conditions (i.e., money superneutrality holds) and, thus, general equilibrium can be ensured by standard general-equilibrium
assumptions in non-monetary models. Note that this result is very general and does not rely on
super-neutrality (see Hahn (1965)). However, anti-Inada conditions are essential for the proof
because if, for instance, lim v(MQ)  - as MQ  0, barter equilibrium would be ruled out by
assumption. Inada conditions are typically assumed in the literature to simplify the analysis by
ruling out corner solutions. They are not intended to rule out relevant equilibrium solutions, as
it would be the case if assumed in the present instance. In the present context, Inada
conditions would be much like saying that fiat money has positive output value in equilibrium
because a situation in which fiat money loses its effectiveness as a MOE would be
"unthinkable" – or, more to the point, saying that fiat money has positive output value in
equilibrium because its value cannot possibly be zero – a vacuous proposition.
The output price of fiat money, Q, can be identified with what Keynes in the quotation at the
outset calls "liquidity premium," i.e., the difference between the market output value of fiat
money and its intrinsic value (= 0 in this case). Thus, Hahn's problem can be rephrased by
saying that there is an equilibrium in which the liquidity premium of fiat money equals zero
(and the economy reverts to barter).
Note that Hahn's problem, despite its simplicity, involves deep issues linked to the fact that fiat
money is a MOE. If fiat money was a regular good, then we would write its utility as v(M),

6

In the literature MQ is usually identified with "real monetary balances."

5

excluding its price, Q, from the utility function;7 in which case, and as a general rule, the
demand for M would be positive, and possibly unbounded, if its relative price Q = 0. Therefore,
Q = 0 would, in general, not be consistent with equilibrium in the money market.
Fiat money is a useful instrument on which to focus the discussion about liquidity premium, but
the result that its output price could be zero in equilibrium may be hard to swallow on
"realism" grounds, since it is not easy to find examples in which the price of fiat money is
suddenly driven down to zero. There are several post-WWI dramatic hyperinflation episodes in
which the value of fiat money was positive until monetary reform was implemented. At that
point, the unwieldy currency was substituted by a more stable alternative, but this occurred in
coordination with government, not as a result of the market autonomously shifting to the zeroprice equilibrium.
However, Hahn's problem is not confined to fiat money. Consider the case of gold, for
example. Let Q and q denote the output price of gold as a MOE, e.g., gold coins, and for
consumption (e.g., jewelry), respectively. Assuming that gold can be transformed into these
two applications on a one-to-one basis, i.e., one ounce of gold as a MOE can be transformed
into one ounce of gold for jewelry at no cost, then, if gold is simultaneously used for both
applications, we have Q = q in equilibrium. But Q = 0 could also be consistent with equilibrium.
For, under those circumstances, individuals will have no incentive to use gold as a MOE and, as
in the case of fiat money, the marginal utility of gold for MOE purposes is zero, making demand
for gold as MOE equal to zero.8 If Q = 0, the price of gold for consumption q will likely fall
relative to its value when gold is also used as a MOE but it will not be zero, i.e., gold will display
a positive intrinsic value. This shows that when gold is used as a MOE it may exhibit a positive
liquidity premium even though, unlike fiat money, its intrinsic output value is positive.9
History shows that gold gave rise to other "liquid" assets. US banks in the 19th century, for
example, were able to issue bank notes partially backed by gold. These notes are an early
example of Asset-Backed securities. The sustainability of those notes was partially ensured by
7

Goods which prices also enter utility functions are sometimes called "status" goods. However, money, as usually
modeled, would not rank as a status good if, in addition, it is required that its demand increases with its relative
price. Consider Cagan's demand for money: M = exp(-αi)/Q, were parameter α > 0, and i is the nominal interest
rate. Clearly, the demand for M falls with its price Q.
8

Unlike the case of fiat money, the demand for gold as a MOE is zero if the marginal utility of gold consumption is
positive.
9

Notice that q < Q implies that the whole stock of gold will be utilized as MOE. This equilibrium is also possible but
adds nothing to the discussion in the text and will, thus, be skipped.

6

the law of large numbers which, under normal circumstances, ensured a stable demand for
those notes; however, they were subject to runs and loss of market value, much as in the case
of Hahn's problem. These runs and associated disruptions in the credit market are very much
like the problems encountered in the current crisis, as will be discussed later on in this note.
Legal Tender and Taxes. An objection to the relevance of Hahn's problem is that it is common
for national fiat monies to be "legal tender," i.e., mandatory MOE within national boundaries.
There is no doubt that legal tender regulations must make the Q > 0 equilibrium more resilient,
but it is unlikely for this regulation to prevent the private sector from employing the national
fiat money as a unit of account and holding another asset, e.g., gold, to carry out future
payments. In the limit, this would drive Q to zero, because the demand for fiat money would
be nil. In practice, however, equilibrium Q is likely to be positive but, given that stocks would
be held for regulatory reasons, demand could be highly volatile, particularly if other highly
liquid assets are available (giving rise to "currency substitution," which will be later discussed in
this note). Thus, Q would be subject to unstable probability distributions and large variations,
unless the government fixes its exchange rate vis-à-vis another stable currency, for example.
The latter, by the way, could result in a stable real value of fiat money but it does not invalidate
Hahn's problem, because the value of money would be derived from anchoring to a stable
liquid asset with positive output value. Q unpredictability undermines fiat money as a MOE.
Therefore, although legal tender might help to overcome Hahn's problem, it presents us with
an equally disturbing, and certainly more realistic, problem which, for lack of a better name, I
will call Hahn's Knightian problem, in reference to Knight (1971). I should clarify that the
volatility that I am referring to here, is not the normal price volatility that characterizes an
efficient market economy. My focus is on volatility provoked by cracks in the market
mechanism due to factors having to do with market regulations, and the difficulty in
anticipating or hedging against those factors, and that seriously undermines fiat money as a
MOE.10
Fiat money's positive output value can also be buttressed by requiring taxes to be paid in terms
of fiat money. However, Starr (1974) shows that this condition is not enough to rule out a zero
output price of fiat money, even if it is declared legal tender and, still more relevant, the price
of money is assumed to be the same for defraying taxes or buying goods. If the latter
assumption is dropped, a situation akin to the zero-price equilibrium might arise. To illustrate,
consider the case in which taxes in terms of fiat money are /q, where  is a positive parameter
and q is the output value of fiat money when it is exclusively employed for defraying taxes. If
10

I am thankful to Fernando Alvarez and Aaron Tornell for highlighting the importance of distinguishing between
these types of volatilities.

7

taxes are the only reason for holding fiat money, we have, in equilibrium, that money supply M
= /q; hence, the price of money q = /M > 0, if M > 0. But if fiat money is also employed as a
MOE, quite possibly its output price, denoted by Q, exceeds q, i.e., Q > q. The liquidity premium
would be Q – q > 0 = liquidity premium if, otherwise, money is only accepted for defraying
taxes. Therefore, as in Hahn's problem, the model displays a barter equilibrium in which fiat
money is only used for paying taxes, and a true monetary equilibrium in which, in addition,
money is held for other private sector transactions.11
Finally, legal tender requirements are much harder to implement for international transactions.
Nothing, in principle, prevents international traders to invoice and make payments in US dollar,
euro or yen.
III. Anchoring Money: Staggered Prices
The central implication of Hahn’s problems is that the output price of fiat money could be zero
or volatile in an unpredictable way, which seriously imperils the functionality of fiat money as
MOE.12 The situation might be substantially different if the private sector posted prices (and
wages) in terms of M, held on to those prices for some period of time, and was prepared to
accommodate supply to demand to ensure equilibrium in the output market. This is the
framework assumed in popular New Keynesian monetary models (e.g., Woodford (2003)).
Under those circumstances, it is clear that Q > 0 is more likely to hold in equilibrium, because
(1) suppliers would be indicating, through the price-setting mechanism, and around the clock,
that they are willing to take fiat money in exchange for their produce at preannounced prices,13
and (2) prices are set in a milieu where a large number of prices are predetermined in terms of
fiat money and, hence, the chances of all prices being set in terms of another unit of account
would be negligible, at least in the short run. Moreover, staggered pricing helps to prevent
Hahn's Knightian problem. To see this, notice that if, contrariwise, all prices are simultaneously
11

Notice the parallels between this discussion and the gold example presented above.

12

Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983 and 1986) show that a zero output price on money (and hyperinflation) could be
ruled out if the central bank sets a lower bound to the output value of total money supply (= 1 peanut, say).
However, this result relies on assuming Inada conditions. If, instead, anti-Inada conditions hold, Q = 0 would still
be consistent with general equilibrium. Suppose Q = 0. Then, individuals would gladly go to the government's
warehouse and exchange M for one peanut. The supply of M will now be nil, but this will cause no excess demand
for fiat money because the latter serves no useful purpose – and equilibrium prevails.
13

This makes this case radically different from the peanut example in previous footnote, in which the government
accepts fiat money in exchange for output (one peanut), given that the government announcement does not
ensure that the private sector is willing to follow suit.

8

set for one period, say, the equilibrium one-period-ahead Q could be highly volatile (and even
zero).
This discussion suggests that price stickiness may play an important role that has so far not
been duly acknowledged in the literature, namely, providing a real or output anchor for money.
I believe that an appropriate label for this approach would be the Price Theory of Money (PTM),
and that the protean Mr. Keynes should be given some credit for the idea (see quotation at the
outset). The PTM attaches a role to price setting which is sharply different from that in
conventional theory. In conventional closed-economy theory, for example, money is seen as a
nominal anchor for prices, and sticky prices as a nuisance that makes it difficult to achieve fullemployment equilibrium.14 However, the two approaches are complementary to one another.
Combining the PTM with standard monetary theory suggests that there might be a tradeoff
between the stability of fiat money in real terms and the speed with which the economy
restores full-employment equilibrium. An economy bereft of nominal flexibility may offer a
strong real anchor to fiat money, but it might be ill-suited to accommodate large changes in
relative prices – while an economy that displays a high degree of nominal flexibility might be illsuited to withstand severe challenges to the output value of its currency.
The role of nominal stickiness in buttressing the real value of money is not taken into account in
conventional monetary theory. In the canonical model, for example, the demand for money is
assumed to be a function of the nominal interest rate and consumption. The degree of nominal
stickiness is completely ignored. Thus, for instance, a shift from fixed to floating exchange rates
has no effect on the demand for domestic money, even though floating exchange rates remove
some of domestic money's output anchor (see next subsection for further discussion).
Moreover, inflation itself could weaken the output anchor, since the frequency of price changes
appears to increase with higher inflation (see Alvarez et al (2011)), which, arguably, lowers
money's output backing. This effect goes beyond what is accounted for by the conventional
link between inflation and the demand for money, and helps to explain why, after an
inflationary spike, the demand for money fails to recover even though inflation goes back to
pre-spike levels. 15

14

New Keynesian models determine future prices by manipulating a short-run interest rates subject, for instance,
to a Taylor rule, but still sticky prices are a roadblock to full employment.
15

I am thankful to Carmen Reinhart for this observation. Uribe (1997) offers a complementary rationale for
money-demand hysteresis, which does not rely on price stickiness, and instead focuses on currency substitution
and network effects.

9

The PTM is not a theory for all seasons. It may be highly powerful for crisis-free, low volatility
periods, like the Great Moderation, but it may fail in economies undergoing bankruptcies and
institutional instability. More research is necessary to establish these limits. Nevertheless, the
mere consideration of these issues already suggests that easy money policy – a currently
widespread policy stance in advanced economies and some EMs – could be helpful in triggering
recovery from a slump or even finance the fiscal deficit under low inflation conditions, but it
may suddenly snap and send the economy into an inflationary tailspin.16
Subject to the above caveats, I believe that price stickiness is a very appealing explanation for
the positive output value of fiat money, because it involves a substantial number of decision
makers who are ready to exchange their riches for intrinsically worthless script. Tax collectors
may guarantee a positive price of fiat money but, if that is all there is, Hahn's Knightian problem
may prevail, and monetary policy is likely to be largely inconsequential. PTM does not replace
the conventional approach (i.e., the monetary theory of the price level), but it helps to
reinforce the latter's weak micro-foundations, as clearly shown in the discussion about Hahn's
problems.17
Gradual Adoption of a MOE. Consider a "gradual monetization" episode in which fiat money is
not adopted as a MOE by everybody at the same time, but its use as a MOE gradually spreads
across different agents and regions in the economy. A possible scenario is the case in which fiat
money is adopted first in a large urban center, and agents living outside that center learn about
its use as a MOE as they get in touch with the center or, eventually, through agents outside the
center who have adopted the fiat money as a MOE. If the process is anticipated by agents
located at the center, will that make Hahn's problems less likely? This question cannot be
answered without a model (a task that falls outside the scope of these notes; for some steps in
that direction, see Calvo (2011 b)), but let me start the discussion with some intuitive remarks.
If agents at the center expect that new entrants will be willing to hold fiat money in exchange
for goods, they will likely feel more secured that fiat money will exhibit a positive output value.
The new-entrants' effect is somewhat similar to price setting, except that it works on the
16

This phenomenon appears to have played a role in Germany's hyperinflation after WWI. Right after the war
speculators expected that the Mark would display sharp appreciation, which led to an expansion in the demand for
Marks around the world. It allowed the government to finance the fiscal deficit without causing a major rise in the
rate of inflation. This idyllic period came to an abrupt end, after which inflation reached unprecedented heights
(see Bresciani-Turroni (1937), Mendershausen (1957)).
17

The microfoundations literature on the demand for money offers interesting insights, like the existence of
potential multiple units of account and associated MOEs; see, e.g., Menger (1892), Kiyotaki and Wright (1989).
The PTM and the conventional macro approaches do not help to overcome the fundamental equilibrium
multiplicity problem, but suggest factors that help to, or detract from, anchoring a MOE, once it is established.

10

demand side, not the supply side, of the fiat money market. This issue is interesting because
fiat money has given rise to quasi-monies with much the same characteristics as fiat money, a
phenomenon that has taken flight thanks to the breakdown of Bretton Woods in early 1970s,
and financial innovation in the last twenty odd years (these topics will be taken up in Section V).
Conceivably, the adoption of the new techniques and instruments, e.g., mortgage-backed
securities, took time to spread across the economy. Hence, their gradual adoption may have
strengthened the real anchor of the new fiat-money denominated financial instruments.
However, once markets for these new assets mature, the flow of new entrants declines, which
may undermine their safety as MOE, a phenomenon that may help to explain that Prospero's
Liquidity Traps pop up long after the new assets have been created. More concretely, this
effect may help to rationalize the fact that the dotcom crisis was much less severe than the
subprime crisis: conceivably assets associated with "shadow banking" were much more mature
in 2007 than in 2001.
The conjecture is also relevant for gradual capital-inflow episodes in EMs, as argued in Calvo
(2011 b). Savvy investors will be encouraged to keep on expanding those inflows due to the
perception that there is a queue of potential investors after them. However, when the
adjustment process comes to an end, gravitational forces become weaker and the chances of a
credit episode may go up.
Floating Exchange Rates. From the PTM perspective, floating exchange rates weaken the
output backing of local fiat money, especially for fiat monies that are not invoice currencies in
international transactions,18 like national EM fiat monies. Exchange rates have a direct impact
on local currency prices of (internationally) tradable goods. Thus, floating exchange rates
remove some of the "stickiness" in tradable good prices in terms of local fiat money which, in
line with the PTM, helps to explain the large number of EMs in which foreign currencies
circulate side by side with local fiat money, a phenomenon called "currency substitution."19 A
complementary reason for currency substitution is that, as a general rule, those foreign
currencies are reserve currencies, i.e., fiat monies that, compared to EM currencies, are seen as
having a strong global output backing.

18

Notice, however, that invoice currencies in international transactions, like the US dollar, get some output
backing à la PTM due to the invoicing mechanism.
19

See Calvo and Vegh (1996) for a discussion of Currency Substitution, and IMF (1999) for a discussion of monetary
policy in dollarized economies. Here I emphasize the Transactions Motive, but currency substitution has also
implications for the Store of Value and Speculative Motives for holding money.

11

Nevertheless, as long as a substantial share of prices are set in terms of domestic fiat money,
Hahn's zero-price problem may be ruled out. Not so Hahn's Knightian problem, though –
particularly if foreign currencies play a large role as MOE (for case studies, see IMF (1999)).
Therefore, it is not surprising to see that central banks in EMs have accumulated substantial
amounts of International Reserves in order to attenuate the effects of a run on local currency,
especially after the 1990s systemic financial crises. It should be noted, though, that
International Reserves put a damper on exchange rate volatility, giving rise to Fear of Floating,
i.e., a situation in which the government intervenes, directly or indirectly, in the foreign
exchange market to keep the domestic currency within relatively narrow bands, see Calvo and
Reinhart (2002).20 Therefore, a floating exchange rate regime may produce its own antibodies
that attenuate exchange rate volatility and push the system back to some form of exchange
rate pegging. The PTM helps to rationalize this outcome as an attempt to ensuring a stable
output price of national fiat money (or stable Q, in our notation).
Exchange rate pegging is an example in which, given the tradeoff between flexibility and
stickiness mentioned in the Introduction, the latter is given the upper hand. Unfortunately,
pegging is not trouble-free, as the large literature on Exchange-Rate Stabilization programs
testifies (see, e.g., Calvo and Végh (1999)).
Floating Exchange Rates and Inflation Targeting.21 Another reason for Fear of Floating that is
worth highlighting is that a monetary policy instrument that has become increasingly popular,
namely, some short-term interest rate, may prove to be a weak nominal anchor if the system is
subject to lack of credibility (for details, see Calvo (2006 and 2007)). Moreover, even if
credibility or Hahn's problems are not critical issues, an interest-rate anchor may become
ineffective if capital markets are less than perfect. I will illustrate this point by focusing on the
realistic case in which individuals are subject to short-sale constraints, a common financial
market imperfection.
Consider, for example, a New Keynesian representative-individual model in which the central
bank sets a one-period policy interest rate, denoted by i, at which the private sector can lend
to, but it is not allowed to borrow from, the public sector. The latter is a simple way to capture
the short-sale constraint. Assuming perfect foresight and that the international one-period
interest rate equals zero, we have that at an interior equilibrium the following interest-rateparity condition must hold:
20

The word Fear is prompted by the fact that many economies exhibiting the phenomenon identify themselves as
"Free Floaters." Thus, these "floaters" could be claimed to be "peggers in the shadows."
21

This section can be skipped without loss of continuity.

12

(1)
where E stands for the price of "foreign exchange" in terms of domestic currency. Equation (1)
states that at an interior equilibrium the one-period interest rate must be equal to the expected
rate of devaluation. However, under the short-sale constraint, a rate of devaluation that is
larger than interest rate i might also be consistent with equilibrium. Clearly, if i is less that the
expected rate of devaluation, individuals will dump their one-period public debt holdings in
favor of foreign bonds. This may also involve lowering money holdings, but this is no problem
because the central bank would be ready to sell public bonds (which the representative
individual will quickly exchange for foreign bonds) for domestic currency. Finally, the larger
devaluation might change the demand for nontradables but, again, that is no problem in a
conventional staggered-prices context because supply is demand-determined. Therefore, the
interest rate instrument would stop being effective, because at a corner solution the market
interest rate will be equal to the expected rate of devaluation which, by assumption, exceeds i.
For further illustration, consider a model in which the central bank follows a Taylor rule, relies
entirely on the interest rate as an instrument and, as a result, stationary equilibrium is
dynamically unstable (see Galí and Monacelli (2005), Calvo (2007)). If equilibrium solutions are
constrained to be interior paths, then the stable manifold is the unique equilibrium. However,
if corner solutions cannot be ruled out, as in the above example, one can easily show that there
are rational equilibriums in which the real exchange rate steadily appreciates for a while, away
from the stationary manifold, until it reaches a point in time in which the currency suffers an
anticipated devaluation that brings the system back to the stationary equilibrium. Individuals
cannot take advantage of this arbitrage opportunity because they are subject to short-sale
constraints.
I picked this example, among many others, because this kind of phenomenon has been
repeatedly observed in EMs during capital-inflow episodes that ended in major devaluation.
Not surprisingly, then, many seasoned EM policymakers resort to foreign exchange intervention
when their currencies show clear signs of misalignment. Anticipation of foreign exchange
intervention may help to constraint the set of equilibriums, providing another rationale for Fear
of Floating in the context of conventional monetary policy. It is worth pointing out that, to
avoid burdening the private sector with additional policy uncertainties, it might be preferable
that the government announces that it will intervene in the foreign exchange market in case of
serious exchange rate misalignment.

13

IV. Payment System: From Safe Money to Safe Credit to Sudden Stop, and After
The payment system is at the heart of a modern economy. Payment instruments are, as a
general rule, not goods that go directly into utility or production functions. The quintessential
payment instrument is fiat money, especially when it displays a strong output anchor and is
subject to a low rate of inflation. To underline the existence of these features, I will label it
"safe fiat money." Modern economies employ other payment instruments that share some of
money's safety features, e.g., government-guaranteed bank deposits, Treasury bills, AAA bonds,
fixed-income securities, which payoff is specified in terms of money. Their prices may vary in
response to, for instance, changes in the rate of interest, but at each point in time they have a
well-defined market price and are largely free from counterparty or idiosyncratic risk. Table 1
in the Appendix shows an estimate of safe assets derived from Barclays (2012). These assets
can be employed to settle accounts or to back up other payment instruments that would
otherwise not be deemed safe, e.g., a personal IOU. Hence, safe assets are directly or indirectly
key components of the payment system. A massive destruction of safe assets, as witnessed
after the 2008 Lehman episode (see the Appendix), would bring about a sudden cut in
aggregate demand, because at pre-crisis prices the stock of payment instruments will be in
dramatically short supply. I will argue that safe assets may be subject to massive destruction
due to their inherent fragility. Thus, safe assets, one of the greatest unsung discoveries of
humankind, helps to oil the wheels of the payment system but contains the seeds of its own
destruction, leaving in its wake a trail of output and employment destruction. At the end of the
day, a safe-asset catastrophe is very similar to a Keynesian impasse, but if a dearth of payment
instruments is at the root of these problems, aggregate demand policies may be wide of the
mark or counterproductive: the eye of the policy sharpshooter should rather be aimed at
restoring the stock of safe assets and credit.
A.

From Safe Money to Safe Credit

Fiat money that exhibits high price stability in terms of output ("safe" fiat money) offers an
attractive base for the creation of other financial assets denominated in that unit of account.
Bank deposits is a classical and prominent example. It illustrates the possibility that the new
assets could even become MOE despite involving obligations that are redeemable by the issuer,
because their refinancing could be largely taken for granted.22 Assets denominated in "safe"
fiat money piggy-back on the latter's safety characteristics, and if they are free from
counterparty risk they will also be seen as safe (in terms of output), e.g., US Treasury bills.23 In
22

Several countries have opted for deposit insurance, which makes refinancing even more of a sure thing.

23

See Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) for evidence about the liquidity and safety of US Treasury bills.

14

the last twenty odd years financial engineering, with the help of cooperating rating agencies
and laxer regulations, has produced a host of new safe assets. Not all of these assets qualify as
MOE, but still serve a useful role as guarantees or "collateral" against loan default. As Gary B.
Gorton has pointed out in several papers, safe assets remove some of the need to learn about
borrowers' idiosyncratic risks, which might dramatically lower lending costs (see, e.g., Gorton et
al (2012) and IMF (2012)). In case of default, for instance, lenders can attach the associated
collateral and dispose of it in the market. If the collateral is composed of safe assets, the
proceeds of the sale in terms of output would be highly predictable and, above all, independent
of the borrowers' idiosyncratic risks and manipulations. Lower lending costs help to open the
gates of the credit market, and give rise to what one might call "safe credit." Notice that this
line of causation starts from the creation of safe MOE, which in advanced modern economies
takes the form of an easily identifiable fiat money (e.g., dollar, euro, yen), highlighting the
relevance of the previous discussion about the factors that explain the liquidity premium of fiat
money. Arguably, this evolution from safe assets to safe credit is a good turn of events but it is,
by no means, risk free; for, safe assets are largely free from idiosyncratic risk, but may still be
subject to "systemic" risk.
B.

From Safe Credit to Sudden Stop

Safe credit also makes borrowers who post collateral in the form of safe assets feel assured that
the loan can easily be refinanced, encouraging them to invest in illiquid ventures, i.e., projects
that are not safe or easily "salable."24 This may give rise to a socially beneficial (e.g., Pareto
improving) allocation of resources. However, all of this is based on a liquidity component that
has all the markings of a mirage: it could be long lasting, but it could also evaporate in the blink
of an eye (akin to Hahn's problem, or an old-fashioned bank run). Fiat money's liquidity
premium, as the previous discussion reminds us, is also a mirage, but staggered pricing and
other underpinnings like legal tender and taxation makes it more solid than the liquidity
premium of the rest of the associated nominal forest.25 Some bank deposits are an example of
this privileged class, but many other safe assets are less protected (recall the meltdown of
asset-backed securities in the current crisis). If their prices fall, the supply of safe assets also
falls. If the fall is large, the gates of the credit market will fast shut off because safe collateral
will shrink. This will likely give rise to a "credit event" or Sudden Stop (Calvo et al (2008)). This
phenomenon is akin to Hahn's problem, but its implications are likely more serious – because
24

Menger (1892), one of the founders of the Austrian School of Economics, considered "salability" one salient
feature of liquid assets.
25

Unless there is a Lender of Last Resort that is ready to monetize their debt obligations in case of stress, in which
case, of course, those assets would be indistinguishable from fiat money.

15

the destruction of safe assets stops credit flows in their tracks and could have severe
consequences on the real economy: output and employment, for example. These effects may
get worse if prices are sticky, but the credit shock occurs even if prices are perfectly flexible,
because (1) the fall in collaterals' output values is a real shock, not a mere monetary
adjustment: it makes real credit more costly; and (2) it may trigger Irving Fisher's (1933) Debt
Deflation.26 By the way, it is not unusual to hear from bankers in the middle of financial crisis
that the problem is not lack of credit (more precisely, Sudden Stop), but lack of demand for
credit. Some analysts conclude from this that the crisis stems from a Keynesian fall in aggregate
demand driven by (mischievous) animal spirits. But there is an alternative explanation that is
fully in line with the above discussion: the initial Sudden Stop lowers aggregate demand as
savings fail to reach dissavers; the latter leads sectors awash with liquidity (e.g., the US
corporate sector in the present crisis) to cut investment projects and lower their demand for
credit, even though the credit channel is wide open for them. Therefore, both "lack of credit"
and "lack of demand for credit" are phenomena that could perfectly occur in the course of a
financial crisis. Nevertheless, I strongly believe that the primary shock comes from a Prospero's
Liquidity Trap cum Sudden Stop.
The government can palliate the effects of safe-asset shock. Debt Deflation could be
forestalled, for example, by easy monetary policy that staves off price level deflation. However,
this would not necessarily be enough to restore some key relative prices, like real estate prices
(see Calvo (2012) for a model). To prevent major relative price swings, which may seriously
impair collateral real values, the government may have to engage in "toxic" asset purchases and
other heterodox policies.27 These purchases may have to be large to make a difference. The
Appendix below suggests that to restore safe assets to pre-crisis levels may call for purchases
that are 170 percent higher than those that occurred during the period 2007-2011. Moreover,
heterodox policies require highly qualified and incorruptible civil servants, which are typically in
short supply. Even if suitable civil servants become available, their effectiveness would likely be
seriously impaired by lack of information. Financial crises make financial markets dysfunctional,
26

Debt Deflation occurs when debts are denominated in fiat money and prices fall, increasing the output value of
debt obligations, and possibly giving rise to massive default. In economies in which debts are denominated in
terms of foreign currencies (a phenomenon called Liability Dollarization), a real currency devaluation episode may
generate a shock akin to Debt Deflation, and hits borrowers who have invested in nontradables. This shock is
common in many EM financial crises, even though it is typically accompanied by price inflation in domestic
currency. See, e.g., Calvo (2005).
27

For the present discussion, "toxic" assets should be thought as illiquid or non-safe assets. Purchases of US
Treasury bills, for example, may not resolve any of these issues, given the high substitutability of Treasury bills and
money. See Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).

16

and to offset their real effects, the government must be able to collect a massive amount of
information in the short run – a truly herculean task!
Can Higher Prices of Safe Assets offset Safe-Asset Shortage? An important detour. The
destruction of safe assets associated with the Lehman episode has resulted in a large fall
in interest rates on safe assets that were relatively unscathed during that episode, e.g.,
US Treasury bills and German bunds. This, of course, implied that the market price of
those safe assets went up, tending to offset the fall in the value of the other pre-crisis
safe assets, e.g., asset-backed securities. Could the price rise of what one might call
super safe assets fully offset the fall of the others, keeping the stock of safe assets
largely unchanged? Conventional monetary theory suggest an affirmative answer.
Suppose that a fire consumes 50 percent of the supply of fiat money. At initial money
price Q0, there will be a shortage of money. But, according to conventional theory,
equilibrium will be restored and money shortage eliminated if Q = 2Q0 (equivalent to 50
deflation of the price level). This price-level deflation mechanism was not observed in
the present crisis because central banks increased M in order to prevent price level
deflation or inflation. Thus, under these circumstances, the offset mechanism should
rely on a rise of non-fiat-money super safe asset prices. According to available
estimates, e.g., Barclays (2012) and IMF (2012), this has, by far, not happened.28 Why?
One plausible explanation is that, unlike Q, central banks are not committed to
preventing large swings in the money price of super safe assets. Governments only
commit to service the string of payments associated with public sector super safe assets.
Their price before maturity is market determined. Suppose that individuals believe that
current interest rates are low relative to what they will be when economies go back to
normal. This implies that as the price of a super safe asset rises, the size of potential
capital loss (that would materialize the moment economies go back to normal) also goes
up. If the timing of transition to normal is unknown, the rise in the price of super safe
assets may make these assets less safe, particularly as loan collaterals. Therefore, their
safety may be subject to an upper bound. Notice, once again, that this type safety loss
would not apply to fiat money if the government is committed to ensure the real value
of fiat money supply, a commitment which is implicit in Inflation Targeting policy, for
example.

28

The Appendix below suggests that safe assets have fallen by 15 percent of world GDP during the period 20072011, despite massive advanced-economies central banks' Quantitative Easing.

17

In a nutshell, nominally stable economies that display nominal price stickiness spawn a forest of
nominal contracts (e.g., nominal bonds) that are classified as "safe," because their output price
is expected to be stable and predictable, and are free from idiosyncratic risk. Safe assets help
to open up the credit channel. However, there are few truly safe assets, and no automatic
mechanism to restore their supply in real terms, especially when price level deflation is ruled
out. The forest of nominal contracts beyond those that are closely grounded on wages and
retail goods may suddenly be subject to a Prospero's Liquidity Trap, and collapse to the ground.
A Prospero's Liquidity Trap is a supply-side shock because the supply of safe assets shrinks. This
contrasts with Keynes's Liquidity Trap in which scared savers prefer to hold money rather than
investing or lending, giving rise to a demand-side shock. The case emphasized in this note is
that in which Prospero's Trap is the initial cause and Keynes's Trap the initial effect (although
this does not rule out feedback going in the opposite direction). A Lender of Last Resort (LOLR)
may help to restore safe assets but, unless it gets involved in microeconomic policymaking or
large "toxic asset" purchases, it cannot prevent a sharp fall of some key prices. This may
depress collateral output values, helping to clog the credit channel and giving rise to a credit
event or Sudden Stop. Timely unclogging of the credit market requires heterodox monetary or
fiscal policy, for which the public sector is not well suited. This helps to explain the snail's pace
of recovery from financial crisis that has been shown in a number of empirical studies (e.g.,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Reinhart and Reinhart (2010), Calvo, Coricelli and Ottonello (2012)).
C.

After Sudden Stop

High debts and fiscal deficits are typically associated with Sudden Stop episodes. It is common
to blame profligate governments, opportunistic lenders or silly borrowers for those problems,
ignoring that most of them may be casualties of a Prospero's trick. A brief discussion of these
and other related issues follows.
Overindebtedness. Sudden Stop forces some borrowers to default or reschedule their debt
obligations, a situation that is usually called "overindebtedness" (OI). OI becomes rampant if
Sudden Stop comes after a boom of credit or capital inflows. Thus, many observers jump to the
conclusion that OI is caused by those booms. Unless carefully qualified, I find this conclusion
very hard to swallow. This is not an event in which only a few individuals or firms are involved.
It is a massive event. Therefore, blaming previous credit booms for massive OI would imply
that the financial sector is incredibly incompetent or corrupt, and that borrowers are hopelessly
unsophisticated. There are, no doubt, many examples of that sort, but I do not find the
evidence strong enough to support the view that these examples gave rise to the present global
financial crisis. Actually, the examples may to some extent be the result of futile attempts to

18

cover up the deleterious effects of the financial crisis (e.g., the recent Libor scandal, see FT
(2012)).
In contrast, the approach presented here is based on the fact that liquidity premium is, except
in special cases, subject to a meltdown. Not because of mischievous animal spirits but because
it is in the very nature of liquidity. From this note's perspective, OI may largely be a
consequence of Prospero's Liquidity Trap and insufficient backing by a LOLR.29 A great
advantage of this approach is that it is consistent with rationality. Therefore, under this
perspective, proposals for preventing future financial crises can be analyzed taking into account
constraints and incentives that are regular staple in conventional economics: a visit to your
corner fortune-teller can be left for another occasion!
Stagflation. Inflation could be a powerful instrument for redressing unsustainable deficits and
disequilibria after Sudden Stop. Calvo, Coricelli and Ottonello (2012) show that inflation after
financial crisis helps to lower real wages and, if inflation is high enough, prevent jobless
recovery, i.e., a situation in which jobs lag behind output.30 Moreover, inflation could have a
sizable impact on the real value of outstanding debt obligations, e.g., Aizenman and Marion
(2009), through a mechanism which is a mirror image of Debt Deflation (should we call it Debt
Inflation?). Finally, expected inflation may alleviate the effects of Keynes's Liquidity Trap by
lowering the demand for money (and close substitutes like Treasury bills) and increasing
aggregate demand for goods and services. Should we conclude that inflation is the road out of
financial crisis?
I have no strong argument against the benefits underlined above, especially if the experiment
consists of implementing a credible once-and-for-all increase in the price level (i.e., a once-andfor-all fall in Q, in the above notation). But the main point that I would like to stress is that
inflation is not a regular tax. The government controls interest rates and money supply, but
inflation is determined by the private sector. There is no mechanical relationship between
instruments and inflation, and this may impair the safety of safe assets. For example, there is
strong empirical evidence supporting the view that inflation and relative price volatility are
positively correlated (see Friedman (1977), Blejer and Leiderman (1980)). Thus, one could
appeal to the PTM to argue that higher inflation may weaken the output anchor of nominal

29

This view is forcefully put forward in Gorton (2010) in the context of the subprime crisis. See Calvo (2012) for a
formal model along these lines.
30

Inflation is not a cure-all, though. It cure unemployment but at the cost of lower real wages. See Calvo, Coricelli
and Ottonello (2002).

19

assets. This lowers the market value of safe assets, clogs the credit channel and fuels
stagflation.31
V. International Trade and Finance
The previous discussion touched upon some international topics but only as a sideline. It is now
time to address some of those issues head on. The main insight derived from the PTM that I
will highlight in this section is that free-floating exchange rates, especially among major
currencies like the US dollar and the euro, may thwart international trade and help to
regenerate risky financial instruments.
First off, it is worth recalling that the Bretton Woods (BW) period did not exhibit deep financial
crisis episodes like the Great Depression or Recession (see Obstfeld and Taylor (2004)). Crises
during that period were relatively localized and most of them took place in less-developed
economies due to inconsistency between fiscal and exchange rate policies. Moreover, the US
dollar was king, financial instruments were rather primitive, and countries were largely free to
impose controls on international and, in countries like the US and Germany, even interregional
capital mobility. Some observers conclude from these facts that financial liberalization is
largely responsible for systemic financial crises (Rodrik (2011)). It is hard to disagree with this
statement, partly because it is somewhat tautological: a tightly fettered financial sector cannot
possibly give rise to systemic financial crises! However, it may contain a grain of truth that I will
try to articulate in what follows.
The breakdown of BW replaced a system of fixed but intermittently adjustable exchange rates
vis-à-vis the US dollar, by a system in which exchange rates are market-determined (although
not necessarily free from unilateral government intervention). Moreover, restrictions on
capital mobility among advanced economies were gradually lifted, and had virtually
disappeared before the recent crisis. All in all, the new system exhibited much higher exchange
rate volatility, both in nominal and real terms. During BW, agents were somewhat indifferent
between setting their prices in US dollars or German marks, for example, but the situation
became markedly different after the 1970s (see Mussa (1990)). This generated a demand for
financial instruments to help easing the currency mismatch that emerged in international
market transactions. The financial sector reacted by creating those instruments and, in fact,
the new financial instruments could be claimed to have been "effective," because empirical
analyses support the view that, until the recent crisis, trade flows were not severely affected by
exchange rate volatility in developed economies (see Calvo and Reinhart (2005) for a survey of
31

The hypothesis discussed here to rationalize stagflation is complementary to the ones put forward in Friedman
(1977) and Blejer and Leiderman (1980), which are based on the deterioration of price signals under high inflation.

20

the literature). However, a consequence of the new arrangement is that the private sector
started to have much greater direct control and management of the new international
payments system. During BW the official sector (national governments, the IMF) had virtual
monopoly over the global payments system. In the post-BW era, in contrast, the official sector
gained control over individual countries' monetary policy but at the expense of generating
greater price-denomination mismatch and diminished control on the international payments
system.32
As a result, even major currencies may be seen as less safe. At the margin, different fiat
monies, especially the ones actively used as invoice currencies for international trade, are
highly substitutable and, therefore, their relative price (i.e., exchange rates) could be
excessively volatile, in the sense of becoming highly sensitive to shocks that are hard to observe
(a phenomenon akin to what I called above Hahn's Knightian problem).33 This likely opened up
arbitrage opportunities that did not exist during the BW period which, combined with a fastgrowing Theory of Finance in the second half of the 20th century, arguably gave incentives for
the creation of new financial instruments to deal with the currency-denomination mismatch
and supported cross-border investments that exacerbated denomination mismatch (for
evidence linked to the Great Recession, see Acharya and Schnabl (2012), Borio (2011)).
Following the banking tradition, many of these instruments, took advantage of the law of large
numbers, making them relatively safe. The main problem is that, while these instruments help
to get rid of idiosyncratic risk, they are subject to systemic shocks.
In short, the above discussion supports the conjecture that the breakdown of BW gave rise to a
large forest of safe assets.34 Their resiliency to shocks may even have temporarily increased
because the new instruments were likely gradually adopted across economies and sectors
(recall Section III). Now the house of cards has collapsed, bringing us back much closer to the
inception of the post-BW period. If nothing substantial is done to reform the system, trade and
credit will continue to suffer, and growth and instability may be the rule of the day. Moreover,
unless the financial sector is tightly regulated, a new forest of safe assets will come to life.
32

Some countries found monetary autarky too risky and unilaterally went back to BW by pegging their currencies
to some currency like the US dollar, which was at the center of the payments system during BW (Fear of Floating).
33

Exchange rate indetermination is discussed in Kareken and Wallace (1981). Their benchmark case could be
considered a bit extreme if not special, but I believe the paper points to a substantive problem. Indetermination
may not hold in practice, but their paper's insights could be employed to argue that exchange rates of globally
relevant fiat monies could be highly volatile, and unhinged from standard fundamentals.
34

This does not rule out other factors like financial deregulation. See Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) for a balanced
discussion of international financial issues in a historical perspective.

21

Given the knowledge accumulated during the last boom, the new instruments are likely to be
spawned much faster than in the past, and a new systemic crisis could be at our doorsteps in a
few years (for recent evidence supporting this conjecture, see The Economist (2012)). This is
not a promising scenario.
Alternatively, the official sector may seize back the reins of the payment system and set up a
new BW, BW21 (for the 21st century). This seems to be already happening. For example,
prompted by ties between US and EU banks, the Fed has rapidly come to the rescue of the ECB
by extending multibillion currency swaps (see Acharya and Schnabl (2010)). Moreover, US
branches of European banks were the largest beneficiaries of new Fed liquidity funding during
the Lehman episode. Countries are collaborating with each other motivated by self interest,
which gives some hope these types of policies will continue in the future and help to build the
political consensus for BW21 from the ground up.
I am afraid, though, that BW21 will come too late to prevent further deepening of the current
crisis. The crisis is not subsiding, fiscal policy has run its course and central banks are the only
institutions that can stop further derailment. However, uncoordinated action by central banks
could evoke the specter of competitive devaluation or trigger additional counterproductive
exchange rate volatility. This may drive central bankers into inaction or, otherwise, foster
protectionist policies to insulate economies from currency appreciation – which might take us
back not just to the start of BW, but to the start of WWII!

22

Appendix: Safe Assets35
The Table below shows an estimate of safe assets following the criterion of Barclays (2012,
Figure 18). The only difference is that I added the US dollar equivalent of the Monetary Base of
the US, UK, Eurozone and Japan. The shortfall of safe assets in 2011 compared to 2007 exceeds
USD 5 trillion, around 90 percent the aggregate monetary base in 2011, despite the large
expansion of monetary base between 2007 and 2011. Interestingly, full restoration of safe
assets would require another round of monetary base expansion more than 1.7 times higher
than that in the 2007-2011 period.
List of Safe Assets: pre and post crisis
% of World
GDP
2007
2011
9.2
15.8
1.3
2.5
7.9
13.3

US Federal government debt held by the public
Held by the Federal Reserve
Held by Private Investors

Billion USD
2007
2011
5,137
10,692
736
1,700
4,401
8,992

GSE obligations
Agency and GSE-backed mortgage pools
Private-issue ABS

2,910
4,464
3,901

2,023
6,283
1,277

5.2
8.0
7.0

3.0
9.3
1.9

German and French government debt
Italian and Spanish government debt

2,492
2,380

3,270
3,143

4.5
4.3

4.8
4.7

Monetary Base
United States
Euro Zone
United Kingdom
Japan

2,870
852
1,117
135
766

5,867
2,532
1,583
314
1,439

5.1
1.5
2.0
0.2
1.4

8.7
3.7
2.3
0.5
2.1

23,418

18,129

41.9

26.8

Safe Assets

Note: Numbers are struck through if they are believed to have lost their ‘safe haven’ status after 2007.
Source: Bank of England, Federal Reserve Flow of Funds, Haver Analytics, IMF, Barclays Capital.

35

I am grateful to Michael Gavin for alerting me of the relevance of these issues and the existence of the Barclay's
study.

23

References
Acharya, Viral V., and Philipp Schnabl, 2010, "Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances?
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009," IMF Economic
Review, vol. 58, No.1, pp. 37-73.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion, 2009, "Using Inflation to Erode U.S. Public Debt," NBER
Working Paper No. 15562, December.
Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Jan Pieter Krahnen, and Marcel Tyrell (editors), 2011, Liquidity
and Crisis, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Alvarez, Fernando, Martin Gonzalez-Rozada, Andy Neumeyer and Martin Baraja, 2011, "From
Hyperinflation to Stable Prices: Argentina's Evidence on Menu Cost Model," manuscript,
October 31.
Barclays Capital, 2012, Equity Gilt Study, Chapter 1.
Blejer, Mario I., and Leonardo Leiderman, 1980, "On the Real Effects of Inflation and RelativePrice Variability: Some Empirical Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 62,
No. 4, November, pp. 539-544.
Borio, Claudio, 2011, "Implementing a Macroprudential Framework: Blending Boldness and
Realism," Capitalism and Society, vol. 6, No.1.
Bresciani-Turroni, Costantino, 1937, The Economics of Inflation, reprinted by the Ludwig von
Mises Institute, Auborn, Alabama 2007.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2005, Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy?;
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2006, "Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden Stop,
Liability Dollarization, and Lender of Last Resort," NBER Working Paper No. 12788,
December.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2007, "Interest Rate Rules, Inflation Stabilization, and Imperfect Credibility:
The Small Open Economy Case," NBER Working Paper No. 13177, November.

24

Calvo, Guillermo, 2011 a, "On Capital Inflows, Liquidity and Bubbles," March 26. Online
www.columbia.edu/~gc2286.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2011 b, "The Liquidity Approach to Bubbles, Crises, Jobless Recovery, and
Involuntary Unemployment," October 13. Online www.columbia.edu/~gc2286.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2012, "Financial Crises and Liquidity Shocks: A Bank-Run Perspective,"
European Economic Review, April, pp. 317-326.
Calvo, Guillermo, Fabrizio Coricelli and Pablo Ottonello, 2012, "The Labor Market Consequences
of Financial Crises With or Without Inflation: Jobless and Wageless Recoveries," in
www.columbia.edu/~gc2286.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis-Fernando Mejia, 2008, “Systemic Sudden Stop:
The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects and Financial Integration,” NBER Working Paper
No. 14026.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2006, "Phoenix Miracles in Emerging
Markets: Recovering without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises," NBER Working
Paper No. 12101, March.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2002, "Fear of Floating," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 68, May, pp. 379-408.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2005, "Fixing for your Life," in Calvo (2005), Chapter
14.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carlos Végh, 1996, "From Currency Substitution to Dollarization and
Beyond: Analytical and Policy Issues," in G. Calvo (ed.) Money, Exchange Rates, and
Output, Chapter 8; Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carlos Végh, 1999, "Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in Developing
Countries," in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.) Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Chapter 24. New York, NY: North-Holland.
Fisher, Irving, 1933, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econometrica, Vol. 1,
No. 4, pp. 337-357.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2012, "Tranching, CDS, and Asset Prices: How Financial
Innovation Can Cause Bubbles and Crashes," American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 4(1), pp. 190-225.
25

Friedman, Milton, 1977, "Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 85, No. 3, June, pp. 451-472.
FT, 2012, "In Depth: Libor Scandal," http://www.ft.com/indepth/libor-scandal.
Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, 2005, "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
Small Open Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 72, pp. 707-734.
Gorton, Gary, 2010, Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007; Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2012), “The Safe-Asset Share,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May, pp. 101-106.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2010, "Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,"
manuscript, Yale University, November 9.
Hahn, F.H, 1965, "On some Problems of Proving the Existence of an Equilibrium in a Monetary
Economy," in F.H. Hahn and F.P.R. Brechling (editors) The Theory of Interest Rates,
London, UK: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., Chapter 6.
IMF, 1999, Monetary Policy in a Dollarized Economies, Occasional Paper No. 171.
IMF, 2012, "Safe Assets: Financial System Cornerstone?" Chapter 3, Global Financial Stability
Report: The Quest for Lasting Stability, April 2012.
Kareken, John, and Neil Wallace, 1981, “On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange Rates,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 96, 2, May, pp. 207-222.
Keynes, John Maynard, 1913, Indian Curren and Finance; London, UK: Macmillan and Co.,
Limited.
Keynes, John M., 1961, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London, UK:
Macmillan and Co., Limited. Reprinted from the 1936 version.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and Randall Wright, 1989, "On Money as a Medium of Exchange," Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 97, August, pp. 927-954.
Knight, Frank H., 1971, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit; Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, "The Aggregate Demand for
Treasury Debt," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 120, No. 2, April, pp. 233-267.
26

Krugman, Paul, 2012, End this Depression Now!; New York, NY: W. W. Norton and Company.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1980, "Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy," Economic Inquiry 18, pp.
203-220.
Mendershausen, Horst, 1955, Two Postwar Recoveries of the German Economy, Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, Publishers.
Menger, Carl, 1892, "On the Origin of Money." Translated by C.A. Foley, Economic Journal, 2,
pp. 238-55.
Mussa, Michael, 1990, "Exchange Rates in Theory and in Reality," Essays in International
Finance No. 179, Department of Economics, Princeton University, December.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, "Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing
Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No. 4, August,
pp. 675-687.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1986, "Ruling Out Divergent Speculative Bubbles,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 17, May, pp. 346-362.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, 2004, Global Capital Markets – Integration, Crisis, and
Growth; Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Patinkin, Don, 1965, Money, Interest and Prices, second edition; New York, NY: Harper and Row,
Publishers.
Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart, 2010, “After the Fall,” NBER Working Paper No. 16334.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly; Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, Dani, 2011, The Globalization Paradox – Democracy and the Future of the World
Economy. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
Shin, Hyun Song, 2010, Risk and Liquidity; Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Shin, Hyun Song, 2012, "Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium, "Global Banking Glut and
Loan Risk Premium," Mundell-Fleming Lecture, IMF Annual Research Conference,
November 10-11, 2011.

27

Starr, Ross M., 1974, "The Price of Money in a Pure Exchange Monetary Economy with
Taxation," Econometrica, vol. 42, No. 1, January, pp. 45-54.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2012, "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 509, pp. 57-95.
The Economist, 2012, "From Vanilla to Rocky Road," April 21, www.economist.com/node/21547989
Uribe, Martin, 1997, "Hysteresis in a Simple Model of Currency Substitution," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 40, pp. 185-202.
Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy;
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

28

