NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TRILLION DOLLAR CONUNDRUM:
COMPLEMENTARITIES AND HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
David Dranove
Christopher Forman
Avi Goldfarb
Shane Greenstein
Working Paper 18281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18281

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We thank BingYang Li for excellent research assistance. We thank seminar participants at Columbia
University, Georgia Tech, Harvard Business School, MIT, Northwestern University, the University
of Arizona, the University of Georgia, the University of Helsinki, and the University of Zurich for
helpful comments, and we thank Dr. David Artz, Tim Simcoe, and Leemore Dafny for useful comments
and suggestions. We also thank Harte Hanks Market Intelligence for supplying data. Avi Goldfarb
thanks SSHRC for research support. We are responsible for all opinions and errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Dranove, Christopher Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Trillion Dollar Conundrum: ¸˛Complementarities and Health Information Technology
David Dranove, Christopher Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18281
August 2012, Revised December 2012
JEL No. I10,L30
ABSTRACT
We examine the relationship between the adoption of EMR and hospital operating costs. We first identify
a puzzle that has been seen in prior studies: Adoption of EMR is associated with a slight cost increase.
We draw on the literature on IT and productivity to demonstrate that the average effect masks important
differences across time, locations, and hospitals. We find: (1) EMR adoption is initially associated
with higher costs; (2) At hospitals with access to complementary inputs, EMR adoption leads to a
cost decrease after three years; (3) Hospitals in unfavorable conditions experience increased costs
even after six years.

David Dranove
Management & Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Christopher Forman
Georgia Institute of Technology
Scheller College of Business
800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Atlanta
GA 30308
USA
chris.forman@scheller.gatech.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18281

Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St George St
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca
Shane Greenstein
The Elinor and Wendell Hobbs Professor
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I. Introduction
More than a quarter century ago economists engaged in a vigorous debate about the benefits from
investment in information technology (IT) in manufacturing and services. That debate was encapsulated in
the Solow ‘Productivity Paradox’—“You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity
statistics” (Solow 1987). That debate eventually faded from view, in part because the data began to reject it.
Over time it was found that firms achieved productivity benefits from IT, just with a lag. Moreover,
explanations for the lag emerged from considerable work on IT use in enterprises. The challenges to
productivity benefits were due to the costly adaptations required for the successful implementation of new
IT. In time, it was found that the firms realizing benefits from their IT investments were those that had
made complementary investments in areas such as worker skills and organizational decision rights.1
A new manifestation of this debate has surfaced around the use of electronic medical records (EMR).
A small sampling of research from the last half dozen years provides a sense of the uncertainty about the
productivity benefits from these investments. The Congressional Budget Office states: “No aspect of health
information technology (i.e., EMR) entails as much uncertainty as the magnitude of its potential benefits”
(Congressional Budget Office 2008). A widely cited 2005 report by the RAND Corporation, published in
the leading policy journal Health Affairs, estimates that widespread adoption of EMR by hospitals and
doctors could reduce annual health spending by as much as $81 billion while simultaneously leading to
better outcomes (Hillestad et al. 2005). Jaan Sidorov, a medical director with the Geisinger Health Plan, an
early adopter of EMR, published a response to the RAND report in Health Affairs. Sidorov (2006)
highlights the high cost of adoption and cites evidence that EMR leads to greater health spending and lower
productivity. Other recent studies, cited below, also fail to find consistent evidence that EMR savings offset
adoption costs.
What impact does EMR have on a key determinant of an existing organization’s productivity, such as
its operating costs? Like other types of enterprise IT, we view EMR as a type of business process

1

See, for example, Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt (2002) and Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012). Several other
explanations have also been highlighted for these empirical findings, including mismeasurement of IT capital or output. For further
details on these issues, see Triplett (1999).

1

innovation, one that involves not only investments in IT but also changes in the operational practices within
the adopting organization. If EMR is viewed in this way, how does that change the understanding of EMR’s
impact? We argue that prior literature has missed important features of EMR by not building on prior
research studying the adoption and productivity benefits of large scale enterprise IT and “insider
econometrics” studies of IT adoption.2
Building on this prior research, we stress the complementary assets that reduce the costs associated
with “co-invention,” which is the process of adapting an innovation to unique circumstances and turning
the overall change into a net benefit to the enterprise. These complementary assets come from several
sources. Local resources may be available as market services, such as expertise in the implementation of
similar technologies, or widespread spillovers in how to use the IT. Resources available internally to the
enterprise, such as experience with other business processes, may also help with implementation of the
technology and often cannot be purchased from markets in the short run. To summarize, variance in local
and internal resources provides an explanation for why the payoff from EMR may be delayed, and for why
we observe variance in the returns to investments in enterprise IT across locations.
We conduct an empirical examination of the impact of EMR adoption on hospital operating costs
during the period 1996 to 2009. The data come from several sources linking hospital costs to EMR
adoption and the potential for complementarities. Our main analysis regresses logged operating costs on
EMR adoption, hospital fixed effects, and a large number of controls. We focus on whether the relationship
between EMR and costs is greater for hospitals that are positioned to exploit available complementarities.
Thus, our key independent variable is the interaction between EMR adoption and the presence of local
complements, as measured by the IT-intensity of local industry. Our key identification assumption is that
EMR adoption is not correlated with unobservable cost factors that are differentially trending in hospitals
with locally available complementary inputs relative to hospitals that lack these inputs. We explain below
why we believe that this is a reasonable assumption; even so, we show robustness to instrumenting for

2

For examples of multi-industry studies that examine the adoption of enterprise IT and the accompanying organizational
adaptations, see for example Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996), Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt (2002), Forman, Goldfarb and
Greenstein (2005), and Bloom et al. (2009). For examples of single-industry “insider econometrics” studies, see Ichinowski and
Shaw (2003) and Bartel, Ichiniowski, and Shaw (2007).

2

EMR adoption using hospital proximity to EMR vendors and EMR adoption in alliance systems and
geographically linked markets.
We find the evidence consistent with our reframing: The timing of cost savings is consistent with what
we would expect given the literature on the productivity paradox in IT. For the average hospital, the gains
from EMR adoption appear with some delay. Moreover, there is significant heterogeneity in the gains
achieved, depending on the local availability of complementary factors such as IT workers. We focus on
costs because much of the political discussion has emphasized cost savings, and because the multi-product
nature of hospitals makes it easier to measure the implications of EMR for costs than for productivity.
However, our focus on costs means that we cannot use our data to rule out the possibility that our results
are paralleled by opposite results on clinical benefits, though the prior literature, including Agha (2012),
Miller and Tucker (2011), and McCullough et al (2010), have found clinical benefits to be small on
average.3
We find that hospitals that adopted EMR between 1996 and 2009 did not experience a statistically
significant decrease in costs on average. In fact, under many specifications, costs rose after EMR adoption,
particularly for the more advanced EMR systems. However, this effect is mediated by measures of the
availability of technology skills in the local labor market. Specifically, in strong IT locations, costs can fall
sharply after the first year of adoption to below pre-adoption levels. In weak IT locations, costs remain
above pre-adoption levels indefinitely. Overall, hospitals in IT-intensive markets enjoyed a statistically
significant 3.4 percent decrease in costs from three years after adoption of basic EMR and a marginally
significant 2.2 percent decrease in costs from three years after adoption of advanced EMR. These results are
significantly better than the up to 4 percent increase in costs after adoption by hospitals in other markets.
Figure 1 displays these general patterns in the raw data, comparing hospitals that adopt basic and
advanced EMR before the adoption period, during the adoption period, and after the adoption period. For
basic EMR, costs do not fall until three years after adoption. For non-IT-intensive locations, costs rise
sharply in the year of adoption, and then fall back. For IT-intensive locations, costs fall with adoption, and
3

Thus far, most significant evidence of significant clinical benefits has been found primarily in mortality risks of high-risk patients
(e.g., Miller and Tucker 2011 and McCullough et al. 2011, 2012).

3

are substantially lower three years after adoption. For advanced EMR, the patterns are similar: costs rise in
the period of adoption for non-IT-intensive locations and fall over time for the other hospitals.
We provide evidence that the benefits of strong IT locations arise in part from an agglomeration of IT
employment in (other) IT hospitals. Hospitals in locations with strong HIT employment enjoyed a 4.1
percent decrease in costs from three years after adoption of basic EMR and a 2.0 percent decrease in costs
from three years after adoption of advanced EMR. However, concentration of IT employment in other
industries is not associated with greater benefits from adopting basic or advanced EMR. Controlling for
strong HIT employment, costs still fall more rapidly in strong IT locations than in weak ones. In short, one
benefit of strong IT locations is a thicker labor market for HIT workers, though other benefits persist as
well.
We also show results suggesting that complementary skills can be found inside the hospital. For
advanced EMR, the initial increase in costs is mitigated substantially if hospitals already have substantial
software experience. Hospitals without experience are hurt in the short run for the most sophisticated
technologies. We do find, however, that within a short time inexperienced hospitals can make up the
difference. Specifically, the difference in costs after adoption for hospitals with and without internal
expertise disappears within three years. This suggests that, in contrast to complementary assets that depend
on a location with favorable agglomeration economies, some assets complementary to EMR can be
acquired relatively quickly.
These findings have several implications. As annual U.S. healthcare expenditures climb towards $3
trillion and with spending forecast to exceed $4.5 trillion by 2020, many analysts hope that electronic
medical records (EMR) can stem the tide (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services). For example, David
Cutler and Melinda Beeuwkes Buntin make EMR the centerpiece of their “Two Trillion Dollar” solution
for modernizing the health care system (Buntin and Cutler 2009). While some are confident in EMR, others
remain cautious, especially due to EMR’s sluggish diffusion. As of 2009, only about 30 percent of
America’s hospitals have adopted any advanced elements of EMR.4 This may have been due, in part, to the

4

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data supplied by HIMSS.

4

lack of consistent evidence of cost savings.
In order to spur EMR adoption, Congress in 2009 passed the Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), which provides $20 billion in subsidies for providers
who adopt EMR. Two thirds of hospitals said they planned to enroll in the first stage of HITECH subsidy
programs by the end of 2012 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2011). The 2010 Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act also contains provisions promoting EMR adoption. Despite these
legislative actions, many remain unconvinced of the benefits of EMR. Our findings also may help resolve
the ongoing debate. Supporters and detractors both seem to treat EMR as if its economic impact is
independent of other environmental factors, as if it either works or it doesn’t. This creates a conundrum for
both sides. If EMR is going to save hundreds of billions of dollars or more, as its supporters claim, why
isn’t it working in obvious ways? If it costs more than it saves, as the skeptics argue, why are policy makers
so keen to expand adoption? Our results suggest that the debate about EMR should be reframed by drawing
on the general literature on business adoption of IT, where it is very common for successful technology
adoption to require complementary changes in business processes that rely on specific labor and
information inputs. It is also common for new enterprise IT to be more productive when companies have
access to these inputs in their local market. Using this experience, it is not surprising that EMR has the
potential to generate substantial savings but demonstrates mixed results in practice.
We proceed as follows. Sections II and III describe the institutional setting for EMR, and some of the
prior evidence about its effects on hospitals. This motivates a comparison in Section IV between EMR and
the adoption of IT inside other organizations, which leads to a reframing of several key hypotheses.
Sections V and VI present data and results. Section VII concludes.

II. What is EMR?
EMR is a catchall expression used to characterize a wide range of information technologies used by
hospitals to keep track of utilization, costs, outcomes, and billings. In practice, EMR includes, but is not
limited to:
 A Clinical Data Repository (CDR) is a real time database that combines disparate information

5

about patients into a single file. This information may include test results, drug utilization,
pathology reports, patient demographics, and discharge summaries.
 Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) use clinical information to help providers diagnose
patients and develop treatment plans.
 Order Entry provides electronic forms to streamline hospital operations (replacing faxes and
paper forms).
 Computerized Provider Order Entry (CPOE) is a more sophisticated type of electronic order
entry and involves physician entry of orders into the computer network to medical staff and to
departments such as pharmacy or radiology. CPOE systems typically include patient information
and clinical guidelines, and can flag potential adverse drug reactions.
 Physician Documentation helps physicians use clinical information to generate diagnostic codes
that are meaningful for other practitioners and valid for reimbursement
As this list shows, there is no single technology associated with EMR, and different EMR technologies
may perform overlapping tasks.
Nearly all of the information collected by EMR already resides in hospital billing and medical records
departments and in physicians’ offices. EMR automates the collection and reporting of this information,
including all diagnostic information, test results, and services and medications received by the patient.
EMR can also link this information to administrative data such as insurance information, billing, and basic
demographics. EMR can reduce the costs and improve the accuracy of this data collection. Two
components of EMR, Clinical Decision Support Systems and Computerized Provider Order Entry, use
clinical data to support clinical decision making (Agha (2012) refers to this as a distinct category labeled
Clinical Decision Support or CDS). If implemented in ideal conditions and executed according to the
highest standards, EMR can reduce personnel costs while facilitating more accurate diagnoses, fewer
unnecessary and duplicative tests, and superior outcomes with fewer costly complications.
Despite these potential savings, EMR adoption has been uneven. Table 1 reports hospital adoption
rates for the five components of EMR described above. The data is taken from HIMSS Analytics, which we

6

describe in more detail in Section V. Clinical Data Repository, Clinical Decision Support, and Order Entry
are older technologies that were present in many hospitals in the 1990s. Even for these older technologies,
adoption rates range from 75 to 85 percent in 2009. The remaining applications emerge in the early to mid2000s. Adoption rates for these are below 25 percent.
While informative, our data set lacks several crucial pieces of information. It lacks comparable data on
physician adoption of EMR, for example, which is much lower than hospital adoption (Callaway and
Ghosal 2012). Our data do not tell us about intensity of use by physicians and staff within hospitals, about
the details of the installation, or on how close operations come to ideal conditions. Interviews with hospital
administrators suggest that adoption can be uneven within hospitals, with some departments
enthusiastically embracing change while others do not. Although beyond the scope of this study,
compatibility issues may shape the success of EMR at a regional level, and this too is missing from the
table. There are many different EMR vendors and their systems do not easily interoperate. As a result,
independent providers cannot always exchange information, which defeats some of the purpose of EMR
adoption (Miller and Tucker 2009).
III. Evidence on the Potential Savings from EMR
Has adoption of EMR reduced hospital costs? This section reviews prior evidence, stressing the
absence of work focusing on operational savings, lack of emphasis on complementarities with the labor
market, and the absence of accounting for the functional heterogeneity of EMR’s components. This
discussion will motivate our concerns and our approach to framing the study of EMR’s impact on
productivity using past research that emphasized enterprise IT as a business process innovation.
Every EMR study remarks on the expense. One prominent estimate, from the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO 2008), estimates that the cost of adopting EMR for office-based physicians is between
$25,000 and $45,000 per physician, with annual maintenance costs of $3000 to $9000. For a typical urban
hospital, these figures range from $3-$9 million for adoption and $700,000-$1.35 million for maintenance.
These costs are substantial: If the adoption costs are amortized over ten years, EMR can account for about 1
percent of total provider costs. It would be no surprise, therefore, if research suggested that EMR does not

7

pay for itself, let alone generate hundreds of millions of dollars in savings.
In their review of 257 studies of EMR effectiveness, Chaudry et al. (2006) note that few studies focus
on cost savings, providing, at best, indirect evidence of productivity gains. Most of the studies they review
focus on quality of care. Ten studies examine the effects of EMR on utilization of various services. Eight
studies show significant reductions of 8.5-24 percent, mainly in laboratory and radiology testing. While
fifteen studies contained some data on costs, none offered reliable estimates of cost savings.
Hillestad et al. (2005; the widely cited RAND study mentioned in our introduction) uses results from
prior studies of EMR and medical utilization and extrapolates the potential cost savings net of adoption
costs. They estimate that if 90 percent of U.S. hospitals were to adopt EMR, total savings in the first year
would equal $41.8 billion, rising to $77.4 billion after fifteen years. They also predict that EMR adoption
could eliminate several million adverse drug events annually, and save tens of thousands of lives through
improved chronic disease management.
Sidorov (2006) challenges these findings, arguing that the projected savings are based on unrealistic
assumptions. For example, the RAND study appears to assume that EMR would entirely replace a
physician’s clerical staff. Sidorov argues that providers who adopt EMR tend to reassign staff rather than
replace them. To take another example, EMR is supposed to eliminate duplicate tests, while it is just as
likely that EMR may allow providers to justify ordering additional tests.5 Buntin et al. (2011) review 73
studies of the impact of EMR on medical utilization. EMR is associated with a significant reduction in
utilization in 51 (70 percent) of these studies. They do not identify any studies of EMR and costs.
Indeed, we have identified only three focused cost studies. Borzekowski (2009) uses fixed effects
regression to examine whether early versions of financial and clinical IT systems generated significant
savings between 1987 and 1994. He finds that hospitals adopting the most thoroughly automated versions
of EMR realize up to 5 percent savings within five years of adoption. He also finds that hospitals that adopt
less automated versions of EMR experience an increase in costs. His conclusions mirror the popular
discussion: there appears to be the potential for savings but there is little understanding of the drivers of the
5

McCormick et al (2012) document that physicians with EMR tend to order more diagnostic tests, though they do not address the
role of omitted variables in driving this result.

8

heterogeneity across hospitals. Second, Furukawa, Raghu, and Shao (2010) study the effect of EMR
adoption on overall costs among hospitals in California for the period 1998-2007. Also using fixed effects
regression, they find that EMR adoption is associated with 6-10 percent higher costs per discharge in
medical-surgical acute units, in large part because nursing hours per patient day increased by 15-26 percent.
This is plausible because nurse use of EMR can be very time consuming. Third, Agha (2012) uses variation
in hospitals’ adoption status over time, analyzing 2.5 million inpatient admissions across 3900 hospitals
between the years 1998-2005. Health IT is associated with an initial 1.3 percent increase in billed charges.
She finds no evidence of cost savings, even five years after adoption. Additionally, adoption appears to
have little impact on the quality of care, measured by patient mortality, medical complication rates, adverse
drug events, and readmission rates. While not directly about costs, Lee, McCullough, and Town (2012)
document small positive effects of hospital IT on productivity.
None of the studies frame EMR in the context of the prior literature on enterprise IT. In other words,
there is no examination of factors that shape availability of complementary components such as local
expertise or prior experience with related technology. This may be due to a lack of familiarity with the
theoretical frameworks that would suggest such differential effects. In the next section, we offer such a
framework, based on research on the productivity of large scale IT projects in enterprises, and develop
some specific implications for the deployment of EMR.

IV. Information Technology and Complementarities
The existing literature on effective implementation of IT within businesses has emphasized the view of
IT as a business process innovation.6 Such innovations alter organizational practices, generally with the
intent of improving services, reducing operational costs, and taking advantage of new opportunities to
match new services to new operational practices. Typically this type of innovation involves changes in the
discretion given to employees, changes to the knowledge and information that employees are expected to
6

Specifically, Attewell (1992), Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996), Black and Lynch (2001), Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt
(2002), Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003), Hubbard (2003), Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2005), Bloom, Garicano, Sadun, and
Van Reenen (2009), and Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012). Forman and Goldfarb (2005) summarize the earlier literature. The
literature on “insider econometrics” has touched on related themes, particularly stressing channels of communication, the influence
of hierarchy on communications, and changes in hierarchy as a result of the deployment of new information technology (e.g.
Ichinowski and Shaw 2003l; Bartel, Ichiniowski, and Shaw 2007).

9

retain and employ, and changes to the patterns of communications between employees and administrators
within an organization.
Because important innovation in enterprise IT occurs on a large scale, it typically involves a range of
investments, both in computing hardware and software, and in communications hardware and software. It
also involves retraining employees and redesigning organizational architecture, such as hierarchy, lines of
control, compensation patterns, and oversight norms. In the discussion below, we draw on a wide literature
to explain a number of common misunderstandings about business process innovations.
For example, there is a misperception that new IT hardware or software yields the vast majority of
productivity gains without the need for adaptation by the firm. Prior research has shown that each
generation of IT is not readily interchangeable with older products or processes, meaning that the initial
investment often does not generate a substantial productivity gain until after complementary investments,
adaptations, and organizational changes (e.g. Bresnahan and Greenstein 1996; Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson,
and Hitt 2002; Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw 2007; Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen 2012). Many of these
necessary changes are made long after the initial adoption. Hence, it is common for IT investments to have
no or negative returns in the short run before yielding positive returns. Among the functions mentioned in
EMR, for example, CPOE generates many changes to routine processes. These changes often take time to
make, and their productivity gains can come long after the initial rollout.
Business process innovation is not equivalent to installing shrink-wrap software for a PC that works
instantly, or merely after training of staff. Instead, prior studies stress the importance of co-invention, the
post-adoption invention of complementary business processes and adaptations aimed at making IT adoption
useful (Bresnahan and Greenstein 1996). The initial investment in IT is not sufficient for ensuring
productivity gains. Those gains depends on whether the employees of the adopting organization–in the case
of hospitals, administrative staff, doctors, and nurses–find new uses to take advantage of the new
capabilities, and/or invent new processes for many unanticipated problems. For example, at one
ophthalmology unit at a teaching hospital, the physicians could not find a way to put their traditional “handdrawings” into the new formats. They found that the new electronic formats sometimes reduced the

10

richness of the information they could record.
This relates to another common misunderstanding: expectations that the entire cost of investment is
incurred as monetary expense. Non-monetary costs comprise a substantial risk from installing a business
process innovation. Prior studies emphasize the cost of delays, for example. Delays can arise from nonconvexities in investment (e.g., all the wiring must be installed before the communications routines can be
tested), the technical necessity to invest in one stage of a project only after another is completed (e.g., the
client cannot be modified until the servers work as designed), lack of interoperability during upgrades
(which some software handles better than others), and cognitive limits (e.g., staff does not anticipate
idiosyncratic issues until a new process is at their fingertips). Moreover, interruptions to ongoing operations
generate large opportunity costs in foregone services that can be substantially mediated with internal
resources (e.g., development of middleware by in-house IT staff) for which there may be no market price
or, for that matter, no potential for resale.7
Planning is another common difficulty in IT adoption. Though the installation of any substantial
business process innovation requires planning – i.e., administrative effort by the enterprise in advance of
installation – such planning alone rarely ends the administrative tasks required to generate productivity
gains. Administrative effort does not cease after installation, and continues throughout implementation.
Hiring and training personnel generates use of new hardware, software, and procedures. New users in new
settings then notice unanticipated problems, which generates new insight about unexpected issues.
As an example of the necessary adjustments and co-invention required for successful EMR investment,
consider one large teaching hospital that supported a diverse and geographically dispersed affiliate
network.8 The IT staff configured the records for patients to suit the needs of physicians treating severe
medical issues. The central hospital saw many severely ill patients, since it was a major trauma center for
its region. After rolling out this new system, the doctors at the satellite campuses complained of wasting
time “cleaning up the records” because no responsibility was assigned for updating the records after an

7

Private communication with David Artz, Medical Director of Information Systems, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, in
August 2012.
8
These observations were obtained from field work that was conducted by one of the authors at a hospital whose management
wished to remain anonymous.

11

urgent event. The doctors at satellite campuses also frequently found themselves wading through many
screens when routine issues did not require it, and while the patient was present, diminishing the patient
experience. It also lengthened the physician’s day, as they spent time updating records. In this simple
example, gaining the maximal productivity gains required tailoring the software to the specific types of
users and the specific setting, as well as implementing procedures to keep it updated.
Two key empirical implications arise from this discussion. First, given that there was considerable
heterogeneity across U.S. locations in the availability of complementary factors, such as skilled labor and
knowledge spillovers (Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2005, 2012), third-party software support and
service (Arora and Forman 2007), and infrastructure (Greenstein 2005, Greenstein and McDevitt 2011),
there should have been a visible relationship between investment in health IT and local conditions in a
limited metropolitan geographic area. Large cities had thicker labor markets for complementary services or
for specialized skills. We expect that thicker markets lowered the (quality-adjusted) price of obtaining IT
services such as contract programming and of hiring workers to develop in-house functions.9 Such locations
may also have had better availability of complementary information technology infrastructure, such as
broadband services. Increases in each of these factors may have increased the (net) benefits of adopting
complex technologies in some cities and not others, other things being equal. Non-IT employees in
advantaged locations also may have adapted more easily to EMR. Overall, the presence of thicker labor
markets for technical talent, greater input sharing of complex IT processes, and greater knowledge
spillovers in cities should have increased the benefits to adoption of frontier technologies in big cities
relative to other locations (Henderson 2003; Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2008).
A few examples help to illustrate. One example is El Camino Hospital in Mountain View, California
(e.g., near Silicon Valley). This hospital is an otherwise small community hospital that would normally be a
laggard in advanced IT, but not due to its location. It could hire plenty of sophisticated administrators to
implement the components of EMR, and IT was "in the air", so the hospital was able to gain worker
9

For example, see this quote: "There's a lot of dedicated health care professionals out there in the universe," said Josh Lee, a doctor
at and chief medical information officer for the University of California San Diego Medical Center. "There's a lot of dedicated IT
professionals. But it's a much narrower band where you have people that can live in both of those worlds."
http://www.pcworld.com/businesscenter/article/229071/hospitals_compete_for_it_talent_with_funding_at_stake.html, accessed
September 16, 2012.

12

acceptance and adapt to its advanced EMR system. This type of spillover is not unique to Northern
California. It is also related to hospitals in the Milwaukee area, which is not a location normally regarded as
one with a thick market for IT talent. However, the largest EMR provider in the country, Epic, has its
headquarters in Madison, Wisconsin, less than a 90 minute drive from Milwaukee. This proximity resulted
in early and extensive support for hospitals in the Milwaukee area, giving them more experience and,
hence, greater success with advanced EMR services than otherwise would be expected.10
This framework has a second implication, which is less surprising, as it mimics long-standing
economic work on learning curves inside organizations. Enterprises with existing IT facilities should expect
lower co-invention costs than establishments without extensive operations, and that should shape costs
around the time of adoption. Prior IT projects may reduce development costs if on-staff programmers are
able to transfer lessons learned from one project to another.11 Prior work on other IT projects may create
learning economies and spillovers that decrease the costs of adapting general purpose IT to organizational
needs, reducing the importance of external consultants and local spillovers. For example, many major
medical centers in the U.S – such as Duke, Vanderbilt, Hopkins, UPMC, Yale, or Washington University in
St. Louis – invested in advanced IT in order to remain competitive, and those centers initially built their
EMR with in-house software instead of packages, using internal expertise during every additional
investment. That internal expertise proved valuable when the hospitals later adopted packages and
customized them to their organizations.
In summary, if the productivity impact of EMR follows patterns seen with other types of IT, then it
should come with a lag. Furthermore, the productivity impact of EMR should depend on factors that shape
the supply conditions for complements, such as the experience of a hospital’s IT staff, as well as the local
labor market for skilled labor and third-party software and support.

10

Private communication with Dr. David Artz, Medical Director of Information Systems, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, August, 2012. Epic’s location arose from the preferences of the founder.
11
For example, software developers may be able to share common tools for design, development, and testing (Banker and
Slaughter 1997), or they may be able to reuse code (Barnes and Bollinger 1991). Software development may also have learning
economies (Attewell 1992) that through experience reduce the unit costs of new IT projects. Much prior research in the costs of
innovative activity has also presumed experience with related projects lowers the costs of innovation (Cohen and Levinthal 1990).

13

V. Data
We use a variety of data sources to examine the relationship between EMR adoption and costs. In
particular, the data for this study matches data on EMR adoption from a well-known private data source on
health IT investments (HIMSS Analytics) with cost data from the Medicare Hospital Cost Report. We add
data from the American Hospital Association’s (AHA) Annual Survey of Hospitals. We obtain regional
controls and information on local complementary factors from the decennial U.S. Census and from U.S.
County Business Patterns data. We supplement the sources above with information on lagged hospital-level
IT experience and local IT workforce from another private source on IT investment, the Harte Hanks
Computer Intelligence Database. Our data are organized as an unbalanced panel, with data available every
year from 1996 to 2009. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics.12
EMR adoption. Information about EMR adoption comes from the Healthcare Information and
Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Analytics data base. The HIMSS Annual Study collects
information systems data related to software and hardware inventory and reports the current status of EMR
implementation in more than 5300 healthcare providers nationwide, including well over 3000 community
hospitals.13 Because most organizations tend to participate for a long period of time, the HIMSS Analytics
data closely approximates panel data and can be used for fixed effects regression.
HIMSS reports adoption of 99 different technologies in 18 categories. Examples include Emergency
Department Information Systems, Financial Modeling for Financial Decision Support, and a Laboratory
Information System. Following most other studies, we restrict attention to five applications in the category
Electronic Medical Records, which we listed above. These closely represent the kind of EMR applications
that the RAND study and others believe will lead to dramatic cost savings and quality enhancements.
We aggregate the five EMR applications into two broad categories that we label “basic” and
“advanced” EMR, similar to our prior framework for enterprise IT (e.g. Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein

12

The number of observations column in table 2 shows a key challenge within and across data sources: missing data. There is
considerable variation across hospitals and years for each of the variables. We simply drop observations with any missing data from
our main specifications, though we document that results are robust to some alternatives.
13
Community hospitals provide treatments for a wide range of diseases and have relatively short (less than 30 day) average lengths
of stay. There are approximately 5000 community hospitals in the United States. HIMSS hospitals are more likely than average to
be privately owned and tend to be larger than non-reporting hospitals.

14

2012). Applications within each of these categories involve similar costs of adoption and require similar
types of co-invention to be used successfully. We say that a hospital has basic EMR if it has adopted a
clinical data repository (CDR), clinical decision support systems (CDSS), or order entry/communication.
We say that a hospital has advanced EMR if it has adopted either computerized practitioner order entry
(CPOE) or physician documentation, applications that are more difficult to implement and more difficult to
operate successfully due to the need for physician training and involvement. Analyses of health IT
adoption, such as the HIMSS Forecasting Model, consider advanced EMR applications to represent the
final stage of EMR adoption (HIMSS Analytics 2011).
Table 1 shows sharp increases in adoption of all of these technologies over the sample period. By
2009, at least 70 percent of responding hospitals had adopted each of the basic EMR technologies and at
least 20 percent had adopted the advanced technologies.
Our estimation sample is based on the set of hospitals that replied to the HIMSS survey. Thus, we may
exclude hospitals that systematically invest little in information systems and have little incentive to reply to
the HIMSS survey. Missing data about specific technologies (and to a lesser extent about covariates) mean
that our regressions involve 2214 to 3653 hospitals observed an average of 10 to 13 years. A comparison of
hospitals that report and do not report data on adoption of basic EMR in 1996 reveals that hospitals who
report basic EMR have similar costs per admit ($9138 versus $9497 for non-reporters) but are substantially
larger, with 47.2 percent more beds. Furthermore, while ownership structures are similar, hospitals that do
not report data are less likely to be located in metropolitan statistical areas and are less likely to be teaching
hospitals. The Appendix provides further details on the comparison.
Hospital costs. Our primary dependent variable is equal to total hospital operating expenses per
admission. There are several reasons why we study the impact of EMR on costs and not productivity. From
a policy perspective, the debate on EMR focuses on two dimensions, costs and outcomes. From an
econometric perspective, hospitals are multi-product firms. It may be easier to specify cost as the dependent
variable and include ad hoc controls for product mix than to try to define output on a uniform scale. This
may explain why there are many published studies of hospital cost functions but few published studies of

15

hospital production functions.
We collect data on hospital costs from Medicare Cost Reports. Hospitals are required to report costs to
Medicare so that Medicare can compute national reimbursement rates. While these cost data are not
audited, hospitals have little incentive to report inaccurately. The cost measure that we use includes the
fully amortized operating costs across the entire hospital. These will include the costs of property, plant,
and equipment depreciation, but exclude costs of services such as parking garages and public cafeterias.14
Physician salaries are generally excluded from this measure, except for in-house staff with administrative
roles, or those whose billing contributes to hospital revenue, such as radiologists. While our primary
measure is total operating expenses per admission, we also show robustness to using total expenses and a
case-mix weight on admissions.15 In some years Cost Report data are missing; in our estimation sample 11
percent of hospital observations are missing cost data. We interpolate values for these missing cost data
using the geometric mean of adjacent year costs though results are robust to excluding these observations.
Table 2 shows that, on average, costs rise considerably over the sample period (from 9.065 to 9.885 in
logged values) but there is a great deal of variation across hospitals.
Because operating expenses include amortized investments in EMR, it would be unsurprising to see
increases in costs around the time of EMR adoption, reflecting increased purchases of computing and
networking hardware and software. We do not expect any such mechanical bump in costs to be correlated
with the local IT environment.
We emphasize results on aggregate costs to the hospital, and show robustness to labor costs. While the
Cost Report does provide a breakdown of costs by department (e.g. diagnostic radiology, housekeeping,
pharmacy), we do not believe these data are reliable reflections of the costs in those areas. In particular,
there appears to be substantial accounting discretion in how costs are allocated within the hospital. For
example, housekeeping costs range from -$16 per admit to $70,000 per admit with a mean of $196 and a
14

Depreciation rules are standardized across hospitals. For further details on these rules, see the documentation for the cost report
data available at https://www.cms.gov/CostReports/02_HospitalCostReport.asp#TopOfPage.
15
We obtained annual data on the case mix of Medicare patients for 87% of the sample available from the CMS website
(https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/AcuteInpatientPPS/Historical-Impact-Files-for-FY-1994through-Present.html). While Medicare case mix does not match actual case mix, we still document that our results are robust to (i)
including the Medicare case mix as a control and (ii) normalizing the cost per admit by the Medicare case mix index. Our main
specification assumes that the case mix does not change simultaneously with EMR adoption for reasons other than EMR adoption.

16

standard deviation of $523. Thus, our understanding of these data is that the aggregate costs (and aggregate
labor costs) are reliable, but the cost breakdown by department is subject to substantial variation in
accounting norms across hospitals.
Hospital characteristics. We obtain hospital characteristics from the American Hospital Association
Annual Survey. The survey contains details about hospital ownership, service offerings, and financials. We
match AHA, Cost Report, and HIMSS data using the hospital Medicare ID and retain only matching
hospitals. Specifically, we start with 4915 hospitals in the HIMSS data, drop to 4819 when merging with
the Cost Report, and drop to 4493 when merging with the AHA data. We use information from the AHA
data and the Medicare Cost Report to exclude several types of hospitals whose costs might be affected by
unobservable and/or idiosyncratic factors unrelated to EMR adoption. In particular, we exclude federal
hospitals, as well as hospitals that are not defined as short-term general medical and surgical hospitals. (The
hospitals that we exclude are not usually considered to be “community” hospitals). Finally, we dropped a
small number of hospitals that report very low total costs (less than $100,000) over one or more years in
our sample period. After dropping these, the minimum cost is $1.2 million and the average cost is $61
million.
Our final data set contains 4231 hospitals for which we have data on basic EMR adoption for 2228 and
data on advanced EMR adoption for 3306. We observe 96 percent of the hospitals in all fourteen years of
the data (though both cost and EMR adoption information may not be available in all years).
We use the AHA data to compute the following covariates16:


Hospital size: We include number of outpatient visits and number of inpatient days. We also
include 1996 values of number of beds and total number of admissions.



Integration with physicians: We include indicators of whether the hospital operates an
independent practice association or a management service organization hospital (as of 1996).



Hospital ownership: We include for-profit ownership, non-secular non-profit ownership, nonprofit church ownership, equity model hospital, or foundation hospital (in 1996).

16

In a small number of cases, specific pieces of the AHA data are missing for a hospital in a given year but available in other years.
In these cases, we impute the missing value using the other years though results are robust to dropping these observations.

17



Other characteristics: We include whether the hospital is a teaching hospital (defined as having
a residency program or being a member of the Council of Teaching Hospitals), number of
births, total costs per admit (to control for different trends on the base level of the dependent
variable), and the number of Medicare and Medicaid discharges (all values are from 1996).17

In our regressions, we interact the 1996 values with a time trend. We emphasize the 1996 baseline to
avoid potential changes in hospital characteristics that are driven by the EMR adoption. Results are robust
to allowing the characteristics to change over time, but we prefer the simpler specification as a baseline.
Local features. We use U.S. Census data to identify location-level factors that might affect costs
independent of IT and to measure complementary factors that might facilitate process innovation. We focus
on cross-sectional values to facilitate interpretation (so that locations do not switch status), though results
are robust to allowing these values to change over time. For controls, we obtain the following variables
from the 2000 decennial U.S. Census and match on county: population, percent Black, percent age 65+ and
percent age 25-64, percent university education, and median household income. In our regressions, these
are interacted with a time trend to allow different locations to have different cost trends.
To measure the availability of local complementary factors, we use three measures from the Census
and two measures based on the Harte Hanks Market Intelligence Computer Intelligence Technology
Database (hereafter CI database).
Our main measure of complementary factors is the percentage of local firms that are in IT-using and
IT-producing industries. We measure the fraction of firms in IT-using and IT-producing industries in the
county as of 1995 from the U.S. Census County Business Patterns data. National aggregate data shows that
such industries have unusually high returns from investment in IT in the 1990s. We define these industries
using the classification reported in Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005, p. 93).18 Table 2 shows that 42 percent

17

We only have discharge information for approximately half the hospitals in our sample. When the information is missing, we
assume it does not change over time by setting it at average levels and allowing the hospital fixed effects to absorb differences
across hospitals.
18
These industries are Communications (SIC 48), Business Services (73), Wholesales Trade (50-51), Finance (60-62, 67), Printing
and Publishing (27), Legal Services (81), Instruments and Miscellaneous Manufacturing (38-39), Insurance (63-64), Industrial
Machinery and Computing Equipment (35), Gas Utilities (492, 496, and parts of 493), Professional and Social Services (832-839),
Other Transportation Equipment (372-379), Other Electrical Machinery (36, ex. 366-267), Communications Equipment (SIC 366),
and Electronic Components (367).

18

of the hospitals in our data are in counties in the top quartile in IT intensity.
Our second measure of local complementary factors combines county-level income, education,
population, and IT intensity. This measure, also used in Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012), defines
“high all factors” counties as those with over 150,000 population that are in the top quartile in income,
education, and IT intensity; 23 percent of the hospitals in our sample fit this criteria.
Third, we include a dummy for whether the hospital is located in an MSA. Urban locations will benefit
from additional supply of complementary factors, including thicker labor markets, third party services
firms, and better infrastructure. In particular, urban location has been shown to be correlated with lower
costs for enterprise IT adoption in a variety of industries (Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2005, 2008).
To measure local availability of IT skills, we create two measures of local employment of
programmers using the CI database: the number of programmers working in hospitals and the number of
programmers working outside of hospitals. The CI database contains establishment- and firm-level data on
characteristics such as the number of employees, personal computers per employee, number of
programmers, and the use of specific software applications. We use data from the 1996 and 2002 data
releases. A number of researchers have used this data previously to study adoption of IT (e.g., Bresnahan
and Greenstein 1996) and the productivity implications of IT investment (e.g., Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson,
and Hitt 2002, Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003, Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen 2012). As has been discussed
elsewhere (e.g., Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2005), this data set represents one of the most
comprehensive sources of information on the IT investments of private firms available: for example, as of
2000, it comprised roughly one half of all U.S. establishments over 100 employees
For each establishment in the CI database, we take the midpoint of the (categorical) measure of the
number of programmers. For each county-industry, we add up the number of programmers.19 We weight
these by comparing the county-industry employment in our sample to total county-industry employment,
where the latter is estimated from the U.S. Census County Business Patterns data. Our measure of total

19

Industries are defined by SIC in 1996 and NAICS in 2002. For both years, we use 2-digit industries (SIC in 1996, NAICS in
2002) plus a separate industry for hospitals (SIC 806 in 1996, NAICS 622 in 2002).

19

non-health programmers is the weighted sum across all non-health industries.20 For our measure of health
programmers, we simply compute the (weighted) employment for hospitals, differencing out the focal
hospital. We show results using both the 1996 and 2002 CI databases (and the County Business Patterns
from the same year). As we do for strong IT locations, we compute the top quartile for both health and nonhealth programmers.
IT capabilities. We also use the CI database to obtain measures of historical hospital-level internal IT
capabilities. For capabilities of hospitals, we gather data from 1996 on the number of computer
programmers and numbers of business and clinical software applications at the hospital, which we interpret
as measures of hospital experience with IT. We merge this information into our main data set using hospital
names. Unfortunately, because the CI database is itself a sample from a broader population of
establishments, there is a significant loss of data from merging these two data sources: the number of
hospitals in our sample falls by more than half in the regressions that use the CI database to measure
internal hospital experience in software in 1996.
V. Empirical strategy and results
We perform linear regression with hospital and year fixed effects on an unbalanced panel of hospitals
observed annually from 1996 to 2009. We proceed in four stages. First, we regress logged costs per patient
on different measures of EMR adoption. We document that costs appear to rise on average after adoption.
Second, we decompose the rise in costs by years since adoption and show that the rise is largest in the first
year of adoption. Third, we examine different margins of complementarity, and show that the results are
much stronger for location than for internal IT experience. In particular, we show that the results are
strongest in locations with a large number of HIT workers. These results provide suggestive evidence of a
difference between complementarities related to available internal expertise and complementarities related
to agglomeration economies. Finally, we examine robustness, identification, and plausibility with a variety
of further tests.

20

The county-industry weights are equal to (total county-industry employment in Country Business Patterns Data)/(total countyindustry employment in the CI database). That is, if our data undersamples a given two-digit industry related to the Census it is
given more weight in our estimates. We use the health industries described in the previous footnote.

20

Overall effects: We begin by examining the relationship between (the log of) total administrative costs
per admit (cit) and EMR:
(1) Log(cit) =Xit +tXi +tZi+EMRit+t+i+it,
Here, t captures average changes to costs over time; i is a hospital-specific fixed effect that gets
differenced out in the estimation; and EMRit is a discrete variable for whether hospital i had adopted a
particular EMR technology by time t. Thus,  identifies our main effect of interest. We assume that it is a
normal i.i.d. variable and calculate heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that are clustered by hospital.
We include three categories of controls. First, Xit are controls for hospital characteristics that change
over time: inpatient days and outpatient visits. We choose to allow inpatient days and outpatient visits to
vary over time to be consistent with prior work on hospital costs that specified these with a translog
function (e.g., Dranove and Lindrooth 2003). Second, Xi are all other controls for hospital characteristics.
These include beds, type of hospital, ownership status, and discharges. We are concerned that EMR
adoption may drive changes in these variables, so including contemporaneous values would be an error. We
take their 1996 values and interact them with a linear time trend. Third, Zi are controls for county-specific
characteristics (such as population and income) that do not vary sufficiently over time for changes in their
values to have much identifying power. However, the location-level characteristics do have power to
identify cost trends. Therefore, we interact these local characteristics with a linear time trend.
For this part of our analysis, our identification relies on the assumption that any systematic changes in
hospital costs after EMR adoption are captured by the changes in the hospital-level controls over time and
the time trends for the locations.21 Put another way, adoption of EMR is uncorrelated with unobservable
cost trends that were experienced differentially by adopting hospitals.
Table 3 shows the results of this regression. For columns 1 to 7, the dependent variable is total
operating costs per admission, as defined in the AHA data. For column 8 and 9, we use total hospital
operating costs (i.e., we do not divide by admissions). Columns 1 to 3 use the specific EMR technologies

21
As in Athey and Stern (2002), Hubbard (2003), Bloom et al (2009), Agha (2012), and Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012)
we initially treat the diffusion of a new technology as an exogenous factor that leads to a change in economic outcomes, and then
examine the consequences of the exogeneity assumption.

21

that together we label “basic EMR”; columns 4 and 8 use the aggregated basic EMR measure (which is
equal to one when the hospital has adopted any of the three technologies); column 5 and 6 use the EMR
technologies that make up “advanced EMR”; columns 7 and 9 use the aggregated advanced EMR measure.
The results suggest that, on average, EMR does not reduce costs. Instead, in many specifications, EMR
is associated with a positive and significant increase in costs of about one to two percent.
Effects by time since adoption: As discussed above, a rich literature on IT productivity has documented
that IT adoption affects productivity with a lag. Table 4 examines the extent to which the increase in costs
is driven by initial adoption costs such as co-invention and learning new processes. Specifically, Table 4
splits the EMR variable into seven pieces, based on time since adoption:
(2) Log(cit) =Xit +tXi +tZi +ΣL=0…6LEMRit+L +t+i+it,
We therefore identify separate coefficients for the first year observed after adoption and for each of the
six subsequent years. For the dummy for the sixth year, we use “adopt at least six years earlier.” The
hospital fixed effects mean these coefficients should be interpreted relative to the period before adoption.
Costs often rise significantly immediately after adoption, increasing 1.9 percent for advanced EMR.
After the first period, costs gradually return to the pre-adoption levels. Generally, the costs return to the
pre-adoption levels faster for the basic EMR technologies than for advanced EMR. This is consistent with
the prior literature on enterprise IT: initial adoption costs are high because of disruptions to established
processes, over time these disruptions diminish, and more complicated technologies take more time to be
effectively implemented. It is also consistent with Agha (2012) who finds a transitory increase in total
medical expenditures upon adoption but that this increase goes away over time to yield no essentially no
change in costs.
Table 5 sets up the sparser specifications that are used in the remainder of the paper to facilitate
interpretation. In particular, it focuses on the aggregate measures of basic and advanced EMR and it
combines individual years into two variables: “adopt in previous three year period” and “adopt at least three
years earlier”. As expected, the results are similar to Table 4.
Effects by location: The literature on enterprise IT has emphasized that efficient use of IT requires the

22

availability of complementary factors such as skilled labor, third-party software support and service, and
infrastructure. To explore this hypothesis, we interact EMR adoption measures with the IT-intensity of a
location:
(3) Log(cit)= Xit +tXi +tZi +EMRit+EMRit-3+
+IT_INTENSEi×EMRit +IT_INTENSEi×EMRit-3+ +t+i+it,
where EMRit-3 is a dummy variable for whether the hospital adopted EMR at least three years earlier and
IT_INTENSEi is a measure of whether the location is IT-intensive.
Table 6 examines three distinct measures of IT-intensity: (i) a dummy variable for whether the hospital
is in a county that is in the top quartile in terms of IT-using and IT-producing industry, (ii) a dummy
variable for whether the hospitals is in a county with high population, income, education and IT-intensive
industry (labeled “high all factors” in Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012)), and (iii) a dummy
variable for whether the hospital is in an MSA. For these estimates, we add a control for these measures
interacted with a time trend.
Recall that in the previous analysis our identification assumption was that adoption of EMR was
uncorrelated with unobservable cost trends that were experienced differentially by adopting hospitals. In
this analysis, which is central to our study, our identifying assumption is weaker. We do not need to assume
that adopters and non-adopters experience the same trends in unobservables. Rather, we need to assume
that there is no difference in unobservable cost trends around the time of IT adoption in high IT-intensity
markets versus low IT-intensity markets; i.e., there is no differential selection on trends in unobservables.
Although we can think of no obvious economic reason why this assumption would be violated, in later
specifications we will instrument for adoption. Another identification assumption that we require is that
hospitals do not relocate to respond to lower EMR adoption costs, and that hospitals cannot easily hire to
overcome local IT deficiencies. That is, we assume that an IT-intensive environment requires sufficient
local scale, and that hospitals will be a small part of a local IT environment.22
The first two rows show that costs per admission do not fall in non-IT-intensive counties. In contrast,

22

Our data are consistent with this assumption: for the average county in our data, less than 1% of IT workers are employed in
hospitals.

23

for advanced EMR, costs per admission appear to rise substantially in such locations. The differences
between IT-intensive locations and other locations increase after the initial adoption period. For basic
EMR, after three years, costs fall a statistically significant 3.4 percent in IT-intensive counties while the
coefficient is positive but insignificant in all other counties. For advanced EMR, after three years, costs fall
a marginally significant (p-value is 0.09) 2.2 percent in IT-intensive counties while costs rise 3.8 percent in
other counties.
Taking the point estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 at face value, a hospital that installed basic
EMR in a favorable location had an average cost reduction of 3.4 percent starting three years after
installation, while an installation of advanced EMR in the same location experienced a cost reduction of 2.2
percent. In contrast, a hospital in a poor location would experience an (insignificant) rise in costs of 1.3
percent from three years after adoption of basic EMR and a strongly significant rise of 3.8 percent after
adoption of advanced EMR. With average annual operating costs in the tens of millions, these differences
are substantial.
Effects by local IT workers: We next explore whether the difference between IT-intensive locations
and other locations is driven by workers in the hospital IT sector, or by IT workers of any kind.
Specifically, as described above, we use measures of the number of IT programmers (from 1996 and 2002)
in hospitals and in all other (non-health) industries in the county:
(4) Log(cit)= Xit +tXi +tZi +EMRit+EMRit-3+
+HIT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit +HIT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit-3+
+OTH_IT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit+OTH_IT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit-3+ +t+i+it,
where HIT_EMPLOYMENTi is a dummy indicating if the hospital is in a county where HIT employment is
in the top quartile, while OTH_IT_EMPLOYMENTi indicates if the hospital is in a top quartile county by
non-health IT employment.
This analysis therefore compares whether the correlations between EMR adoption, IT intensity, and
costs are more strongly driven by local hospital IT expertise or by IT expertise across other sectors. As
noted above, HIT shares many features with other kinds of enterprise IT, so it is possible that labor skills
and knowledge will transfer across industries. Table 7 columns 1 and 2 show the results using the 1996

24

measures of hospital IT employment and other IT employment and columns 3 and 4 use the 2002 measure.
The results suggest that it is local hospital IT employment rather than local IT employment in other sectors
that drives the results of the previous subsection. Costs appear to be substantially lower for hospitals
located in the top quartile of counties in terms of hospital IT employment. This does not seem to be true of
hospitals in the top quartile of counties in non-health IT employment, controlling for hospital IT
employment.
Columns 5 through 8 of table 7, however, suggest that local hospital IT employment may not explain
the entire result on IT-intensive locations found in Table 6. In particular, we include both local hospital IT
employment and our measure of IT-intensive location in the regression:
(5) Log(cit)= Xit +tXi +tZi +EMRit+EMRit-3+
+HIT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit +HIT_EMPLOYMENTi×EMRit-3+
+IT_INTENSEi×EMRit +IT_INTENSEi×EMRit-3+ +t+i+it,
Consistent with columns 1 to 4 of Table 7, we find that local hospital IT employment is strongly
correlated with reduced costs. In addition, we find a weakly persistent relationship between IT-intensive
locations and reduced costs, even controlling for hospital IT employment. We interpret this to suggest that
local expertise in hospital IT is particularly important but it may not explain all of the difference between
IT-intensive counties and other counties.
Effects by hospital IT experience: Internal expertise also can mitigate the costs of adoption of a new
process innovation. Importantly, unlike local factors, a hospital may be able to overcome some of these
issues by hiring outside expertise. Table 8 examines the interaction in the following format:
(6) Log(cit)= Xit +tXi +tZi +EMRit+EMRit-3+
+HIT_EXPERIENCEi×EMRit +HIT_EXPERIENCEi×EMRit-3+ +t+i+it,
As measures of hospital IT experience, we examine business software applications, clinical software
applications, and programmers employed (all measured in 1996, at the beginning of the sample). These can
be seen as measures of whether the hospital had prior experience in managing software. Given that the
sample is reduced by more than half when we merge in the CI database that contains experience
information, the additional insight imposes a significant cost on the analysis.
Still, Table 8 suggests a striking contrast to the effects of local IT-intensity. Internal expertise appears

25

to have little impact on the relationship between basic EMR and costs. It does appear related to reduced
costs for hospitals that adopt advanced EMR, but only in the first period after adoption. For each of the
three measures, a one standard deviation change yields a 2.5 to 3.9 percent decrease in costs per admittance
in the initial three years after advanced EMR adoption. Internal expertise therefore seems particularly
important for the most advanced applications that might involve a great deal of co-invention to be
successfully employed but any cost disadvantages from a lack of expertise are quickly overcome. We
speculate that this might be because it is not difficult for the hospital to hire the expertise from outside.
Broadly, the main message of Tables 6, 7, and 8 is consistent with this study’s framing, using the results of
prior literature on enterprise IT to understand EMR adoption.
Robustness, identification, and plausibility: Next, we explore the degree to which we can claim our
main results in table 6 are causal and general. There are four potential types of concerns. First, there might
be an omitted variable correlated with EMR adoption and with costs. Second, and related to this, it is
possible that unobservable changes in cost drivers are associated with EMR adoption differentially in high
and low IT intensity markets. Third, it is possible that anticipated changes in costs drive EMR adoption
(rather than EMR adoption driving changes in costs). Fourth, the large amount of missing data may mean
that our sample is not representative.
In anticipation of these concerns, we included in our previous analyses hospital and time fixed effects
as well as a very large set of covariates as controls. In order to address additional concerns we conduct three
types of analyses, examining the timing of the relationship between EMR adoption and cost changes,
instrumental variables analysis, and robustness to alternative specifications such as alternative treatments of
the missing variables.
In Figure 2, we examine the timing of the relationship between EMR adoption and changes in costs.
Specifically, we focus on eventual adopters and exploit variation across hospitals in year of adoption. We
run the equation (2) above, but add variables for 1 year before adoption, 2 years before adoption, 3 years
before adoption, and 4 or more years before adoption. Figures 2a and 2b demonstrate distinct effects for ITintensive and non-IT-intensive locations, defined by the top quartile of counties in terms of IT-intensive

26

industry. Figure 2a examines basic EMR adoption and Figure 2b examines advanced EMR adoption. Prior
to adoption, the costs follow similar patterns. During and after the initial adoption, however, the costs in
non-IT-intensive locations rise while the costs in IT-intensive locations fall substantially. The coefficients
for these regressions are shown in Appendix Table A.2. The timing of the impact of EMR displayed in
Figure 2 suggests that there is not a noticeable omitted variable driving the estimates. Similarly, there is no
evidence of differential time trends between IT-intensive and non-IT-intensive locations prior to EMR
adoption.
In Table 9, we apply instruments for EMR adoption to explore concerns about the direction of
causality; one possible concern is that hospitals (especially those in IT-intensive locations) anticipating a
reduction in costs will buy an EMR system. While the results are, at best, weakly significant, the signs are
consistent with the results of the main specifications. We emphasize three instruments that have some
power in the first stage (shown in the Appendix) and, under certain assumptions, may not directly impact
costs. First, we use geographic variation in hospitals that belong to multi-location hospital systems and use
EMR adoption by competing hospitals in other counties within the same systems as an instrument. This
instrument is similar to the one used in Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2008) to examine the impact of
internal expertise in IT on advanced internet adoption by U.S. businesses. The identification assumption is
that adoption by competing hospitals in other geographic markets will increase the likelihood of EMR
adoption by hospitals within the same system but in those other geographic markets. This will decrease the
costs of EMR adoption by the focal hospital but should not affect its other costs.
Second, we use the distance from the hospital to the closest EMR vendor as of 1996 (and interact this
with a time trend). The identification assumption is that hospitals near EMR vendor offices will have lower
costs for learning about EMR systems.
Third, we use information on hospital alliances and use adoption by other hospitals in the same
alliance as an instrument for own adoption. The identification assumption is that adoption by other
hospitals in the alliance might lead to lower EMR adoption costs or better information about EMR but will
not be coincident with trends in costs for other operating procedures. Given that we think the third

27

instrument requires the strongest assumptions, we show results for all three and for just the first two. In the
Appendix, we show just-identified results for each instrument.
Because the instruments are at the hospital level rather than the hospital-year level, we focus on one
covariate for EMR adoption: whether the hospital adopted EMR at least three years earlier. The instruments
vary in their first stage power, though they are generally weak with first stage F-statistics ranging from 2.00
to 23.23. The competing hospitals instrument is the most powerful; it works best for basic adoption but also
for advanced adoption. The distance to nearest vendor instrument is quite weak. The hospital alliance
instrument has some power for advanced adoption but little for basic adoption. For the second stage,
Hausman tests show that the coefficient values are not significantly different from the main results, though
this is driven more by high standard errors than similar coefficient values. The p-values of the
overidentification tests range from 0.28 to 0.75.
Column 1 of Table 9 shows that the coefficients on the main effect of basic EMR adoption turn
negative when we instrument for adoption. The main effect is positive (but not significant) for advanced
EMR adoption in column 2. Perhaps more importantly, columns 3 and 4 show that the signs of the results
on the difference between IT-intensive counties and other counties hold, and the results are weakly
significant for basic EMR. Columns 5 through 8 provide nearly identical qualitative results with just two
instruments. While not conclusive, we view the instrumental variables analysis as suggestive that our result
on the difference between IT intensive locations and other locations is unlikely to be driven by anticipated
changes in costs leading to more adoption.
In the Appendix, we address other concerns regarding specification. We show that results are robust to
dropping all controls, to adding controls for time-varying hospital characteristics and the Medicare case mix
index, and to changing the dependent variable to labor costs per admit, direct costs per admit, or total costs
per admit weighted by the Medicare case mix index. We also show that the results are robust to including
only those hospitals observed in all years (a balanced panel) and to dropping locations in which hospital IT
workers make up a substantial fraction of IT employment. We also document strong similarity between the
coefficients on the controls for our main sample and for a sample that excludes hospitals that never adopt,

28

suggesting that the control group of hospitals has a similar cost function to the treatment group.

VI. Conclusion
Drawing on a variety of data sources on IT, EMR, local demographics, and hospital characteristics,
this study demonstrates the value of viewing EMR adoption through the lens of the prior literature on IT
use in enterprises. While EMR adoption appears to be associated with an increase in costs on average, there
is important heterogeneity over time, across technologies, across locations, and across hospitals. Both basic
and advanced EMR adoption are initially associated with a rise in costs, and this initial increase in costs is
mitigated in hospitals with some internal information technology expertise. After three years, hospitals in
IT-intensive locations experience a (significant) 3.4 percent decrease in costs after adopting basic EMR,
and a marginally significant 2.2 percent decrease in costs after adopting advanced EMR. These benefits are
greatest in locations with a large number of HIT workers, though the benefits of IT-intensive locations
likely extend beyond local expertise in hospital IT. In contrast, hospitals in other locations experience an
increase in costs, even after several years.
As with any empirical work, our analysis has a number of limitations. First, we observe only a subset
of the medical providers in the United States. Doctors’ offices, outpatient clinics, nursing homes, and other
medical practices may have had a different experience. While we believe it is likely that the general
principles of the prior literature on IT would apply broadly, our evidence is specific to hospitals. Second,
we focus on a particular set of EMR technologies over a particular time period. It is possible that the
technologies that have arisen since 2009 may be more effective and easier to implement. Third, a key
assumption is that hospitals represent a small fraction of local IT expertise and employment. If this is not
the case, then our explanation based on complementarities related to co-invention costs is hard to justify.
This study also leaves open questions such as why hospitals adopt if their costs do not fall. It might be
due to the pursuit of a societal ideal in spite of the cost, misconceptions, expected benefits that we do not
measure, the difference between ex ante aspirations and ex post experience, or something else. We have
tried to address the endogeneity of this adoption through various techniques, but we cannot completely rule
out the possibility that adopting hospitals in IT-intensive locations adopt because they expect their costs to

29

fall for some reason other than the complementarities of the local IT environment. Relatedly, though the
evidence in the literature is mixed on whether hospitals accrue benefits, such as improved clinical outcomes
or reduced errors, it is possible that hospitals outside IT-intensive locations experience a sharp increase in
benefits such as clinical outcomes and reduced errors. In that case our findings on reduced costs only tell
part of the story.
Despite these limitations, we believe our results help inform the discussion on the “trillion dollar
conundrum,” providing the (perhaps missing) link between healthcare IT and healthcare costs. Indeed, our
results can be restated as a possible resolution to the trillion dollar conundrum. EMR may succeed when the
necessary complements are present and the complementary components are in place. Until then, the results
of EMR implementation, at best, can be only mixed. While EMR’s past mixed performance is no guarantee
of a future result, the past experience also is no guarantee of future failure. Over time, complementary IT
skills are expected to become more widely available, and the various components more widely deployed. If
so, more hospitals will enjoy the benefits of EMR and it may yet fulfill its promise.

References
Agha, L. 2012. The Eﬀects of Health Information Technology on the Costs and Quality of Medical Care.
Working paper, Boston University.
Arora, A. & C. Forman. 2007. Proximity and Information Technology Outsourcing: How Local are IT
Services Markets. Journal of Management Information System 24(2): 73-102.
Athey, S., & S. Stern. 2002. The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency Health Care Outcomes.
RAND Journal of Economics 33: 399-432.
Attewell, P. 1992. Technology Diffusion and Organizational Learning: The Case of Business Computing.
Organizational Science 3: 1–19.
Banker, R. & S. Slaughter. 1997. A Field Study of Scale Economies in Software Maintenance.
Management Science 43: 1709–1725.
Barnes, B.H. & T.B. Bollinger. 1991. Making reuse cost-effective. IEEE Software 8(1): 13–24.
Bartel, A, C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw. 2007. How Does Information Technology Affect Productivity?
Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement, and Worker Skills. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(4): 1721-1758.
Black, S. E., & L. M. Lynch. 2001. How To Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and Information
Technology on Productivity. Review of Economics and Statistics 83: 434-445.

30

Bloom, N., L. Garicano, R. Sadun, & J. Van Reenen. 2009. The Distinct Effects of Information Technology
and Communication Technology on Firm Organization. NBER Working Paper #14975.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, & J. Van Reenen. 2012. Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the
Productivity Miracle. American Economic Review 102(1): 167-201.
Borzekowski, R. 2009. Measuring the Cost Impact of Hospital Information Systems: 1987-1994 Journal of
Health Economics 28: 938-49.
Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, & L. M. Hitt. 2002. Information Technology, Workplace Organization,
and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1):
339-376.
Bresnahan, T. & S. Greenstein. 1996. Technical Progress and Co-invention in Computing and in the Uses
of Computers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 1996: 1-83.
Brynjolfsson, E. & L. Hitt. 2003. Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 85(4): 793-808.
Buntin, M. & Cutler, D. 2009. The Two Trillion Dollar Solution. Center for American Progress.
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2009/06/pdf/2trillion_solution.pdf.
Buntin, M., M. Burke, M. Hoagline, & D. Blumenthal. 2011. The Benefits of Health Information
Technology: A Review of the Recent Literature Shows Predominately Positive Results. Health Affairs
30(3): 464-471.
Callaway, Brant, and Vivek Ghosal. 2012. The Adoption and Diffusion of Health Information Technology:
The Case of Primary Care Clinics. Mimeo, Georgia Institute of Technology.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 2010. National Health Expenditure Projections 2010-2020. At
https://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/proj2010.pdf . Accessed Feb. 14, 2012.
Chaudhry, B., J. Wang, S. Wu, M. Maglione, W. Mojica, E. Roth, S. Morton, & P. Shekelle. 2006.
Systematic Review: Impact of Health Information Technology on Quality, Efficiency, and Costs of
Medical Care. Annals of Internal Medicine 144(10): 742-752.
Cohen, W. & D. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly 35: 128–152.
Congressional Budget Office. 2008. Evidences on the Costs and Benefits of Healthcare Information
Technology. Available at http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/91xx/doc9168/maintext.3.1.shtml. Accessed on
February 14, 2012.
Dranove, David, & Richard Lindrooth. 2003. Hospital consolidation and costs: another look at the
evidence. Journal of Health Economics 22: 983-997.
Fonkych, K. & R. Taylor. 2005. The State and Pattern of Health Information Technology Adoption. Santa
Monica, RAND Corporation
Forman, C., & A. Goldfarb. 2006. Diffusion of Information and Communication Technologies to
Businesses. In Handbook of Information Systems, Volume 1: Economics and Information Systems, ed.
Terrence Hendershott. pp.1–52. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Forman, C., A. Goldfarb, & S. Greenstein. 2005. How Did Location Affect the Adoption of the
Commercial Internet? Global Village vs Urban Density. Journal of Urban Economics, 58(3): 389-420.

31

Forman, C., A. Goldfarb, & S. Greenstein. 2008. Understanding Inputs into Innovation: Do Cities
Substitute for Internal Firm Resources? Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 295-316.
Forman, C., A. Goldfarb, & S. Greenstein. 2012. The Internet and Local Wages: A Puzzle. American
Economic Review, 102(1) 556-575.
Furukawa, M., Raghu, T. & B. Shao. 2010. Electronic Medical Records, Nurse Staffing, and NurseSensitive Patient Outcomes: Evidence from California Hospitals, 1998-2007. Health Services
Research 45(4): 941-962.
Greenstien, S. 2005. The Economic Geography of Internet Infrastructure in the United States. In Handbook
of Telecommunication Economics, Volume II eds. Martin Cave, Sumit Majumdar, and Ingo Vogelsang.
pp. 289-364. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Greenstein, S., & R. McDevitt. 2011, The Broadband Bonus: Estimating Broadband Internet’s Economic
Value. Telecommunications Policy 35: 617-632.
Hillestad, R., J. Bigelow, A. Bower, F. Girosi, R. Meili, R. Scoville, & R. Taylor. 2005. Can Electronic
Medical Record Systems Transform Healthcare? An Assessment of Potential Health Benefits, Savings,
and Costs. Health Affairs 24(5): 1103-17.
HIMSS Analytics. 2011. Essentials of the U.S. Hospital IT Market, 6th Edition.
Henderson, V. 2003. Marshall’s Scale Economies. Journal of Urban Economics 53(1): 1-28.
Hubbard, T. N. 2003. Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-Board Computers and Capacity
Utilization in Trucking. American Economic Review 93: 1328-1353.
Ichniowski, C., and K. Shaw. 2003. Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of the Value of
Complementary Human Resource Management Practices. Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1):
155-180.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, & Kevin J. Stiroh. 2005. Productivity, Volume 3: Information Technology
and the American Growth Resurgence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lee, Jinhyung, J. S. McCullough, & R.J. Town. 2012. The Impact of Health Information Technology on
Hospital Productivity. NBER Working Paper #18025.
McCormick, D., D. H. Bor, S. Woolhandler, & D. U. Himmelstein. 2012. Giving Office-Based Physicians
Electronic Access to Patients’ Prior Imaging And Lab Results Did Not Deter Ordering Of Tests.
Health Affairs 31(3): 488-496.
McCullough, J. 2008. The Adoption of Hospital Information Systems. Health Economics 17: 649-64.
McCullough, J., M. Casey, I. Moscovice, & S. Prasad. 2010. The effect of health information technology
on quality in US hospitals. Health Affairs 29: 647-654.
McCullough, J., S. T. Parente, & R.J. Town. 2011. The Effect of Health Information Technology on Patient
Outcomes. Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
McCullough, J., S. T. Parente, & R.J. Town. 2012. Health Information Technology and Quality: The Role
of Organizational and Informational Complementarities. Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
Miller, A. & C. Tucker. 2009. Privacy Protection and Technology Diffusion: The Case of Electronic
Medical Records. Management Science 55(7): 1077-93.

32

Miller, A. & C. Tucker. 2011. Can Healthcare Information Technology Save Babies? Journal of Political
Economy 119(2): 289-324.
Parente, S. & L. Van Horn. 2006. Valuing Hospital Investment in Information Technology: Does
Governance Make a Difference?” Health Care Financing Review 28(2): 31-43
Sidorov, J., 2006, “It Ain’t Necessarily So: The Electronic Health Record and the Unlikely Prospect of
Reducing Health Care Costs.” Health Affairs 25(4): 1079-85.
Solow, R. 1987. We’d better watch out. New York Times (July 12), Book Review, 36.
Triplett, J. 1999. The Solow Productivity Paradox: What Do Computers Do to Productivity? Canadian
Journal of Economics 32(2): 309-334.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2011. Surveys Show Significant Proportions of Hospitals
and Doctors Already Plan to Adopt Electronic Health Records and Qualify for Federal Incentive
Payments. HHS Press Release, 1/13/ 2011.

33

Table 1: Types of EMR and Hospital Adoption Rates
EMR

Clinical Data Repository
Clinical Decision Support
Order Entry
Computerized Physician
Order Entry
Physician Documentation

Description

% of Hospitals
Adopting
1996
2009
Real time database that consolidates clinical data to create a 0.134
0.809
unified patient medical record
Uses patient data to generate diagnostic and/or treatment
0.136
0.752
advice
Provides electronic forms to streamline hospital operations
0.196
0.851
(replacing faxes and paper forms
Electronic entry of physician treatment orders that can be
0.007
0.242
communicated to the pharmacy, lab, and other departments
Allows physicians to transition from written to electronic
0.033
0.227
notes

34

Table 2: Summary statistics
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev. Min

Max

# obs.

EMR MEASURES (2009 VALUES)
CDR
CDSS
Order entry
Basic EMR adoption (CDR, CDSS, or order entry)
CPOE
Physician documentation
Advanced EMR adoption (CPOE or Physician doc’n)
COST MEASURES (2009 VALUES)
Log total costs
Log total costs per admit
Log labor costs
Log direct costs
HOSPITAL-LEVEL CONTROLS (2009 VALUES)
Log inpatient days
Log outpatient visits
FIXED HOSPITAL-LEVEL CONTROLS (1996 DATA)
Log total costs per admit
Log total hospital beds
Independent practice association hospital
Management service organization hospital
Equity model hospital
Foundation hospital
Log admissions
Births (000s)
For-profit ownership
Non-secular nonprofit ownership
Non-profit church ownership
Number of discharges Medicare (000s)
Number of discharges Medicaid (000s)
Residency or Member of Council Teaching Hospitals
LOCATION-LEVEL CONTROLS
Log population in 2000 census
% Black in 2000 census
% age 65+ in 2000 census
% age 25-64 in 2000 census
% university education in 2000 census
Log median household income in 2000 census
OTHER VARIABLES USED
Top quartile county IT-intensive industry
Top county in IT-intensity, education, income, and pop.
County is in an MSA
Number of programmers in all hospitals in county in 1996
Number of programmers total in county in 1996
Number of programmers at hospital in 1996
Number of business applications at hospital in 1996
Number of clinical applications at hospital in 1996

35

0.809
0.752
0.851
0.870
0.242
0.227
0.306

0.393
0.432
0.357
0.336
0.428
0.420
0.461

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2856
2587
3046
2149
3527
3479
3198

17.987
9.885
8.933
9.840

1.326
0.511
0.540
0.512

14.015
5.902
5.293
5.902

21.950
15.977
14.897
15.946

4231
4231
4231
4231

9.833
11.113

1.405
1.408

1.792
0.000

13.194
15.124

4196
4202

9.065
4.807
0.250
0.200
0.079
0.156
8.214
0.810
0.146
0.483
0.124
3.554
2.798
0.189

0.388
0.904
0.433
0.400
0.270
0.363
1.188
1.119
0.353
0.500
0.330
1.899
1.228
0.392

7.232
1.792
0
0
0
0
2.773
0.000
0
0
0
1.001
1.001
0

11.928
7.233
1
1
1
1
10.931
13.614
1
1
1
17.876
21.184
1

4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016

11.840
0.113
0.136
0.853
0.137
10.552

1.781
0.144
0.038
0.046
0.059
0.243

7.643
0.000
0.028
0.455
0.037
9.697

16.069
0.843
0.347
1.047
0.402
11.303

4016
4016
4016
4016
4016
4016

0.424
0.494
0.234
0.423
0.544
0.498
11.895
35.462
1775.648 4509.823
1.238
6.284
4.204
3.736
2.019
2.117

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
229.593
24611.010
101
36
14

4231
4231
4231
4020
4020
1469
1461
1461

Table 3: Main effects by technology
(1)
Log total
costs per
admit
CDR

(2)
Log total
costs per
admit
CDSS

(3)
Log total
costs per
admit
Order
entry

(4)
Log total
costs per
admit
Basic EMR
adoption

(5)
Log total
costs per
admit
CPOE

Adopted EMR

0.0123
(0.0055)**

0.0114
(0.0059)*

0.0018
(0.0053)

0.0045
(0.0064)

0.0103
(0.0068)

Observations
# of hospitals
R-squared

31175
2964
0.58

27849
2679
0.57

33388
3161
0.58

23418
2228
0.58

-0.5061
(0.1476)***
-0.0493
(0.0960)
0.0280
(0.0079)***
0.0123
(0.0059)**
-0.0211
(0.0129)
-0.0234
(0.0026)***
-0.0077
(0.0020)***
-0.0003
(0.0013)
-0.0017
(0.0013)
-0.0027
(0.0027)
0.0017
(0.0016)
0.0011
(0.0020)
0.0016
(0.0007)**
-0.0101
(0.0021)***
0.0004
(0.0015)

-0.4917
(0.1688)***
-0.0386
(0.0977)
0.0257
(0.0080)***
0.0102
(0.0054)*
-0.0180
(0.0127)
-0.0221
(0.0029)***
-0.0082
(0.0021)***
-0.0005
(0.0014)
-0.0017
(0.0014)
-0.0022
(0.0028)
0.0023
(0.0017)
0.0021
(0.0020)
0.0021
(0.0007)***
-0.0102
(0.0021)***
-0.0000
(0.0015)

-0.5331
(0.1736)***
-0.0561
(0.0987)
0.0317
(0.0073)***
0.0150
(0.0056)***
-0.0267
(0.0120)**
-0.0221
(0.0024)***
-0.0090
(0.0019)***
-0.0000
(0.0013)
-0.0024
(0.0012)**
-0.0041
(0.0027)
0.0018
(0.0016)
0.0034
(0.0019)*
0.0014
(0.0006)**
-0.0105
(0.0019)***
-0.0004
(0.0014)

-0.4476
(0.1873)**
-0.0605
(0.1190)
0.0298
(0.0086)***
0.0171
(0.0067)**
-0.0306
(0.0143)**
-0.0202
(0.0030)***
-0.0083
(0.0024)***
-0.0009
(0.0015)
-0.0021
(0.0015)
-0.0025
(0.0032)
0.0022
(0.0019)
0.0027
(0.0022)
0.0018
(0.0008)**
-0.0105
(0.0022)***
0.0005
(0.0016)

Technology

CONTROLS
Log inpatient days
Log outpatient visits
Log inpatient days x Log
inpatient days
Log outpatient visits x Log
outpatient visits
Log inpatient days x Log
outpatient visits
Log total costs per admit in
1996 x year
Log total hospital beds x year
Independent practice assn.
hospital x year
Mngmt service org. hospital x
year
Equity model hospital x year
Foundation hospital x year
Log admissions x year
Births (000s) x year
For-profit ownership x year
Non-secular nonprofit
ownership x year

36

(6)
Log total costs
per admit

0.0248
(0.0075)***

(7)
Log total
costs per
admit
Advanced
EMR
adoption
0.0195
(0.0070)***

38167
3653
0.56

37519
3597
0.56

-0.5564
(0.1433)***
-0.0545
(0.0878)
0.0276
(0.0071)***
0.0105
(0.0050)**
-0.0173
(0.0115)
-0.0228
(0.0022)***
-0.0092
(0.0018)***
0.0008
(0.0012)
-0.0033
(0.0012)***
-0.0024
(0.0024)
0.0017
(0.0015)
0.0035
(0.0018)*
0.0017
(0.0006)***
-0.0096
(0.0018)***
-0.0004
(0.0013)

-0.6086
(0.1380)***
-0.0572
(0.0878)
0.0309
(0.0067)***
0.0112
(0.0050)**
-0.0181
(0.0115)
-0.0229
(0.0023)***
-0.0091
(0.0019)***
-0.0001
(0.0012)
-0.0024
(0.0012)*
-0.0025
(0.0025)
0.0014
(0.0015)
0.0033
(0.0019)*
0.0016
(0.0006)***
-0.0096
(0.0019)***
0.0000
(0.0013)

Physician
documentation

(8)
Log total
costs

(9)
Log total
costs

Basic EMR
adoption
0.0195
(0.0062)***

Advanced
EMR
adoption
0.0387
(0.0070)***

34407
3306
0.56

23418
2228
0.74

34407
3306
0.71

-0.6094
(0.1433)***
-0.0581
(0.0903)
0.0299
(0.0070)***
0.0104
(0.0050)**
-0.0165
(0.0118)
-0.0230
(0.0024)***
-0.0098
(0.0020)***
0.0001
(0.0013)
-0.0028
(0.0013)**
-0.0016
(0.0025)
0.0015
(0.0016)
0.0040
(0.0020)**
0.0018
(0.0007)***
-0.0097
(0.0019)***
-0.0004
(0.0014)

-0.2584
(0.0974)***
-0.0975
(0.0542)*
0.0264
(0.0052)***
0.0088
(0.0019)***
-0.0020
(0.0060)
-0.0118
(0.0027)***
-0.0016
(0.0020)
-0.0016
(0.0015)
-0.0026
(0.0017)
0.0016
(0.0034)
-0.0016
(0.0022)
-0.0045
(0.0019)**
0.0013
(0.0007)*
-0.0079
(0.0024)***
0.0022
(0.0016)

-0.1279
(0.0762)*
-0.0613
(0.0467)
0.0205
(0.0038)***
0.0088
(0.0013)***
-0.0048
(0.0047)
-0.0141
(0.0022)***
-0.0029
(0.0016)*
-0.0012
(0.0013)
-0.0024
(0.0014)*
0.0002
(0.0027)
-0.0008
(0.0019)
-0.0028
(0.0016)*
0.0014
(0.0006)**
-0.0056
(0.0019)***
0.0014
(0.0014)

Non-profit church ownership x
year
Number of discharges Medicare
(000s) x year
Number of discharges
Medicaid (000s) x year
Residency/Mmbr Council
Teaching Hosps x year
Year 1997
Year 1998
Year 1999
Year 2000
Year 2001
Year 2002
Year 2003
Year 2004
Year 2005
Year 2006
Year 2007
Year 2008
Year 2009
Log population in 2000 census
x year
% Black in 2000 census
x year
% age 65+ in 2000 census x
year
% age 25-64 in 2000 census x
year
% university education in 2000
census x year
Log median hh income in 2000
census x year

-0.0009
(0.0018)
0.0003
(0.0003)
0.0004
(0.0004)
0.0036
(0.0015)**
0.2244
(0.0414)***
0.4411
(0.0821)***
0.6618
(0.1227)***
0.8973
(0.1633)***
1.1234
(0.2043)***
1.3838
(0.2448)***
1.6243
(0.2855)***
1.8421
(0.3264)***
2.0953
(0.3671)***
2.3531
(0.4079)***
2.6015
(0.4489)***
2.8390
(0.4895)***
3.0933
(0.5301)***
-0.0008
(0.0006)
-0.0202
(0.0042)***
-0.0460
(0.0172)***
-0.0216
(0.0133)
0.0379
(0.0133)***
0.0082
(0.0041)**

-0.0007
(0.0020)
0.0003
(0.0003)
0.0003
(0.0004)
0.0032
(0.0016)**
0.1872
(0.0421)***
0.3730
(0.0840)***
0.5606
(0.1257)***
0.7641
(0.1674)***
0.9622
(0.2094)***
1.1876
(0.2509)***
1.3972
(0.2927)***
1.5819
(0.3345)***
1.8078
(0.3763)***
2.0338
(0.4182)***
2.2542
(0.4604)***
2.4531
(0.5021)***
2.6777
(0.5439)***
-0.0015
(0.0006)**
-0.0207
(0.0043)***
-0.0306
(0.0178)*
-0.0384
(0.0133)***
0.0290
(0.0142)**
0.0117
(0.0042)***

-0.0013
(0.0017)
0.0002
(0.0003)
0.0003
(0.0004)
0.0039
(0.0014)***
0.2002
(0.0389)***
0.3891
(0.0770)***
0.5843
(0.1150)***
0.7903
(0.1532)***
0.9869
(0.1915)***
1.2240
(0.2295)***
1.4375
(0.2678)***
1.6271
(0.3059)***
1.8492
(0.3441)***
2.0802
(0.3823)***
2.3023
(0.4207)***
2.5108
(0.4589)***
2.7375
(0.4971)***
-0.0010
(0.0005)*
-0.0215
(0.0040)***
-0.0355
(0.0163)**
-0.0212
(0.0127)*
0.0301
(0.0126)**
0.0088
(0.0038)**

-0.0007
(0.0021)
0.0001
(0.0004)
0.0002
(0.0005)
0.0031
(0.0018)*
0.1744
(0.0449)***
0.3399
(0.0893)***
0.5077
(0.1336)***
0.6987
(0.1778)***
0.8770
(0.2224)***
1.0860
(0.2665)***
1.2787
(0.3109)***
1.4423
(0.3553)***
1.6494
(0.3997)***
1.8581
(0.4441)***
2.0581
(0.4888)***
2.2439
(0.5330)***
2.4494
(0.5775)***
-0.0013
(0.0007)*
-0.0198
(0.0046)***
-0.0333
(0.0188)*
-0.0311
(0.0137)**
0.0267
(0.0154)*
0.0107
(0.0045)**

-0.0008
(0.0017)
0.0002
(0.0003)
0.0004
(0.0004)
0.0028
(0.0014)**
0.2103
(0.0370)***
0.4115
(0.0736)***
0.6222
(0.1099)***
0.8397
(0.1465)***
1.0528
(0.1831)***
1.2987
(0.2195)***
1.5223
(0.2561)***
1.7264
(0.2927)***
1.9646
(0.3292)***
2.2093
(0.3657)***
2.4429
(0.4025)***
2.6635
(0.4390)***
2.9075
(0.4755)***
-0.0012
(0.0005)**
-0.0197
(0.0038)***
-0.0409
(0.0157)***
-0.0189
(0.0126)
0.0413
(0.0120)***
0.0080
(0.0037)**

-0.0005
(0.0017)
0.0003
(0.0003)
0.0006
(0.0004)
0.0026
(0.0014)*
0.2217
(0.0381)***
0.4324
(0.0755)***
0.6522
(0.1129)***
0.8827
(0.1505)***
1.1018
(0.1882)***
1.3614
(0.2256)***
1.5947
(0.2632)***
1.8067
(0.3008)***
2.0578
(0.3383)***
2.3127
(0.3759)***
2.5551
(0.4137)***
2.7864
(0.4513)***
3.0419
(0.4888)***
-0.0014
(0.0005)***
-0.0183
(0.0039)***
-0.0436
(0.0161)***
-0.0163
(0.0132)
0.0470
(0.0125)***
0.0071
(0.0038)*

-0.0002
(0.0018)
0.0002
(0.0003)
0.0005
(0.0004)
0.0028
(0.0015)*
0.2127
(0.0398)***
0.4155
(0.0790)***
0.6295
(0.1181)***
0.8525
(0.1575)***
1.0656
(0.1969)***
1.3172
(0.2360)***
1.5428
(0.2754)***
1.7488
(0.3147)***
1.9914
(0.3539)***
2.2389
(0.3933)***
2.4736
(0.4327)***
2.6971
(0.4720)***
2.9475
(0.5113)***
-0.0014
(0.0006)**
-0.0180
(0.0041)***
-0.0344
(0.0166)**
-0.0181
(0.0139)
0.0498
(0.0131)***
0.0076
(0.0040)*

-0.0004
(0.0022)
0.0005
(0.0003)
-0.0007
(0.0004)*
0.0019
(0.0019)
0.0690
(0.0461)
0.1164
(0.0917)
0.1728
(0.1366)
0.2578
(0.1820)
0.3313
(0.2274)
0.4202
(0.2727)
0.4992
(0.3181)
0.5501
(0.3636)
0.6339
(0.4092)
0.7091
(0.4545)
0.7775
(0.5000)
0.8364
(0.5455)
0.8960
(0.5912)
0.0000
(0.0007)
-0.0142
(0.0049)***
-0.0221
(0.0207)
-0.0462
(0.0144)***
0.0278
(0.0150)*
0.0175
(0.0044)***

-0.0012
(0.0019)
0.0004
(0.0003)
-0.0005
(0.0004)
0.0012
(0.0016)
0.0920
(0.0390)**
0.1574
(0.0771)**
0.2359
(0.1151)**
0.3378
(0.1533)**
0.4252
(0.1915)**
0.5396
(0.2297)**
0.6341
(0.2679)**
0.7080
(0.3062)**
0.8105
(0.3445)**
0.9042
(0.3828)**
0.9870
(0.4211)**
1.0649
(0.4594)**
1.1451
(0.4979)**
-0.0005
(0.0005)
-0.0129
(0.0042)***
-0.0286
(0.0182)
-0.0472
(0.0129)***
0.0429
(0.0128)***
0.0174
(0.0038)***

Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at
means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

37

Table 4: Main effects by technology, by years since adoption

Technology

Adopt this year
Adopt 1 year earlier
Adopt 2 years earlier
Adopt 3 years earlier
Adopt 4 years earlier
Adopt 5 years earlier
Adopt at least 6 years
earlier

(1)
Log total
costs per
admit
CDR

(2)
Log total
costs per
admit
CDSS

(3)
Log total
costs per
admit
Order
entry

(4)
Log total
costs per
admit
Basic EMR
adoption

(5)
Log total
costs per
admit
CPOE

(6)
Log total
costs per
admit
Physician
documentation

(7)
Log total
costs per
admit
Advanced
EMR adoption

(8)
Log total
costs

(9)
Log total
costs

Basic EMR
adoption

0.0121
(0.0058)**
0.0132
(0.0065)**
0.0125
(0.0072)*
0.0087
(0.0081)
0.0004
(0.0091)
-0.0016
(0.0105)
0.0028
(0.0122)

0.0072
(0.0063)
0.0073
(0.0070)
0.0133
(0.0076)*
0.0159
(0.0083)*
0.0048
(0.0093)
0.0078
(0.0105)
0.0007
(0.0123)

-0.0041
(0.0057)
0.0023
(0.0061)
0.0037
(0.0069)
-0.0039
(0.0076)
-0.0090
(0.0084)
-0.0141
(0.0098)
-0.0158
(0.0112)

0.0023
(0.0067)
-0.0002
(0.0075)
0.0037
(0.0083)
-0.0012
(0.0091)
-0.0142
(0.0102)
-0.0164
(0.0115)
-0.0192
(0.0132)

0.0114
(0.0068)*
0.0123
(0.0075)
0.0106
(0.0087)
0.0146
(0.0099)
0.0075
(0.0121)
0.0004
(0.0130)
-0.0056
(0.0165)

0.0228
(0.0085)***
0.0270
(0.0087)***
0.0338
(0.0089)***
0.0275
(0.0105)***
0.0280
(0.0108)***
0.0244
(0.0135)*
-0.0197
(0.0144)

0.0189
(0.0074)**
0.0260
(0.0078)***
0.0235
(0.0087)***
0.0160
(0.0100)
0.0147
(0.0112)
0.0148
(0.0135)
-0.0232
(0.0145)

0.0148
(0.0062)**
0.0185
(0.0072)***
0.0199
(0.0075)***
0.0184
(0.0087)**
0.0078
(0.0098)
0.0018
(0.0111)
0.0050
(0.0133)

Advanced
EMR
adoption
0.0331
(0.0065)***
0.0444
(0.0073)***
0.0418
(0.0079)***
0.0400
(0.0095)***
0.0383
(0.0104)***
0.0432
(0.0129)***
0.0145
(0.0151)

31175
27849
33388
23418
38167
37519
34407
23418
34407
Observations
2964
2679
3161
2228
3653
3597
3306
2228
3306
# of hospitals
0.58
0.57
0.58
0.58
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.74
0.71
R-squared
Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at
means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. All regressions include the same set of controls as in Table 3. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

38

Table 5: Main effects by technology, by years since adoption

Technology
Adopt in previous 3 year period
Adopt at least 3 years earlier

(1)
Log total costs
per admit
Basic EMR
adoption
0.0053
(0.0063)
-0.0077
(0.0089)

(2)
Log total costs
per admit
Advanced
EMR adoption
0.0253
(0.0069)***
0.0065
(0.0097)

(3)
Log total costs

(4)
Log total costs

Basic EMR
adoption
0.0195
(0.0061)***
0.0115
(0.0087)

Advanced
EMR adoption
0.0410
(0.0066)***
0.0340
(0.0099)***

23418
34407
23418
34407
Observations
2228
3306
2228
3306
# of hospitals
0.58
0.56
0.74
0.71
R-squared
Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include
hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in
parentheses. All regressions include the same set of controls as in Table 3. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%

39

Table 6: Interactions with IT-intensive location
(1)
Definition of IT-intensive
location

Technology

Adopt in previous 3 year
period
Adopt at least 3 years
earlier
Adopt in previous 3 yr pd
x IT-intensive location
Adopt at least 3 yrs earlier
x IT-intensive location

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Log total costs per admit
Log total costs
Top quartile county ITHigh all factors: County
MSA
Top quartile county ITintensive industries
pop. over 150k and Top
intensive industries
quartile county in ITintensive industry,
education, and income
Basic EMR
Advanced
Basic EMR Advanced
Basic
Advanced
Basic EMR
Advanced
adoption
EMR
adoption
EMR
EMR
EMR
adoption
EMR
adoption
adoption
adoption adoption
adoption
0.0128
0.0403
0.0068
0.0311
0.0042
0.0514
0.0306
0.0517
(0.0085)
(0.0102)*** (0.0074)
(0.0089)*** (0.0106)
(0.0132)*** (0.0086)*** (0.0102)***
0.0170
0.0382
0.0032
0.0209
0.0066
0.0714
0.0393
0.0561
(0.0123)
(0.0145)*** (0.0102)
(0.0121)*
(0.0155)
(0.0194)*** (0.0119)*** (0.0140)***
-0.0157
-0.0285
-0.0051
-0.0164
0.0017
-0.0375
-0.0232
-0.0202
(0.0126)
(0.0140)**
(0.0128)
(0.0136)
(0.0132)
(0.0155)**
(0.0120)*
(0.0131)
-0.0513
-0.0597
-0.0381
-0.0426
-0.0230
-0.0931
-0.0578
-0.0415
(0.0178)*** (0.0189)*** (0.0171)** (0.0184)**
(0.0189)
(0.0220)*** (0.0171)*** (0.0193)**

23418
34407
23418
34407
23418
34407
23418
34407
Observations
2228
3306
2228
3306
2228
3306
2228
3306
# of hospitals
0.58
0.56
0.58
0.56
0.58
0.56
0.74
0.71
R-squared
Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at
means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. All regressions include the same set of controls as in Table 3 plus a time trend for ITintensive location, defined as top quartile in columns 1,2,7, and 8, as high all factors in columns 3and 4, and as MSA in columns 5 and 6. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

40

Table 7: Location characteristics: IT Workers and Healthcare IT workers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Definition of IT-intensive location
Top quartile IT-intensive
Top quartile IT-intensive
Top quartile IT-intensive Top quartile IT-intensive
workers defined in 1996 data workers defined in 2002
workers defined in 1996
workers defined in 2002
data
data
data
Technology
Basic EMR
Advanced
Basic EMR
Advanced
Basic EMR Advanced
Basic EMR
Advanced
adoption
EMR
adoption
EMR
adoption
EMR
adoption
EMR
adoption
adoption
adoption
adoption
0.0111
0.0374
0.0114
0.0346
0.0138
0.0395
0.0136
0.0416
Adopt in previous 3 year period
(0.0074)
(0.0086)*** (0.0073)
(0.0087)*** (0.0087)
(0.0105)*** (0.0086)
(0.0105)***
0.0064
0.0296
0.0074
0.0240
0.0180
0.0390
0.0192
0.0416
Adopt at least 3 years earlier
(0.0106)
(0.0123)**
(0.0108)
(0.0126)*
(0.0124)
(0.0147)*** (0.0126)
(0.0149)***
-0.0367
-0.0326
-0.0346
-0.0439
-0.0290
-0.0341
-0.0253
-0.0278
Adopt in previous 3 yr pd x top
(0.0175)**
(0.0184)*
(0.0177)*
(0.0169)*** (0.0168)*
(0.0166)**
(0.0158)
(0.0157)*
quartile HIT workers
-0.0473
-0.0501
-0.0694
-0.0733
-0.0355
-0.0449
-0.0461
-0.0435
Adopt at least 3 yrs earlier x top
(0.0244)*
(0.0249)**
(0.0252)*** (0.0265)*** (0.0234)
(0.0227)**
(0.0218)**
(0.0214)**
quartile HIT workers
0.0131
-0.0077
0.0118
0.0120
Adopt in previous 3 yr pd x top
(0.0187)
(0.0178)
(0.0173)
quartile non-hospital IT workers (0.0175)
-0.0077
-0.0201
0.0122
0.0179
Adopt at least 3 yrs earlier x top
(0.0247)
(0.0247)
(0.0253)
quartile non-hospital IT workers (0.0240)
-0.0022
-0.0088
-0.0034
-0.0162
Adopt in previous 3 yr pd x IT(0.0136)
(0.0152)
(0.0130)
(0.0144)
intensive location
-0.0342
-0.0340
-0.0305
-0.0410
Adopt at least 3 yrs earlier x IT(0.0195)*
(0.0210)
(0.0188)
(0.0201)**
intensive location
22552
33133
23220
34161
22552
33133
23220
34161
Observations
2114
3133
2206
3278
2114
3133
2206
3278
# of hospitals
0.59
0.57
0.58
0.56
0.59
0.57
0.58
0.56
R-squared
Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at
means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. All regressions include the same set of controls as in Table 3 plus a time trends for location
IT intensity characteristics used in the regression. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

41

Table 8: Interactions with internal HIT experience
(1)

(2)
Definition of internal
Number of business
HIT experience
applications in 1996
Technology
Basic EMR
Advanced
adoption
EMR adoption
0.0480
Adopt in previous 3 year 0.0065
(0.0120)
(0.0129)***
period
-0.0076
0.0296
Adopt at least 3 years
(0.0181)
(0.0208)
earlier
-0.0040
Adopt in previous 3 yr pd 0.00004
(0.0018)
(0.0017)**
x HIT experience
0.0013
-0.0023
Adopt at least 3 yrs
(0.0028)
(0.0029)
earlier x HIT
experience

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Number of clinical applications
Number of programmers
in 1996
employed in 1996
Basic EMR
Advanced
Basic EMR
Advanced
adoption
EMR adoption adoption
EMR adoption
0.0036
0.0533
0.0070
0.0317
(0.0120)
(0.0134)***
(0.0080)
(0.0088)***
-0.0032
0.0256
-0.0040
0.0171
(0.0163)
(0.0193)
(0.0115)
(0.0138)
0.0016
-0.0103
0.0001
-0.0013
(0.0036)
(0.0035)***
(0.0006)
(0.0006)**
0.0007
-0.0029
0.0010
0.0007
(0.0051)
(0.0050)
(0.0008)
(0.0013)

10262
14557
10262
14557
10290
14653
Observations
827
1183
827
1183
829
1190
# of hospitals
0.67
0.62
0.67
0.62
0.67
0.62
R-squared
Dependent variable is costs per admit. Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include hospitalspecific fixed effects, differenced out at means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. All regressions include the same set of controls as in
Table 3 plus a time trend for HIT experience. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

42

Table 9: Instrumental variables results
(1)
Technology

Basic EMR
adoption

Adopted EMR at least 3 years earlier

-0.0595
(0.1069)

Adopted EMR at least 3 years earlier x
IT-intensive county

(2)

(3)
Three instruments
Advanced
Basic EMR
EMR
adoption
adoption
0.1648
0.1804
(0.1625)
(0.1386)
-0.3799
(0.2142)*

(4)
Advanced
EMR
adoption
0.4133
(0.2277)*
-0.2827
(0.2315)

(5)
Basic EMR
adoption
-0.0652
(0.1073)

(6)

(7)
(8)
Two instruments
Advanced
Basic EMR Advanced
EMR
adoption
EMR
adoption
adoption
0.5014
0.1813
0.9304
(0.4985)
(0.1424)
(0.6882)
-0.3867
-0.6318
(0.2177)*
(0.5814)

23407
34385
23407
34385
23407
34385
23407
34385
Observations
2217
3284
2217
3284
2217
3284
2217
3284
# of hospitals
0.51
0.38
0.65
0.56
0.28
0.41
0.31
0.75
Overidentification test (p-value)
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Hausman test (p-value)
0.58
0.54
0.55
0.52
0.58
0.45
0.55
0.38
R-squared
Dependent variable is total operating costs per admit. Unit of observation is a hospital-year. Sample includes annual data from 1996 to 2009. Regressions include
hospital-specific fixed effects, differenced out at means. Robust standard errors, clustered by hospital, in parentheses. All regressions include the same set of
controls as in Table 3 plus time trends for IT-intensive location (in columns 3,4, 7, and 8). First stage results shown in Appendix Table A.10. Three instruments
are log distance to nearest vendor in 1996 multiplied by a time trend, percent of hospitals in alliance adopting EMR technology, and EMR adoption by
competitors in other markets where hospital operates. The alliance instrument does not appear in the two instruments results. Overidentification test uses Hansen
J statistic.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

43

Figure 1a: Percent rise in costs per admit from year earlier, by
timing of basic EMR adoption
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
All locations

Non‐IT intensive locations

3 years before adopt

year adopt

IT‐Intensive locations
3 years after

Figure 1b: Percent rise in costs per admit from year earlier,
by timing of advanced EMR adoption
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
All locations

Non‐IT intensive locations

3 years before adopt

year adopt

44

IT‐Intensive locations
3 years after

Figure 2a: Coefficients by years from Basic EMR adoption
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
‐0.02
‐0.04
‐0.06
‐0.08
‐0.1
‐0.12

4 or more 3 years
years
before
before
adoption
adoption

2 years
before
adoption

1 year
Adoption 1 year after 2 years
before
period
adoption
after
adoption
adoption

non IT intensive location

3 years
after
adoption

4 years
after
adoption

5 years 6 or more
after
years after
adoption adoption

IT intensive location

Figure 2b: Coefficients by years from advanced EMR adoption
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
‐0.05
‐0.1
‐0.15
‐0.2

4 or more 3 years
years
before
before
adoption
adoption

2 years
before
adoption

1 year
Adoption 1 year after 2 years
before
period
adoption
after
adoption
adoption

non IT intensive location

3 years
after
adoption

4 years
after
adoption

IT intensive location

Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Full set of coefficients in Appendix Table A.2

45

5 years 6 or more
after
years after
adoption adoption

