NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TFIE TERM STRUCTURE OF
INTEREST RATES:
EVIDENCE AND THEORY

Angelo Melino

Working Paper No. 1828

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1986

Most of this paper was written while the author was a visitor to the
Bank of Canada in the suriner of 1983. The hospitality and corinients
of Chuck Freedman and the members of the Monetary and Financial
Analysis Division are gratefully acknowledged. Olivier Blanchard,
John Campbell, Ben Friedman, James Poterba, Bob Shiller and an anonymous referee also provided useful advice. Responsibility for any
remaining errors, however is my own. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER 1tThg Paper #1828
Fthniary 1986

The Tern Strrture of Interest Pates: Evidence and Theory

The term structure of interest rates is an old topic. Over the years,
both the hypotheses debated and the research techniques used have changed

considerably. Two fairly recent developments which distinguish current
research are the widespread adoption of rational expectations and the
integration of the term structure with the general theory of asset

pricing. This survey reviews previous work from this perspective. The
main objective is to catalog available evidence about term premia and to
interpret this evidence in light of alternative models of term premia
determination.

Angelo Mel mo
Institute for Policy

Analysis
University of 'Ibronto
140 St. Ceorqe Street
Suite 707
Tbronw, ctario M59 LA1

THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES: EVIDENCE AND THEORY

Financial markets are characterized by a wide array of fixed—income

securities, each bearing its own particular rate of interest. The study
of the relationship among these various yields, as opposed to their
overall level, falls under the rubric of the term structure of interest

rates. The distinction between models which determine relative yields
and those which determine the general level of interest rates is often

forced. The best formulated models should provide an integrated
explanation of both. Nonetheless, a well established tradition of
research has focused on the apparently simpler problem of determining
only relative yields.

This paper has two main objectives (i)to survey the literature on
the term structure of interest rates with particular attention to the
empirical evidence and methodology; and (ii) to catalog available
evidence regarding term premia and to interpret this evidence in light of
alternative models of their determination.

The literature on the term structure of interest rates has grown

very large and unwieldy. Over the years. both the hypotheses debated and
the techniques employed by researchers have changed considerably. This
shifting focus complicates the task of those seeking an introduction to

this literature. An important goal of this paper is to provide an
historical guide that reduces the barriers to entry for both students and
non—specialists.

Two fairly recent developments which distinguish current research
are the widespread adoption of rational expectations and the integration

of the term structure with recent advances in the general theory of asset

2

pricing. The important change in perspective brought about by these
developments requires a re—evaluation of the earlier literature. This
survey attempts to identify earlier studies that are still relevant to
the current research agenda, as well as to surmnarize the main conclusions
of recent investigations.

Economists have had a long interest in the term structure.
According to the conventional wisdom, the central bank mainly affects
short—term interest rates such as call money rates or the yields on

Treasury bills. Real economic activity, an the other hand, is more
closely linked to the yield on bonds with the same maturity as physical

capital, say in the order of 10 to 20 years. According to this view, it
is crucial that we understand the factors which influence the relative
yields on these different types of securities, in order to understand the
impact of central bank actions on the real side of the economy.1
The price of a bond should presumably depend upon its features.
Important characteristics include (1) the maturity of the bond; (ii) the
size and timing of its coupons; (iii) the provision of options to call,
extend or convert the bond; and (iv) factors which affect the probability

of timely payment, such as the credit worthiness of the issuer. The
principal concern in the mainstream economics literature has been with
the pricing of bonds identical in every respect except for maturity. In
particular, economists have studied the pricing- of pure discount bonds,

that are not only free of default risk, but also free of call or other

options.2 Almost all of the empirical work has dealt with Treasury or
high—grade corporate securities. This emphasis on a very simple and
specialized aspect of bond pricing has been productive, but not without

3

its costs. Until recently, pure discount bonds did not exist, except at
short maturities. As a result, prior to the empirical testing of term
structure models, actual data on the prices of heterogeneous,

coupon—bearing bonds were processed into an estimate of the yield curve

for pure discount bonds. This preliminary data analysis is laden with
difficulty.3

Because of its historical importance, the expectations model of the

term structure is the central focus of this survey. The literature on
this subject is extremely large and often confusing. Despite the immense
research activity, it may appear that we have learned little.
Professional opinion has vacillated and the quality of much of the
empirical research is questionable.4

When I started my own research in

this area, one of my colleagues warned that altogether too much has been
written on the topic already and that we should agree to allow the entire
literature to die a quiet death.

One of the conclusions of this survey is that frustration as to the
implications of existing empirical research about the expectations model

is largely unwarranted. Historically, most of the confusion has been due
to the lack of a professional consensus about how to model expectations.
If one adopts the current view that expectations are rational, in the
sense of Muth (1961), the implications of existing research become much

clearer. The papers which are consistent with rational expectations and
exercise care in the examination of high quality data speak with an
a'most uniform voice.

The main developments and empirical conclusions, discussed in detail
in the text, can be broadly summarized as follows.

4

The substantive prediction of the expectations hypothesis is that

term premia are time invariant. Until the early 1970s. this prediction
was not seriously challenged and the central question that dominated
empirical research was the relationship between the average

(unconditional) term premia and maturity. Indeed, much ink was spilled
on whether or not these term premia were in fact zero. With the adoption
of rational expectations, a consensus was established that term premia
have been generally positive and increasing (but not monotonically) with
maturity.

Subsequently, the focus of research shifted to the question of

whether or not movements in the yield curve are due entirely to revisions
in expectations about the level of future short rates brought about by

the arrival of new information.6 In other words, if we maintain that
expectations are rational can we conclude that term premia are time
invariant?

The earliest empirical studies provide evidence to reject this
hypothesis about term premia at the short end of the maturity spectrum

and subsequent research confirms this conclusion. Using data for longer
maturity bonds, however, many authors investigated and failed to reject

the expectations model. Nonetheless, as described in Section 5, care in
the selection of the alternative hypothesis and in the collection of
data have recently resulted in the accumulation of convincing empirical

evidence. The best documented result is that holding premia on løng
bonds have been positively correlated with the spread between long and
short rates.

The paper is organized as follows.

In Section 2, the expectations

S

model is discussed and compared to competing models of the term

structure. The objective is to survey different well—formulated
approaches to modelling term premla. Recent research has focused on
whether or not the stylized facts about term premia can be accounted for

by models which treat them as rewards to bearing risk.7 As much of this
work is in its early stages, I provide only a brief discussion of the

preliminary empirical findings. In general, the empirical evidence about
term premia is presented on an historical basis. In Section 3, the main
controversies which were debated up until the mid 1960s are reviewed. In

Section 4, the rather confusing literature that followed Meiselmans
(1962) suggestion of divorcing expectations from subsequent realizations

is assessed. The discussion extends to the general adoption of rational
expectations in the l970s. Section 5 surveys recent evidence concerning
the time variation of term premia. Following a well established
tradition, the paper ends with a brief conclusion.

2. ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF PRICE DETERMINATION
Most of the research on the term structure of interest rates has

focused on one of the many variants of the expectations model. However.
many alternative frameworks have been proposed that also characterize

equilibrium restrictions on expected asset yields. The purpose of this
section is to review quickly these alternatives, since several of them
are unfamiliar except to specialists in finance, and to provide a common
framework for comparing them.

6

Consider the following class of models

Et H(n)

H(R(l). Xt)

R(l) +

n =

2,3...

(2.1)

where Ht(n) denotes the one—period holding yield (coupon plus any

capital gains or losses) on an n period bond; Rt(m) denotes the yield
to maturity on an rn—period bond; and

is a vector of relevant variables

which will be described in more detail below. Tt(n) denotes a term
premium.

The left hand side of (2.1) denotes the market's expectation of

Ht(n). it is generally agreed that the markets expectation cannot be
directly measured.8 One of the central objectives of researchers has
been to construct an empirical counterpart to the unobservable market

expectation. Opinion on the merits of various suggestions has varied
considerably, and debate continues.

it is important to stress that if it stands alone, the relationship

described by (2.1) is a tautology. it simply expresses an accounting
identity and is void of empirical content. The model becomes interesting
only when we specify explicit and refutable models for expectations and
for term prernia. With only a model of expectation formation, (2.1)

simply defines the term premium. Similarly, a model of term premium
determination allows us to construct via (2.1) a model of the market's
expectation.

Current opinion favours viewing Et as a conditional expectation
operator with respect to an information set

assumed that

.

It

is usually

includes at least current and past yields on bonds of

7

all maturities. The merits of rational as opposed to 'reasonable'
expectations remains an area of controversy. Nonetheless, in this paper
it will be assumed that the true model (2.1) obtains with rational

expectations and the evaluation of available empirical evidence will be
from this perspective.

2.1 The Expectations Model of the Term Structure
Perhaps the simplest assumption we can make is that the term premia
are time Invariant,

EtFIt(n) =

Rt(l)

+

T(n)

n

2,3,...

(2.2)

There have been many traditions in the term structure literature.
Although comparing holding period yields on short and long bonds goes
back at least to Keynes (1930), empirical work based on (2.2) is

relatively new. Most of the original work compared forward rates to

subsequent spot rates. Subsequently, authors tended to emphasize the
relationship between the yield to maturity on long bonds and the sequence

of future short rates. Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) provide a review
of these different approaches. In addition, they show that these three
variants of the expectations model are logically incompatible, strictly

speaking. This is moderately bothersome. Shiller (1979) and SMiler,
Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983) have shown, however, that the three
versions of the expectations model are not substantively dissimilar, as
they are well approximated (within the range of historical variation) by

a famfly of linear approximations which is internally consistent.9 In

a

particular,

the holding period yield is highly correlated with the

approximation ht(n) satisfying

ht(n) =

R(n)

+

(0(n)—i)

[Rt(n) —

Rt+i(n—1)]

n =

(l—g')/(l—g)

where 0(n) =

2.3,...

(2.3)

denotes the 'duration' of the long bond, and

g is a "typical" discount rate.
If we ignore the distinction between the holding period yield and
its approximation then we are led to a constant coefficient stochastic
difference equation which we can solve as

n—I

sK E t+k +
0(n)

z

R(n) =

ko

V(n;

n =

2,3,...

t2.4)

n

with U(n) =

gk T(k)/D(nL10

This form of the expectations

model relates the long rate to a weighted average of current and expected

future short rates. The formula given in (2.4) is meant for coupon
bearing bonds and as a consequence the weights decline into the future.

For pure discount bonds the weights become n yielding the familiar
arithmetic approximation.

Early empirical work on the expectations model focused on forward
The forward rates for pure discount bonds are defined by

rates F(n).
the relationship

(l+F(n)) =

(l+Rt(n+1)/(l+R(nfl

(2.5)

9

Arbitrage arguments based on expectations held with certainty or
risk neutrality led to the model

F(n) = Et Rt+n(l) + L(n)

n =

1,2,3,...

(2.6)

With short selling, forward rates for pure discount bonds constitute
the implicit one period rate at which agents can contract today to borrow

or lend n periods into the future. The appropriate definition of forward
rates for coupon bearing bands is not clear. Shiller. Campbell and
Schoenholtz (1983) provide a useful extension of the usual definition.

Their definition of a forward rate is well approximated by

D(n+l) R (n+l) —

t

0(n)

D(n+l) —

0(n)

f(n) =

Rt (n)
(2.7)

if we ignore the approximation errors (i.e.. treat (2.2) and (2.6)

as obtaining with ht(n) and

replacing H(n) and F(n) ), then

it can be shown that the three variants of the expectations model are

equivalent in the sense that any one implies the other two. This is
extremely useful since empirical investigation has proceeded under all

three definitions. The accuracy of the linear approximations gives us
some justification in treating all evidence symmetrically as pertaining
to the expectations model.

10

2.2 Capital Asset Pricing Model
The workhorse of security pricing in the finance literature has been
the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) developed by Sharpe (1964) and

Lintner (1965). As pointed out by Roll (1971) and McCallum (1975), CAPM
implies a term premium of the form'1

T(n)

=

Bt(n)*Et(RMt

—

(2.8)

Rt(1))

where RMt denotes the rate of return on the market portfolio and

is the ratio of the conditional covariance of Ht(n) and RMt to the
conditional variance of the market return.

There are many derivations of the CAPM model, but necessary and
sufficient conditions for market equilibrium to obey the restrictions of

CAPM are not known. The usual derivation begins from a set of sufficient
conditions which includes mean variance preferences defined over end of
period wealth, as originally posited by Markowitz (1952).

Although many of the predictions of the CAPM appear to be broadly
correct (see Jensen (1972)), professional opinion on the model

merits

is increasingly negative (see Ross(1978fl.

Research has uncovered several empirical anomalies. For example, it
is now well documented that idiosyncratic risk (Fama and Macbeth (1973))

and small—firm (or "January") effects (Reinganum (1981)) appear in the
pricing relationship, in addition to the effect of systematic risk as
measured by market proxies.

It must be noted that there exist serious

problems in deciding how to interpret this evidence. In an important
paper. Roll (1977) has raised serious doubts as to the adequacy of

11

empirical studies which use market proxies. Since it is generally argued
that the return to the market portfolio of all assets, including stocks,
bonds, real estate and human capital, can only be measured approximately,

Rolls critique raises doubts as to whether the CAPM has any testable
implications at all.

Theoretical unease with the CAPM is also widespread. An important
criticism focuses on the assumption of mean—variance preferences used to
generate asset demands.

rhe debate involves more than just functional

form. Stiglitz (1970) was one of the first to remind the profession that
the fundamental reason for holding assets is to facilitate consumption

plans. Rather than end of period wealth, a more traditional approach for
economists is to posit that agents have preferences defined over

distributions of uncertain consumption paths or sequences. At each point
in time (whether continuous or discrete) agents have to choose their
portfolio, amongst other things, keeping in mind its innediate return as
well as its implications for future consumption/investment choices.
Fama (1970a) and Hakansson (1970. 1971) provide conditions under
which this more general problem yields portfolio rules similar to the

static (or atemporal) CAPM. These restrictions are quite severe and
limit the usefulness of the model to account for the stylized facts about
term premia. According to the CAPM, the holding prethia on long term
bonds are explained by the covariance of bond returns with those of the

market portfolio. Variations in the premia can be accounted for by
allowing this covariance to change over time (see Bollerslev, Enyle and

Wooldridge (1985)). However, a pattern of predictable time varying risk
would seem to be exactly the sort of thing to make the assumption of

12

myopic optiinizatin, upon which the CAPM rests, untenable.

2.3 Structural Models of Demand and Supply
An important development in the last ten years has been the
empirical implementation of structural models of demand and supply, as

suggested by Brainard and Tobin (1968). The most notable contributions
have been made by Ben Friedman (1971, 1980) and V. Vance Roley (1981,
1982).

These models begin by postulating risk averse investors with mean
variance preferences defined over end of period wealth, and hence are

intimately rejated to the CAPM. However, by not imposing all of the
assumptions required by CAPM, they avoid the empirically embarassing
prediction that agents all hold the same risky portfolio. They also
differ by postulating that costs of adjustment introduce a wedge between
the desired portfolio allocation, which the mean variance analysis

predicts, and observed portfolios. The

disaggregated models allow for

different speeds of adjustment as well as quite different target
portfolios.

In order to get predictions about asset yields, demand equations
with the structure described above are combined with some specification
for asset supplies (often that they are exogenous) and the the
assumption
that the expected holding period yields'2 on assets adjust to achieve

market equilibrium. As a result, the

implied "term premium" will depend

upon (1) the level of expected yields on

distribution of asset holdings

exogenous securities; (ii) the

across investor classes; (iii) the

distribution of flows of new wealth

across investor classes; (iv) the

13

quantity of securities extant.'3 Factors (1) —

(iv)

were emphasized by

Culbertson (1957) as important determinants of asset yields, and the
Friedman—Roley work is often viewed as the state of the art
implementation of the market segmentation hypothesis.
The structural models have achieved an enviable level of empirical

success. They explain within sample variations of asset yields about as
well as any competitor. Nonetheless, most of the profession seems to
have decided to reserve judgement on both the results and the value of
this research prograrmue.

The various criticisms which have been raised against mean— variance
preferences apply to the current generation of structural models as

well. Myopic behaviour can be justified under certain conditions.
However, the transactions costs which are at the heart of the adjustment
models and therefore the dynamics of the structural demand equations

require an intertemporal view. The model's dynamics should be derived
from a more explicit approach to the agent's choice problem.
The main qualm about the structural modelling approach appears to be
the informational requirements and the size and difficulty of the

research programme which it suggests. Structural modelling requires a
great deal of work, patience, and resources. The larger models cannot be
estimated in their full generality. A myriad of choices including
parameter restrictions must be made in order to obtain a tractable

model. Although each of these choices may appear reasonable when viewed
individually, the resulting model is often far removed from the original

derivation and it is extremely difficult to evaluate the effects of the
modelling choices taken as a group.

14

2.4 Multifactor Models
A generalization of the CAPM is the "multifactor" or 'multi—beta'

model where the term premium satisfies

T(n) =

3
Z
3=1

where

8

(2.9)

denotes the "factors' which summarize all systematic

uncertainty in the financial markets, and

B,j(n) are the weights which

these factors receive in determining the excess return.

The term premium model given by (2.9) can be derived as either a
consequence of the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) or
the arbitrage pricing theory (APT).

The ICAPFI was introduced in a pioneering paper by Merton (1973). It

is a fairly explicit equilibrium model of asset return determination. In
his paper, Merton postulated that the economy's uncertainty could be

summarized by a finite dimensional state vector. Agents were presumed to
make consumption and portfolio choices continuously so as to maximize

the expectation of a time additive utility functional. Application of
theorems of control for such environments allows for the determination of
asset demands and returns in terms of the value of the state vector and

the parameters characterizing its evolution. Equation (2.9) appears as
an implication of equilibrium on instantaneous asset returns. Merton
shows that the number of factors will be (at most) equal to one pius the
number of fundamental economic sources of uncertainty.

In an interesting paper, Breeden (1979) shows that the ICAPM can be
expressed in the form of a single beta mode] with the marginal rate of

substitution of aggregate consumption replacing the market return.14 The

15

insight provided is that agents should be willing to pay more for
securities which have high payoffs in those states where consumption must

be reduced. Since it is rather easy to construct economies in which the
market return and aggregate consumption behave quite differently, the
ICAPM can have potentially quite different predictions than the static
CA PM.

The ICAPM can be reduced to the traditional CAPM, however, in a

variety of ways. The simplest way to achieve this is to postulate that
the sources of uncertainty at different times are independent. Combined
with the assumption of time additive preferences, this breaks the choice
problem up into a sequence of independent problems so that myopic
behaviour is optimal.

Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) compare the Characterization (2.9)
implied by the LCAPM with Continuous time versions of the expectations

model. They show that the expectations model is inconsistent with (2.9),
and therefore inconsistent with the equilibrium framework used to derive

it, unless the term premia are zero. They also show that risk neutrality
is not sufficient to generate zero term premia, at least in continuous
time.

Empirical work based on the ICAPM is recent and still exploratory.
It has been hampered by the difficulties involved in translating the
restrictions on the continuous time processes into restrictions on

observed data. Long (1974) and Lucas (1978) provide discrete time
versions of the ICAPM. Hansen and Singleton (1983) overwhelmingly reject
this model. Grossman, Melino and Shiller (1985) report some qualitative
success but basically reach a similiar conclusion about the continuous

16

version.

time

The covariance of returns with consumption growth is

high for stocks and less so for bonds, which is consistent with the fact

that stocks have earned on average a higher return. However, the
difference between the average return on stocks and bonds appears to be
too high to explain except by postulating an incredibly high aversion to
risk.

A related approach which also implies the representation (2.9) is

the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) developed originally by Ross (I976).
The APT is not an explicit general equilibrium model in the sense that
it does not describe how preferences, opportunities and information sets

interact to determine market equilibrium. It begins with the empirical
proposition that the realized holding period return on any asset can be

written as a linear combination of, say, J common factors plus an
idiosyncratic component. The key intuition is that with a large
number of assets (strictly speaking an infinite number), we can invoke
central limit theorems to show that portfolios can be constructed which
are independent of idiosyncratic risk.

If wealth is valued, it follows

that the reward for bearing idiosyncratic risk should be zero in
equilibrium.

16

The generality of APT is at once its main attraction and its main

fault. Since it is not an explicit general equilibrium theory, it
provides us with no guidance as to the identities of the common factors,
their number, or how the return generating process will change with
shifts in the economic environment.17

Most of the empirical testing of APT has examined stock return data

(Then (1983); Lehman and Modest (1985)). The results are encouraging in

17

that many of the pricing anomalies that plague the CAPM are accounted for

by APT with a relatively small number of factors. The main exception is
the small firm effect. Brennan and Schwartz (1979. 1982) have
investigated a continuous time version of the APT for bond r!turns under
the assumption that the number of factors is quite small (1 or 2) and

that there is no idiosyncratic risk. They report some success in
modelling the yield curve and in pricing more complicated debt

instruments. However, they also conclude that a larger number of factors
is needed. Unfortunately, this leads to some technical difficulties
which have not yet been resolved.

3. THE EXPECTATIONS MODEL — EARLY EVIDENCE AND DEBATE
The literature on the term structure is extensive. Debate was first
organized around the pattern of term premia under the maintained

assumption that they did not vary over time. From the current
perspective, it is useful to think about the early literature as
pertaining to the pattern of the average or unconditional term premia.
In this section, we review the main theories and relevant evidence, up to

about the early 1960s. To anticipate, the main empirical conclusions of
the early literature are that at the very short end of the maturity
spectrum forward rates are not accurate predictors of subsequent spot
rates, forward premia are not zero on average, and other factors (perhaps
taxes and transactions costs) have significant effects on the yield
curve.

The substantive prediction of the expectations model is that the

term premia are constant. Historically, discussion first centered around

18

the forward rate expression of the expectations model, namely,

F(n)

EtRt+n(l) +

L(n)

n =

1,2,3....

(3.1)

out of course statements about L(n) can be translated into statements

about the term premia 1(n) or V(n) and vice versa.
In Section 2.1. we distinguished various traditions of the
expectations models on the basis of focusing on forward rates, yields to

maturity or holding period yields. This is a rather recent view.
InitialTy. participants in the literature emphasized different models of

the relationship of the term premia with the horizon n.
The hypothesis that the term premium L(n), is zero for all
maturities is usually attributed to Fisher (1930) or Lutz (1940).18 and

is commonly referred to as the pure expectations theory, or PET.19 Lutz
motivated PET on the basis of frictionless markets, and investors

possessed with single valued and accurate expectations.20 Early critics
of PET were often content with showing that the expectations embedded in
the term structure did not coincide with subsequent realizations and in
fact that the two looked quite different.

Competitors to PET were quickly formulated. Hicks (1939) argued
that forward rates should exceed subsequent spot rates, an average, and

that the difference should increase with maturity.2' Hicks based his
argument on the assumption that most borrowers looking to finance long
lived investments would prefer to borrow long, but lenders preferred the
liquidity and absence of capital risk provided by short tern securities.

This imbalance of desired maturities for borrowing and lending, Hicks

19

argued, Would require issuers of long—term bonds to increase their

promised rate of return by a positive 'liquidity premium in order to

induce borrowers to purchase their securities. The longer the
instrument, the greater the liquidity premium would need to be. This
hypothesis was formalized as 0

L(1)

L(2)

.

L(n), and is

usually referred to as the liquidity preference theory.
Market participants viewed both the pure expectations and the

liquidity preference theories as just so much academic nonsense. In an
influential paper, Culbertson (1957) articulated the market segmentation
hypothesis.

The basic idea was that financial markets determined market

yields by the familiar process of supply and demand. Arbitrage across
the maturity spectrum was limited. Flows of wealth and the relative
supplies of securities played the most important role in determining

security returns. A straw man version of this hypothesis maintained that
expectations p!ayed no role in determining relative yields. Although
much discussed, empirical implementation of the market segmentation
hypothesis was elusive.

Nodigliani and Sutch (1966, 1967) integrated several of the ideas of

the market segmentation hypothesis with the expectations model. They
argued that liquidity premia could be positive or negative and that there

was no need for them to follow any systematic pattern with maturity.22
Their preferred habitat hypothesis recognized that heterogeneous groups
of borrowers and lenders preferred securities of different maturities.
Life insurance companies, for example, are observed to purchase mainly

long lived securities. Matching demands and supplies for bonds in their
world of heterogeneous preferred habitats could generate any conceivable

20

pattern of liquidity premiums.23 Although Modigliani and Sutch argued
that the pattern of term premia would depend upon the changing wealth and
preferences of investor categories, as well as upon the maturity
distribution of securities offered, they were unable to find any

empirical evidence that these addltiona factors generated noticeable
variations in the pattern of term premia.

In empirical research, the

richness of the preferred habitat hypothesis was reduced to the
proposition that term premia need not follow any systematic pattern.
An excellent survey of empirical studies of the term structure prior

to 1965 is provided by Malkiel (1966)24 Much of this work, although
lacking in econometric sophistication, remains highly relevant. The
focus in many of the early studies is on the relationship between the
predictions of future yields embedded in the term structure and

subsequent realizations. This makes these studies entirely consistent
with the assumption of rational expectations. Although the data analysis
of these early studies is fairly simple (sometimes amounting to little
more than the presentation of descriptive statistics) this is often more
than compensated by the quality and quantity of the data examined.

Early work on the expectations model focused on the accuracy of

forward rates as predictors of subsequent spot rates. Macaulay (1938)
observed that before the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in
1915 there existed a pronounced and well known seasonal in the call money

rate. Macaulay found that time money rates (from one to six months) did
indeed anticipate the seasonal, but there was little additional evidence

of successful forecasting.25 In fact, the forward rate constructed from
the term structure of very short—term securities was found to be useless

21

in predicting the qualitative change in the spot rate. On balance, the
difference between the forward rate and the spot rate was negatively
correlated with observed changes in the spot rate.

In a very carefully executed study, Kessel (1965) confirmed

Macaulay's findings also using very short term data. Kessel found that a
stable seasonal pattern in very short term yields had emerged once again

in the late fifties.26 Using data on 27 and 55 day bills aver the period
1959—61. he also concluded that the seasonal companent of call money

rates was anticipated. Using data on 14, 28. 42, 56. 63 and 91-day bill
rates. Kessel constructed a series of implied forward rates. He found
that they systematically over predicted subsequent spot rates. Like
Macaulay, Kessel also found that the forward rates provided poor and, on
oalance, misleading qualitative predictions about the change in rates.
Kessel suggested that the forward rate should be viewed as the market's
expectation of the subsequent spot rate plus a term premium which varied

positively with the level of the current spot rate.27 He found that
adjusting the forward rate by subtracting an estimate of the term premium
provided a qualitatively accurate predictor of rate changes.28
Most of the early research involved the relationship between forward
rates and subsequent spot rates as a test of the expectations model, but

there were exceptions. Culbertson (1957) computed and graphed holding
period yields (coupons plus capital gains or losses) for short and

various long term Treasury securities. He considered holding periods of
one week and three weeks.29 The realized holding period yields were very
different froni observed spot rates and Culbertson concluded that the Lutz

hypothesis of accurate expectations was totally unjustified. Culbertson

22

went

further

and remarked that it was difficult for him to believe that

such large discrepancies would be possible if professional speculators
were attempting to arbitrage the yield differences.
Several historical episodes discussed in the early literature
provide useful evidence on the relative importance of expectations in

determining yields, it is worthwhile to review them.
Kessel (1965) reports prolonged periods in 1959 and 1960 when the
computed one week ahead forward rate was negative.30 Since interest rates
can never be negative (such a bond being dominated by cash), negative
forward rates cannot be representing the market's expectation.

Furthermore, since on average the term premium for the one week maturity
was positive over the sample period, this episode provides clear cut

evidence that term premia have varied. it would be interesting to know
if negative forward rates are a comon phenomena at very short

maturities. This topic does not appear to have been systematically
explored.

31

A less clear cut but perhaps more important piece of evidence about
the expectations model is provided by the behaviour of U.S. rates in the

forties. During the period 1942—194? and to some extent until the Accord
of 1951, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System pursued a policy of

pegging the term structure.32 rhe stated aims of the policy were to
reduce speculation that rates would rise, so that Treasury offerings
would be well received, and to help keep the costs of war finance low.
To be precise, the rates were not pegged but ceilings on yields were

imposed.33 The ceilings corresponded roughly to the term structure
extant in 1941. and were maintained successfully from 1942 to 1947. Over

23

this period, short—term securities traded at their limits. Long rates
bumped against the ceiling until 1944 and then fell by about 30—40 basis
point.

Walker (1954) argues that the term structure in late 1941 indicated

expectations of higher rates. If so, then a credible policy of
effectively fixing the path of short—term rates should have had drastic

consequences. We should have either observed a precipitous fall in long
rates or a dramatic shift in the maturity composition of private

portfolios toward the long end of the spectrum. Neither occurred.

although the latter seems closer to describing actual events.34 Private
agents did lengthen their portfolios, and purchases of new ireasury Bills

were almost exclusively by the Federal Reserve System. It seems
difficult to describe the portfolio shifts as dramatic, however. For
example, banks continued to keep a large fraction of their portfolios in
still short—term but higher yielding certificates of indebtedness.

Modigliani and Sutch (1967) argue that the success in maintaining
interest rate ceilings for such a long time constitutes prima facie
evidence that expectations cannot be the only determinant of yield
differentials.

In particular, they argue that the maturity composition

of the securities supplied by the Treasury must also be very important.
Kessel (1967) in his corniient on their paper argues that such a conclusion

is unwarranted. All we can learn from this period, he argues, is that
private agents are quite willing to change the maturity composition of
their portfolios in response to perceived yield differentials.

The safest conclusion appears to be that the behaviour of the term
structure before the Accord remains a remarkable but relatively

24

unexplored source of evidence.

'4.

FROM MEISELMAN TO RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS

By 1960. opinion as to the merits of the expectations model was
almost uniformly negative.

In a striking contribution, tleiselman (1962)

provided a most influential and eloquent defense of the pure expectations

model that revitalized the debate. Meiselman pointed out that accurate
forecasting was not a necessary condition for zero term premia. They
could be generated from an equilibrium model in which well financed risk

neutral speculators eliminated any differential in ex ante yields. It
followed, therefore, that one could not conclude that forward rates did

not represent the markets expectation simply by demonstrating that they

were poor predictors. It is difficult to overestimate Meiselmans impact
on the term structure literature and for almost a decade his hypothesis
of zero term premia remained the focus of debate.

The number of papers contributing to the literature on the

expectations model since Meiselman is staggering. Unfortunately, a
review up to about the mid seventies reveals few substantive results.

Almost all of the empirical work during this period contains at least one
of several coownon flaws that make them irrelevant to current debate. The
important contributions during this period are almost entirely
methodological.

The main problem with the empirical work from this period is the

treatment of expectations. Having noted that the best forecasts possible
are often far off the mark, a researcher who thinks in terms of rational
expectations would expect the debate to shift to whether or not there is

25

evidence of systematic forecasting error. However, Meiselman seemed to
take the position that we can infer nothing about whether or not forward
rates represented the market's expectations from comparing the implied

forward rates to the subsequent expectations. He suggested a "plausible
rule for how expectations should evolve over time and then showed that
forward rates behaved in a manner that was more or less consistent with

it. Although Meiselman's error learning model is a very interesting
mechanical rule, most of the literature which followed his lead in
divorcing expectations from realizations can only be described as
confusing and confused.

Meiselmans error learning model postulated that forward rates
evolved according to the rule.

F(n) —

Ft_j(n+l)

=

a ÷ (Rt())

—

Ft_i(l))

(4.1)

Using the Durand annual data on high grade corporate bond yields from

901—1954, he estimated the relationship (4.1) for n =
found that the estimated

a

9.

He

were not individually different from zero.

He also found that the estimated

with n.

1

were all less than one and declined

Finally, the R2 of his regressions were high for low n but

declined from about 0.8 to 0.3 for n9.
On the basis of his empirical findings, Meiselman concluded that (i)
term premia were zero; and (ii) forward rates behaved as expectations

should. We now know that both conclusions were unwarranted. Wood (1963)
and Kessel (1965) were quick to point out that one could not rule out
increasing liquidity premia, even if the intercepts in (4.1) were truly

26

zero.35 A more obvious complaint is that it is hard to see what we learn
from the significant correlation between forward rate changes and

innovations in the spot rate. From today's perspective, innovations in
almost any variable are conceivably useful in revising expectations, and
while innovations in the spot rate are a plausible source of information,
they are certainly not a sununary statistic. If we believe that
expectations are rational, the question to ask is if observed
correlations between forward rate changes and innovations in the spot
rate are consistent with the stochastic properties of the latter, not
whether these correlations are non-zero.36
The error learning model is in fact closely related to rational

expectations. A few clarifying remarks on this score may be useful. If
the short rate follows a univariate stationary process whose innovations
are orthogonal to the history of publicly available information, then
optimal forecasts will be updated exactly as the error learning model

predicts. Of course, in this case the

from the regression (4.1)

should be unity. If the short rate is one member of a perhaps large
information set of covariance stationary processes, then the error
learning model can be shown to be consistent with optimal forecasting.
Flowever, in this more general case, the parameters and the

of

Meiselman1s regressions can take on any pattern with the horizon n, and
no testable implications are implied by his model of expectation
formation.37

Meiselman initiated several other traditions. One of the most
important was the switch to the investigation of much longer maturities.

His empirical work looked at one— to nine—year-ahead one year forward

27

rates. Previously, the implications of the expectations model for this
part of the yield curve had been virtually ignored.
Unfortunately, the emphasis on longer forward rates and the more
distant future carried with it a sharp deterioration in the Quality of

the data examined. At the short end of the spectrum, yield data are
available from prices of existing and traded securities. Questions about
other parts of the yield curve have to deal with missing and incomplete

data. Empirical work is often based on estimated yield curves. The
quality of these estimates have been highly variable. It is now
generally accepted, for example, that the Durand data used by Meiselman
(1962) and later by Nelson (1972) are completely unreliable for the study

of forward rates.38 Despite the problems encountered, the preliminary
processing of bond price data into a yield curve estimate continues to be
the norm in empirical investigation of the expectations model.
In their influential papers, Modigliani and Sutch (1966, 1967)

followed Meiselman's initiative of breaking the link between expectations

and realizations, in their original formulation, they began by
postulating that expected holding period yields were equated to the short

rate plus a term premium, as in (2.2). They hypothesized that the
expected capital gains could be written in terms of a fixed coefficient

distributed lag of current and past short rates. In their subsequent
paper, they motivated their work on the hypothesis that expectations of
the short rate were formed from its own past history, and then

investigated the expression (2.4). Both approaches lead to an expression
for the long rate of the form

28

R(n) =

where

L
z a Rt_.(l) +
j:O

+

(4.2)

and a are parameters. Modigliani and Sutch treated the

distributed lag as representing the effects of expectations. All other

variables, denoted by Z, were treated as representing the term
premium.

The Modigliani—Sutch framework turned out to be a very popular one,
and literally dozens of papers were written on the specification of the

lag coefficients alone.39 In retrospect, however, the conclusion seems
to be that most of this research effort was misspent.4°

The criteria used to distinguish variables related to expectations

from those related to term premia is arbitrary and implausible. The
important paper by Modigliani and Shiller (1973) demonstrates the
awkwardness of the working hypothesis that only the past history of a

process is useful in predicting its future values. ModiglianlShiller
discovered that the rate of inflation helped improve the prediction of

subsequent spot rates, at least since the late sixties. Therefore, they
added a distributed lag of current and past inflation to the right hand

side of the Modigliani—Sutch specification. However, their main argument
to justify why inflation belonged on the right hand side of (4.2) seems
to have been that viewing nominal rates as a real rate plus Inflation
made it natural to forecast the sum using the past history of both these

variables. Once begun, this line of reasoning seems impossible to
restrain, Why not view the nominal rate as the sum of the after tax rate
plus a tax premium and include a distributed lag of the latter in the
long rate regression?

29

Clearly, some better way of identifying the effect of variables on
expectations and term premia was necessary. It. is impossible to
distinguish these two effects from consideration of a reduced form

equation such as (4.2) alone. Modigliani and Shiller recognized this and
they were careful, as were many authors, to buttress their arguments with

direct evidence from the forecasting equation for the short rate. Their
conclusion that the effects of inflation in the long rate equation
reflected expectations alone also invoked a direct comparison of these

coefficients with those in the short rate eQuation. This procedure is
exactly what current practice dictates. The problem was to make these
comparisons in a more formal and potentially testable manner and this was
solved by explicitly incorporating the structure provided by the rational

expectations hypothesi 41
Nelson (1972) introduced the idea of identifying expectations by
first estimating a univariate ARMA process for the short rate and then
solving for the coefficients on lagged short rates implied by the

representation (2.4).42 The difference between the current long rate and
its predicted value given past short rates was computed and used as a
proxy for the term premium.

In the second stage, the estimated term

premium was regressed on a vector of variables to uncover patterns of

term premium behaviour. This two step procedure can be adapted fairly
readily to larger information sets. Pesando (1978) uses a bivariate
representation af short rates and inflation to generate his forecasts.
He finds, for example, that at the short end of the maturity spectrum,
the rolling premia are positively correlated with the level of rates, but
that the correlation is reversed for longer horizons.3 Pesando also

30

finds some evidence that relative supplies of securities are correlated
with his term premia estimates.

Although it is an improvement over the earlier methodology, the two

step procedure suffers from some problems. For example, as usually
implemented, there is a bias towards accepting the null hypothesis of
time invariant term premia.44

The use of univariate or bivariate models to generate forecasts does
not eliminate entirely the problems of identification which plague the

reduced form approach of (4.2). For example, we do not know if the
significant correlation between term premia and security supplies
reported by Pesando reflects an expectational effect or a correlation
with term premia.

In the two step approach, we can provide some

clarification by testing if security supplies provide a significant

reduction in the errors of forecasting the short rate. This is a
consistent but not very powerful test.

The major conclusion that seems to be drawn from the
Modigliani—Sutch paper and subsequent related literature is that it is
difficult to find variables which provide a significant improvement in
explaining long rates once the correlation with other interest rates has
been taken into account.

Although the coefficients of estimated reduced form equations such
as (4.2) vary over time, within sample multiple correlations of a long
rate on a distributed lag of short rates are uniformly high and the

estimated standard errors of these equations are small. Moreover, the
deterioration in the forecast performance of the estimated equations is
often not serious for several years after the end of the sample used to

31

estimate the regression parameters. It is sometimes argued that
estimated reduced form equations such as (4.2) are therefore useful in
forecasting and for short—run policy evaluation.

Lucas (1976) provides a convincing argument against using reduced

form estimates of equations such as (4.2) for policy evaluation. in
general, we should view the reduced form coefficients as a combination of
deeper parameters characterizing agents' preferences and the stochastic

environment which they face. Changes in policy rules amount to changes
in the environment, so that reduced form estimates will not be a reliable
guide for policy makers.

The problem of parameter variation over time is serious and

pervasive in economics. In many cases, we have no alternative but to
ignore it. Taking seriously the objective of uncovering agents'

objectives and constraints will not eliminate parameter variation. The
nope is that it will help us to correct for some systematic and
predictable shifts.

These various remarks suggest that a linear time invariant

stochastic representation for short and long rates may be a poor

approximation. Fortunately, if we invoke rational expectations, we can
study term premium behaviour even if the rules which agents use to form

their forecasts vary over a sample. Since the assumption of time
invariant expectational rules is easily relaxed when looking at forward
rates or holding period yields, this may be an advantage to concentrating
research within these two traditions rather than looking at the yield to
maturity expression (2.4).

In general, adoption of rational expectations in the term structure

32

literature was a significant advance and preceded its general acceptance

in macroeconomics. Several authors made important contributions. Roll
(1970) adopted the inartingale model of Samuelson (1965) to the forward

rate. Nelson (1972) appears to have been the first to introduce and
exploit the techniques of time series anaiysis to identify optimal

predictors. Sargent (1972) provided an exhaustive discussion of the
implications of rational expectations for the expectations model in a

world where short rates are sufficient statistics. Modigliani and
Shiller (1973) confirmed the usefulness of rational expectations, helped
shift attention towards multivariate information sets, and demonstrated
the importance of the law of iterated projections for empirical work.
In contrast to the methodological advances, most of the empirical

results of research conducted during the period 1962—1973 do not appear

to merit serious review, Of course, there are some notable exceptions.
Roll (1970) continued the earlier tradition of studying forward

rates and term premiums for very short maturities. He looked at weekly

data from October 1946 to December 1964.

Roll's data were carefully

collected from dealer quote sheets and were usually based on the Tuesday

price for Thursday delivery. Invoking rational expectations allowed him
to estimate historical term premia from sample averages of the weekly

figures. Roll showed that forward premia are generally positive and.
while they tend to increase with maturity! that this relationship is not
monoton c

46

It is hard to understand, in retrospect, the fury with which
Meiselman's hypothesis of zero term premia was debated for almost a

decade. However, by the early seventies, a general consensus emerged

33

that term premia existed and even that they were usually positive.

Subsequently, the expectations model was identified with the proposition

that term premia are time invariant. The average relationship between
term premia and maturity or horizon is still investigated, but it is
viewed as an empirical question and no longer excites debate.

5. TIME VARYING TERM PREMIA: RECENT EVIDENCE
Having agreed upon the generic existence of term premia, debate next

turned to whether or not they varied over time. Most research activity
from the early seventies to the early eighties centered around the null
hypothesis of rational expectations and time invariant term premia.

It

is now common practice to refer to this null hypothesis simply as the
expectations model, and this will be the convention followed in this

section. Loosely speaking, the expectations model contends that
movements in the term structure are due almost entirely to the arrival of
new information and the associated revision in expectations about the
future course of short—term interest rates.

For about a decade, the expectations model was often referred to in
the literature as the efficient markets theory.47 This latter choice of

nomenclature was unfortunate. rt sometimes left the impression that
evidence of time varying term premia constituted evidence of improperTy

functioning capital markets. As we saw in Section 2, there is no such
implication. Several asset pricing theories predict that variations in
the structure or rewards to bearing risk can account for time varying
term premia.

There is currently a great deal of research activity dealing with

34

time varying term premia, so the empirical conclusions that can be

offered in this survey are necessarily incomplete. However, several
important results are available.

As we saw in Section 3. at the short end of the spectrum, there has
been available for some time convincing evidence of time variation in

forward premia. Moreover, these forward premia tend to covary positively

with the level of short rates. More recent research confirms this
evidence and documents that movements in forward premia at the short end
of the maturity spectrum are large in a substantive sense, and account
for a good deal of the variation in that portion of the maturity
spectrum.

Evidence about premia for longer maturity bonds is less complete.
It was much more difficult to reject the expectations hypothesis for

yields on long term bonds. In part, this was due to the technical
difficulty of testing the yield to maturity rather than holding period

expression of the expectations model. More fundamentally, the sharp
reduction in the signal to noise ratio that occurs as we move towards the
longer end of the maturity spectrum makes it very difficult to

distinguish between competing hypotheses. However, there is now
convincing evidence that holding premia on long term bonds do vary over
time.

In particular, they covary positively with the long—short spread

and the movements in holding premia are large relative to movements in
the spread.

Initial investigations usually conveyed the impression that the

expectations theory was an excellent approximation to the truth. There
are several stylized facts which seem to support this position. Looking

35

at long bonds, one finds that the first difference of their yields are
well approximated as a martingale with respect to their own past

history. More generally, most of the observed variance of the change in
long rates cannot be predicted ex ante. Neither of these properties are
implied, strictly speaking, by the expectations model but it is argued

that they are close approximations to the model's predictions. In any
event, the same statements can be used to describe observed excess
holding period yields on long bonds.

It seems almost tautological to say that the inability to predict
long rate changes must be interpreted as implying that movements in the
long rate are due almost entirely to the arrival of new information.

However, it could be news that generates a reassessment about the
structure and rewards to risk rather than the path of short—term interest

rates that is driving the change in the long rate. There are many
reasons for believing that this alternative hypothesis is in fact the

more plausible. Historically, movements in the long rate have been much
larger than the ex post realizations of the weighted average of future
short rates which appears in (2.4), and it is difficult to reconcile
observed movements in the long rate with the historical properties of

short rates. The errors made in using the current long rate to forecast
the weighted average of future short rates have been systematically and

positively related to the level of rates. Research also reveals that
while excess holding period yields are extremely erratic, they are not
totally unpredictable.

In particular, the excess yield is positively

correlated with both the general level of rates and with the long—short
spread.

36

The evidence favourable to the expectations hypothesis at shorter
maturities most often cited is that regression estimates of realized
short rates on forward rates result in a coefficient that is pretty close

to one. Moreover, the forecast errors implied by the forward rates are
well approximated as a martingale with respect to their own past

history. The stronger proposition that the forecast errors are
orthogonal to all publicly available information has never been generally
accepted, and studies which cast doubt on this prediction are numerous.
Pesando (1978) suggests that if the efficient markets model is
correct, then the yield to maturity on a Tong bond should be well
approximated as a martingale.

In order to understand the intuition which

supports this idea, it is useful to invoke Shiller's approximation to the
holding period yield

Etht(n)

Rt(l) +

T(n)

(5.1)

or

EtRt+i(n—l) —

R(n)

=

0(n)

—

((Rt(n)

—

R(l))

—

T(n))

(5.2)

For long bonds, it seems safe to Ignore the distinction between

R+,(n_l) and Et R÷1(n) and treat (5.2) as a statement about
predicted changes in the long rate. Even if the term premium is time
invariant, it is clear that the expression on the right hand side of

(5.2) will not be a constant. However, predicted changes in the long
rate for spreads within the historical range of variation should be

37

small. An example may be useful to provide some perspective.

Using

quarterly data and assuming that an average bonds carry a coupon of about
9 per cent, it turns out that the duration of a 15 year bond trading at

par is about 26 1/2 quarters, or a little over seven years. A difference
of about IOU basis points for the spread (expressed at annual rates)

would amount to about a 4 basis point predicted change. Pesando
estimated observed quarterly differences of Canadian long bonds to have a

root mean square of about 60 basis points. If we use this figure to
complete the example, we cannot escape the conclusion that predicted
changes in the long rate will be very small compared to observed
movements.

Pesando uses the long rate for an index of Government of Canada
bonds of 10 years maturity or over to test the hypothesis that the change

in the long rate is unpredictable. There are an infinity of choices for
variables which could conceivably be useful in predicting the change in

the long rate. Inspired by Modigliani—Sutch (1966. 1967) and
Modigtiani—Shjller (1973), he regresses the change in the long rate on a
distributed lag of the changes in the short rate, and then on distributed

lags of the changes in both the short rate and the rate of inflation. He
finds that only the contemporaneous change in the short rate matters, and
no evidence to contradict the martingale hypothesis.48

What are we to conclude from these results? rhe most obvious
conclusion is that the Modigliani—Sutch and Modigliani—Shiller
specifications provide no improvement over the martingale model without
estimates of subsequent spot rates that exploit insider or non—publicly
available information.

It is not possible to conclude anything about the

38

validity of the expectations model from these results.

The expectations model per se makes absolutely no prediction about

the accuracy with which we can predict changes in the long rate. In
fact, in the extreme case of no sources of uncertainty, we would be able

to predict changes in the long rate with perfect accuracy. By the same
token, we can construct models consistent with the expectations theory in
which the percentage of the variation in the long rate which we can hope

to predict is arbitrarily dose to zero. Since the expectations model
says absolutely nothing about the per cent of the variation of changes
in the long rate which we can hope to predict, evidence that this
percentage is small has no bearing whatsoever on the merits of the

model. It is also clear that looking at the magnitude of predicted
versus actual changes in the long rate is not a very useful way of

investigating the issue of time varying term premia. From (5.2), it
appears that substantial variation in term premia is also consistent with
an inability to predict more than a small fraction of observed changes.
particularly if the covariance between the term premium and the
long—short spread is positive, as appears to be the case.

The testable implication of the expectations model is that the
change in the long rate corrected for the effect due to the long—short
spread should be unpredictable, given only publicly available

information. Pesando does not take into account the correction, which

turns out to be very important. Shiller (1979) demonstrates that the
long—short spread is a statistically significant predictor of the change

in the long rate. However, the effect is negative rather than positive
as required by (5.2). This is only possible if the holding premium is

39

positively correlated with the long—short spread, and if a 1 basis point
change in the spread is usually accompanied by a more than I basis point
change in the premium.

PIe inability to predict more than just a small proportion of the
variance of long rate differences does seem to imply that movements in

the long rate are dominated by the arrival of new information. However,
this information may be about future term premia —

the structure of

non—diversifiable risk and the rewards for bearing it — as well as about

the course of future short rates. The evidence favours the idea that the
movements in long rates cannot be justified by observed historical
patterns of short rate behaviour.
Sargent (1979b) assumes that the first differences of short and long
rates follow a fourth order bivariate autoregressive process.

lie then

characterizes the restrictions on this process, assuming that the long
rate is equal to the arithmetic average of expected future short rates.
Using quarterly sampled data on three—month bill rates and the yield on
five—year notes, Sargent originally concluded that the restrictions were

in fact satisfied. However, there are several problems with this study.
It turns out that Sargent imposed a weaker version of the full set of

restrictions implied by the expectations model. Also, that first
difference representation and the restrictions implied by the

expectations model are an awkward combination. The two of them can hold
simultaneously only if the data display a certain singularity.49 In a
subsequent paper with Lars Hansen (1981), these problems were corrected.

The full set of restrictions were imposed. The singularity issue was
sidestepped by postulating a covariance stationary representation for the

40

first difference of the short rate and the long—short spread. Also,

monthly values for the same two interest rates were collected, and a
procedure which corrected the standard errors for the induced serial

correlation was used. The restrictions implied by the expectations model
were overwhelmingly rejected. The implication is that the difference
between the long rate and the subsequently realized arithmetic average of
future short rates was systematically related to current and lagged
values of short and long rates.

The Hansen—Sargent results are a test of the joint hypothesis of the
expectations model and the covariance stationary representation which

they assume. As was discussed in the previous section, however, it is
more convincing if we can use techniques that are robust to the

assumption that such a representation exists. Shiner

(1979) explicitly

compares the long rate to the subsequently realized weighted average of
future short rates from (2.4), which he calls the "ex post rational"

rate. He uses quarterly data on four— to six—month prime comercial
paper as his short rate, and recently offered Aaa utility bond yields for

his long rate. The contrasts are startling. The ex post rational rate
looks very much like a constant, moving over the period 1966:1 to 1977:1
in a range of about 50 basis points.

By contrast, observed movements in

the long rate gyrated within a range of about 800 basis points. Because
of the moving average structure of the forecast errors, Shiller does not
perform any formal test of the predtctability of the difference between
the ex post rational rate and the observed long rate. He does note,
however, that the difference is almost perfectly correlated with the
current level of the long rate.

41

Using six different data sets, Shiller provides convincing evidence
that excess holding period yields while highly erratic are not totally

unpredictable. He shows that if the realized excess yield is
uncorrelated with the level of the long rate — as the expectations model
requires —

then it is possible to derive an upper bound on the ratio of

the variance of the holding period yield on the long bond to the variance

of the short rate. Shiller proposed to test the expectations model by
assessing the sample violation of his variance bounds. Although the
observed sample violations of the bounds seem large, the statistical

properties of the volatility tests which he proposed are somewhat

controversial.50 In the same paper, however, Shiller used familiar
regression tests to show that the correlation between the excess yield
and the level of the long rate is positive, implies a substantial term

premium and is statistically significant.5' Shiller also demonstrates
that the holding premium is significantly correlated with the long—short

spread.52 This particular finding appears to be the most robust and is
confirmed by many other researchers (including Mankiw and Sumers (1984);
Campbell (1985b); Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983)).
Convincing evidence that the expectations model does not adequately
describe the behaviour of long-term interest rates is fairly recent.
However, evidence of the failure of the expectations model to explain the

evolution of short term yields has never been lacking. As we noted
earlier, both Macaulay and Kessel found that forward rates providea
qualitatively misleading predictions of the change in spot rates, at

least in the samples which they examined. Kessel's finding of negative
forward rates at very short maturities is clear cut evidence that term

42

premia have varied and that expectations alone cannot explain the

movements of all yields. KesseJ also provided evidence that at short
maturities, the term premia are positively correlated with the level of

rates. More recently, Fama (1976) and Shiller, Campbell and
Schoenholtz (1983) have locked at broader data sets and confirmed these

earlier conclusions. Fama (1984a) and Campbell (1985b) also report that
evidence of the relationship of excess holding period yields and the
spread is even stronger at the short end of the spectrum.

Startz (1982) provides estimates of the size of the variation in

forward premia. His rather involved procedure amounts to taking the
explained sum of squares from a regression of, say, r(l) —
various variables including

the variance of L(1).

Rt÷I(1)

on

Rt(l) as an estimate of a lower bound for

He estimates that forward premia account for at

least 44 per cent of the variation in the difference between the

one—month forward rate and the one—month rate realized subsequently. He
also estimates that over two—thirds of the difference between the forward
rate prediction for the one—month rate eleven months in the future and

the subsequent realization (FCfl —

Rt÷jjOfl

can be attributed to

variations in the forward premium. Forward premia do not seem to
contribute much to the variance of the multiperiod forecast error.
Campbell (1985b1 reaches similar conclusions about holding premia. He
estimates that holding premia account for at least 50% of the ex post
variance of the excess return on two month over one month bills, and at
least 20% of the ex post variance of the excess return on 20 year bonds

over one month bills. He also provides evidence that holding premia on
long bonds and for stocks are very collinear, although the latter are

43
much larger.

6.

coNcLusroN

Progress in improving cur understanding of the term structure

relationships has been uneven. Although much ink has been spilled on the
subject, many of the main ideas and positions have changed remarkably

little from the original discussion and debate. We have seen, however,
important clarifications of hypotheses and a marked improvement in our
ability to formalize these ideas into tractable models that are
potentially refutable.

Recent research suggests as stylized facts that term premia do vary,
that holding premia on long bonds tend to be positively correlated with
the long-short spread, and that they account for a substantial part of
the variation in yield curves at the short end of the spectrum.

Much important work remains to be done. Are bond holders
efficiently rewarded for the risk they bear? low do the various actions
of the monetary authority affect the structure of risk and returns?
These are not new questions, but recent advances have left us in a much
better position to attempt to answer them.

44

REFERENCES

Black. Fischer, "Capita! Market Equilibrium with Restricted
Borrowing", Journal of Business, 45 (July 1972): 444—455.
Bo!Ierslev, Tim P.. Robert F. Engle. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge,
'A Capital Asset Pricing Model with Time Varying

Covariances, Working Paper 85—28, (September 1985),
University of California, San Diego.

Brainard. William C.. and James Tobin 'Pitfalls in Financial
Model Building". American Economic Review, 58 (May 1968):
99—122.

Breeden, Douglas T

An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with

Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities'1.

Journal of Financial Economics. 7 (September 1979): 265—296.

Brennan, Michael J., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, "An Equilibrium
Mode! of Bond Pricing and a Test of Market Efficiency",
Journal of Financial and Ouantltative Anali,sis, 17 (September
1982): 301—329.
______________________________________________

"A Continuous Time

Approach to the Pricing of Bonds'. Journal of Banking and
Finance. 3 (July 1979): 133—155.

Buse, Adolf, Interest Rates, the Meiselman Model and Random
Numbers", Journal of Political Economy, 75 (February 1967):
49—62.

Campbell, John V

A Defense of Traditional Hypotheses about the

Term Structure of Interest Rates", unpublished mimeo,

45

Princeton University, May 1985a.
__________________

'Stock Returns and the Term Structure",

National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper

No. 1626. June 1985b.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "A Simple Account of the
Behavior of Long—Term Interest Rates", American Economic
Review, 74 (May 1984): 44—48.

Chamberlain, Gary and Michael Rothschild, Arbitrage, Factor
Structure, and Mean—Variance Analysis on Large Asset

Markets", Econometrica, 51 (September 1983): 1281—1304.
Chen, Nal—Fu, "Some Empirical Tests of the Theory of Arbitrage
Pricing', Journal of Finance, 38 (December 1983): 1393—1414.

Cox, John, Jonathan Ingersoll and Stephen Ross, "A Re—examination of
Traditional Hypotheses about the Term Structure of Interest Rates",
Journal of Finance, 36 (September 1981): 169—799.
____________________________________________

'An Intertemporal

General Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices", Econometrica, 53,
(March 1985): 363—384.

Culbertson, J.M .,"The Term Structure of interest Rates",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 71 (November 1957): 485—517.
Diller, Stanley, "The Seasonal Variation of interest Rates", in
Essays on interest Rates, vol 11, edited by J. Fl. Guttentag,

New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1971.
Dobson, Steven 14., Richard C. Sutch and David E. Vanderford, "An

Evaluation of Alternative Empirical Models of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates', Journal of Finance, 31 (September 1976): 1035—1065.

46
Ourand, David, Basic Yields of Corporate Bonds. 1900—1942.
Technical Paper 3, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research,
1942.

Oybvig, Philip H

An Explicit Bound on individual Assets

Deviations from APT Pricing in a Finite Economy', Journal of
Financial Economics. 12 (December 1983): 483—496.
Engle, Robert F .,"Wald, Likelihood Ratio, and Lagrange Multiplier
Tests In Econometrics", is Handbook of Econometrics. vol. ii,

edited by Z. Griliches and M.D. lntrilligator, Elsevier
Science Publishers BV. 1984.

Fama. Eugene F.," The Information in the Term Structure", Journal
of Financial Economics, 13 (December 1984a): 509—528.

______________

"Term Premiums in Bond Returns', Journal

of Financial Economics, 13 (December 1984b): 529—546.
________________

"Forward Rates as Predictors of Future Spot

Rates", Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (October 1976): 361—377.

_____________

'Efficient

Capital Markets: A Review of Theory

and Empirical Work", Journal of Finance, 25 (May 197Db):
383—4 17.

_____________

"Multiperiod

Consumption—Investment Decisions",

American Economic Review. 60 (March. l970a): 163—174.
Fama, Eugene and James Macbeth. "Risk, Return and Equilibrium:
Empirical Tests", Journal of Political Economy, 81 (1973):
607—636.

Fisher. Irving, The Theory of Interest, New York: MacMillan,
1930.

47

Flavin, Marjorie A.," Excess Volatility in the Financial Markets:

A Reassessment of the Empirical Evidence', Journal of
Political Economy, 91 (December 1983): 929-956.
Friedman, Benjamin M. ,

Interest

Rate Expectations versus Forward

Rates: Evidence from an Expectations Survey", Journal of
Finance. 34 (September 1979):965—973.
______________________

"The Effect of Shifting Wealth Ownership

on the Term Structure of Interest Rates: The Case of Pensions,

Quarterly Journal of Economics. 94 (May 1980): 567—590.
______________________

'Financial

Flow Variables and the Short—Run

Determination of Long—Term Interest Rates", Journal of Political
Economy. 85 (August 1977): 661—689.

Grossman, Sanford J.. Angelo Melino and Robert J. Shiller,
"Estimating the Continuous Time Consumption Based Asset Pricing
Model", Working Paper No. 1643, National Bureau of Economic
Research, June 1985

Hakansson, N.H., "Multiperiod Mean—Variance Analysis: Toward A
General Theory of Portfolio Choice", Journal of Finance, 26
(September 1971): 857—884.
________________

"Optimal Investment and Consumption Strategies

under Risk for a Class of Utility Functions", Econometrica, 38
(September 1970): 587—607.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent, "Exact Linear Rational

Expectations Models: Specification and Estimation", Staff
Report 71, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, November
1981.

48

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth 3. Singleton, "Stochastic
Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior
of Asset Returns', Journal of Political Economy,
91 (April 1983): 249—265.

Hansen, Lars Peter, Scott F. Richard and Kenneth J. Singleton,

Testable Implications of the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing
Model", unpublished mimeo. 1982.

Hicks, John R.. Value and Capital; An Inquiry into Some
Fundamental Principles of Economic Theory, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1939.

Jensen. Michael C ."Capital Markets: Theory and Evidence', Bell
Journal of Economics and Management Science, 3 (Autumn 1972):
357—398.

Kane. Edward J .,"Nested Tests of Alternative Term Structure
Theories", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 55
(February 1983): 115—123.
________________

'The lerm Structure of Interest Rates: An Attempt

to Reconcile Teaching with Practice', Journal of Finance, 25 (May
1970): 361—374.
Kessel ,

Reuben

A. •

Coumnent on "Debt Management and the Term

Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent
Experience", Journal of Political Economy, 75 (August 1967):
592—595.

_______________

The Cyclical Behavior of the Term Structure of

Interest Rates, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research,
1965.

49
Keynes. John Maynard, A Treatise on Money, Vol. 2. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1930.

Lehmann, Bruce N.. and David M. Modest. "The Empirical Foundations
of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory I: The Empirical Tests",

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1725,
October 1985.

Lintner, John, 'The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of
Risky Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets", Review
of Economics and Statistics. 47 (February 1965): 13—37.
Long, John B.," Stock Prices, Inflation and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates", Journal of Financial Economics, 1 (July
1974): 131—170.

Lucas, Robert E .," Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique", in

Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer eds., The Phillips Curve and
Labor Markets, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Vol. 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1976): 19—46.

________________

"Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy",

Econometrica, 46 (November 1978): 1429—1445.

Lutz, Frederick A .,"The Structure of Interest Rates', Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 55 (November 1940): 36—63.

Macaulay, Frederick R., The Movements of Interest Rates! Bond
Yields and Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1938.
Malkiel, Burton G., The Term Structure of Interest Rates:
Expectations and Behavior Patterns, Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1966.

50

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Jeffrey A. Miron, "The Changing

Behavior of the Term Structure of Interest Rate?,
Working Paper No. 1669, National Bureau of Economic
Research. July 1985.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Lawrence H. Sunners, "Do Long—Term
Interest Rates Overreact to Short—Term Interest Rates?'.

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1984:1, 223—242.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and Matthew D. Shapiro,

"An Unbiased Reexamination of Stock Market Volati1ity,
Journal of Finance, 40 (July 1985): 677—687.
Markowitz, H.M !

Portfolio

Selection", Journal of Finance, 7

(March 1952): 77—91.

McCallum, John S .,"The Expected Holding Period Return,
Uncertainty and the Term Structure of Interest Rates", Journal of
Finance, 30 (May 1975): 307—323.

McCulloch, J. Huston, "Measuring the Term Structure of Interest
Rates", Journal of Business, 44 (January 1971): 19—31.

Meiselman, David, The Term Structure of Interest Rates, Englewood
Cliffs. N.J.: Prentice—Hall, 1962.

Melino, Angelo, 'Estimation of a Rational Expectations Model of the
Term Structure", in Essays on Estimation and Inference in
Linear Rational Expectations Models, unpublished dissertation,
Harvard University, 1983.

Merton, Robert C .,"An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model",
Econometrica, 41 (September 1973): 867—887.

Michaelsen. Jacob B .,"The Term Structure of interest Rates and

51

Holding—Period Yields on Government Securities11. Journal of Finance,

20 (September 1965): 444—463.

Mishkin, Frederic, "Efficient—Markets Theory: rmplications for
Monetary Policy", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3,
1978: 107—752.

Modigliani, Franco and Robert J. Shiller, "Inflation. Rational
Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates", Economica,
40 (February 1973): 12—43.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Sutch, "Debt Management and the
Term Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of
Recent Experience", Journal of Political Economy, 75 (August
1967): 569—569.

____________________________________

"Innovations

in Interest

Rate Policy", American Economic Review, 56 (May 1966): 178—197.
Muth, John F., 'Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price
Movements", Econometrica, 29 (July 1961): 315—335.

Nelson, Charles R., The Term Structure of Interest Rates, New
York: Basic Books, 1972.

Pesando, James E .,"On Forecasting Interest Rates: An Efficient

Markets Perspective", Journal of Monetary Economics. 6 (November
1981): 305-318.
__________________

'On the Efficiency of the Bond Market: Some

Canadian Evidence", Journal of Political Economy, 86 (December
1978): 1057—1076.
__________________

'Determinants of Term Premiums in the Market

for United States Treasury Bills", Journal of Finance. 30

52

(December 1975): 1317—1327.
Reinganum. Marc R

Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing:

Empirical Anomalies Based on Earnings Yields and Market
Values", Journal of Financial Economics, 9 (1981): 19—46.

foley, V. Vance, 'The Effect of Federal Debt—Management Policy on

Corporate Bond and Equity Yields, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
97 (November 1982): 645—668.
________________

'The Determinants of the Treasury Security Yield

Curve", Journal of Finance, 36 (December 1981): 1103—1126.
Roll, Richard, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests;
Part I: On Past and Potential Testability of the Theory", Journal of
Financial Economics, 4 (March 1977): 129—176.

____________

"Investment

Diversification and Bond MaturityH,

Journal of Finance, 26 (March 1971): 51—66.

_____________

The Behavior of Interest Rates: An Application of

the Efficient Market Model to U.S. Treasury Bills, New York: Basic
Books, 1970.

Ross. Stephen A .,"The Current Status of the Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM)", Journal of Finance, 33 (June 1978): 885—901.
_________________

'tThe Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing",

Journal of Economic Theory, 13 (December 1976): 341—360.

Rothschild, Michael, "Asset Pricing Theories", Technical Working
Paper No. 44, National Bureau of Economic Research, March 1985.

Samuelson, Paul A .,"Proof that Properly Anticipated Prices
Fluctuate Randomly", Industrial Management Review, 6 (Spring
1965): 41—49.

53

Sargent, Thomas J. ,

Macroeconomic Theory, New York: Academic

Press, l979a.

_________________

'A Note on Maximum Likelihood Estimation of

the Rational Expectations Model of the Term Structure", Journal of
Monetary Economics, 5 (January 1979b): 133—143.
____________________

"Rational

Expectations and the Tern Structure

of Interest Rates", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 4
(February
1972): 74—97.
____________________

"Expectations

at the Short End of the Yield

Curve: An Application of Macaulay's Test', in Essays on
Interest Rates, vol II, edited by J. Fl. Guttentag, New York:

National Bureau of Economic Research, 1971.

Sharpe, W .,"Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium
Under Conditions of Risk". Journal of Finance, 19 (September
1964): 425—442.

Shea, Gary S .,"Pitfalls in Smoothing interest Rate Term Structure
Data: Equilibrium Models and Spline Approximations". Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 19 (September 1984):
253—269.

Shiller, Robert J .,'The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates

and Expectations Models of the Term Structure, Journal of Political
Economy, 87 (December 1919): 1190—1219.
ShUler, Robert J. , John Y. Campbell and Kermit L. Schoenholtz,

'Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of
Interest Rates", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,

54
1983: 173—217.

Startz, Richard. "Do Forecast Errors or Term Premia Really Make
the Difference between Long and Short Rates?

Journal of

Financial Economics. 10 (November 1982): 323—329.

Stiglitz, Joseph E .,'A Consumption—Oriented Theory of the Demand
for Financial Assets and the rerm Structure of Interest Rates',
Review of Economic Studies, 37 (July 1970): 321—351.

Telser, Lester G .,"A Critique of Some Recent Empirical Research on
the Explanation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates",
Journal of Political Economy, 75 (August 1967): 546—561.

Walker, Charles E .,"Federal Reserve Policy and the Structure of
Interest Rates on Government Securities", Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 68 (February 1954): 19—42.

Wood. John H., "Expectations, Errors, and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates", Journal of Political Economy, 71 (April
1963): 160-171.

55

Notes

'For an early expression of this view, see Keynes (1930)
chapter 37.

20f course, if we can price such bonds properly then it is a
trivial matter to deal with coupon bearing bonds.
31n the earliest studies that provided estimates of the
yield curve for long maturites, such as Durand (1942), the
problems were mainly due to imposing too much structure on the
shape of the curves (see Buse (1967)). Since Mcculloch (1971).
there has been a widespread adoption of more formal approximation
theory and techniques that allow for very flexible yield curve
shapes. Although the level of the yield curve is now estimated
fairly accurately (given enough data), there still appear to be
some difficulties for very long maturities, and the derivatives
of the estimated yield curves (which are used to estimate forward
rates) can often display erratic behavior (see Shea (1984)).
4Ed Kane (1970) writes, "It is generally agreed that,
ceteris paribus, the fertility of a field is roughly proportional
to the quantity of manure that has been dumped upon it in the
recent past. By this standard, the term structure of interest
rates has become in the last dozen years an extraordinarily
fertile field indeed."

5mese stylized facts refer to the term premia L(n)
defined in equation (2.6) below. Analogous conclusions can be
stated for the other two forms of term premia, namely 1(n) and
V(n), described in Section 2. Specific evidence is described in
Section 4.
61n the literature, this is often described as the
'efficient market hypothesis". This is an unfortunate
nomenclature since it suggests that evidence of time varying term
premia constitutes evidence of improperly functioning markets.
Careful authors always drew the distinction between a pricing
model (such as time invariant term premia) and the hypothesis
that markets are efficient if they quickly and fully reflect all
available relevant information. According to this alternative
usage, markets are efficient if expectations behave like rational
expectations with respect to some postulated information set.
7laxes and transactions costs are also agreed to be
important considerations, but, it seems fair to say, they have
not succumbed to a general treatment with empirical consequences.
8Some authors, eg. Friedman (1979) and Kane (1983), advocate
the use of survey data on expectations.

56

9See Campbell (1985a) for further elaboration of this point.

10V(n) Is sometimes referred to as the average or rolling
term premium, while T(n) is referred to as the marginal or
holding term premium, and L(n) is the forward premium.

Rol1 (1971) dealt with the implications of CAPM for the
forward premia L (n) of (2.6). For (2.8) to obtain, it is
assumed that Rtd) represents a riskiess rate. Otherwise,
H (1) should be treated as the uncertain one period yield on any
prtfolio uncorrelated with the market. For details, see Black
(1972).

Michaelsen (1965) appears to have been the first to attempt
to use the CAPM to explain the pattern of term premia. Although
he was somewhat informal in his application of the theory, it is
surprising that this suggestion went largely unnoticed.

l2 is usually assumed by empirical researchers in this
literature that expectations are unitary, i.e. that the current
value is the best predictor of the future, so that expected
capital gains are zero.
13Usually, in the Friedman—Roley work, government securities
are treated as exogenously determined, but corporate bonds are
endogenous variables.
T4Hansen, Richard and Singleton (1982) provide a useful
discussion of when and how a multifactor model can be reduced to
a single beta model.

Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) for some
extensions. Rothschild (1985) as well as Dybvig (1983) provide
some useful clarification.
16Ross (1976) discusses conditions under which this
intuition is in fact correct.
17Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) have recently provided an
example of a completely specified general equilibrium model where
asset prices exhibit the APT structure. While useful, the
development of further example economies, especially those that
incorporate monetary factors, is clearly needed.
18Actually, Lutz argued that the term structure would in
general be upward sloping because of transactions costs. He
believed that the premia would be zero after adjusting for this
(small) bias.

19Following Malkiel (1966), some prefer the label "classical
expectations hypothesis".

57

20Lutz made it clear that he envisaged agents acting as if
they held single valued expectations. He also explicitly
postulated that these forecasts were accurate, although he seemed
uncomfortable with the idea.

pattern of increasing term premia is referred to as
normal backwardation. The opposite pattern is called contango.
The terms were borrowed from the commodity traders of the
twenties and have nothing to do with sex.
(1940) criticism of the Hicksian liquidity
preference theory amounts to saying that the preferred habitat
theory is the mare plausible alternative to PET.

231n order to avoid the association of the expression
"liQuidity premium" with the Kicksian theory, Nelson (1912)
suggested the more agnostic term premium'. Current usage is
about evenly split.
less detailed but informative survey of much the same
literature is provided by Telser (1967).
25Macaulay speculated that the seasonal component of time
money rates should have been larger given the observed magnitude
of the seasonal in the call rate. Sargent (1971) repeated
Macaulay's (and Kessel's (1965)) analysis using spectral
techniques and confirmed these qualitative findings. Mankiw and
Miron (1985), however, report that if we account for the seasonal
component using duniny variables, the expectations imbedded in the
term structure prior to the establishment of the Federal Reserve
I can offer no explanation for this
were accurate predictors.
conflict.
260111er (1971) estimates the seasonal movement between July
and December constituted 20% of the average level of short rates
from 1959—1961. By contrast, he estimates the seasonal movement
in Macaulay's data to be about 35%.
27Frledman (1979) and Shiller (1979) also find that term
premia are positively correlated with the level of rates. Nelson
(1972) finds the opposite. Although Nelson's result is often
cited, it is based on the Durand data and for that reason is
probably best ignored.
28Using 28-day rates and monthly data from October 1949 —
February i961, Kessel estimates this premium to be about
O.22wR (1). Using weekly data on 91—day rates over just the
last 4w years of this sample period, he estimates a term premium
of about .43*Rt(1).
29Shiller (1979) brought attention to this graph once again.

58

30computed forward rates were based on ask prices. Kessel
used quote sheets from three different brokers to confirm the evidence.
have been unable to find any other study which documents
the existence of negative forward rates. Roll (1970) reports
verifying computed negative forward rates as a data check.
He does not tell us how often or when the negative rates occurred.
32Walker (1954) provides a useful historical sununary.

ceilings were the following:
Yield
3/8 of 1 per cent
7/8 of 1 per cent
2 per cent
2 1/2 per cent

Security
3 month treasury bills
9—12 month certificates
7—9 year bonds
15 year or over bonds

34This opinion is based on my own casual inspection of the
statistics from the Treasury Bulletin over this period.

351n particular a
and L(n+l) =

L(n)

=C

is consistent with both

L(n)

0

+

36Malkiel (1966) reached pretty much the same conclusion in
his review of Meiselman's contribution.
37see Sargent (1979a, chapter 10) for a discussion of the
error learning model and of the various researchers who
contributed to clarifying its relationship with optimal forecasts.
381he Durand data is an annual estimate of the yield curve
for high grade corporate bonds. In an attempt to get at the
was
riskless rate, it was drawn as an envelope curve. i.e. •
drawn below the observed scatter of points. Durand restricted
his curves to be either level or monotonic. He also imposed
several conditions to smooth his estimated curves. See Buse
(1961) for a discussion of the pitfalls involved in making
inferences from such data.

it

39Dobson et al. (1976) provide a survey of this literature.
400ne of the biggest problems in interpreting the relevance
for current debate of these empirical studies is the quality of
their data. Modigliani and Sutch used quarterly averages of
monthly figures. and the maturity of their long rate varied
from 10—15 years over the sample. We know that both of these
problems can sharply alter the dynamic properties of a series,
and hence of optimal forecasts, Unfortunately, reversing the
filter is analytically intractable.

59

411n his thesis. Sutch did compare the implied forecast
equation for the short rate from his estimates of (4.2). He
ignored several issues, such as non—uniqueness and the
complications of time averaging his dependent variable.
Nonetheless, he found the slope of the implied distributed lag to
be qualitatively similar to the distributed lag obtained by
estimating a short rate equation directly. Although Sutch did
not report formal tests, he concluded that the two were broadly
similar. Nelson (1972) opines that the difference is too large.
It is interesting that the debate as to whether or not the
cDefficients on the distributed lag represented expectational
effects continued as long as it did simply because of the
technical difficulty involved in testing the issue. The debate
would have been quickly resolved if Modigliani and Sutch had kept
their original derivation In which the distributed lag was
supposed to represent expected capital gains.
42Although Nelson's work was carefully executed, his
decision to employ the Ourand data renders his empirical results
unreliable.
43campbell and Shiller (1984) also
relationship between the short rate and
holding premia on long maturity bonds.
subject to the qualifications which the

report a negative
both the rolling and
Their conclusions are not
two step approach necessitates.

44me test statiqic for a constant term premium is 2
asymptotically just nR , where n is the sample size and R is the
proportion of the variance explained in the regression of the
forecast error from the first stage on the variables which are
purported o explain term premia. The correct test statistic
uses the R from the regression which includes these variables
and any variables used in the first stage to forecast short
rates. [see Engle (1984). Testing.,for a zero term premium

requires us to use the uncentered R.] Snce including
additional variables can never make the R fall, and in general
will cause it to rise, ignoring variables from the first stage in
the second stage test biases the test towards accepting the null
hypothesis.

45The first half of Roll's sample contains prices on bills
from 1 to 13 weeks. Six month Treasury bills were first
auctioned in February 1959. and after that date, prices for bills
up to 26 weeks were collected.
46Michaelsen (1965) reached similiar conclusions about the
holding preniia T(n). Fama (1984b) provides a recent confirmation
of Roll's findings and extends his analysis to include securities
of longer maturity.

60

47original discussion of the efficient markets theory
associated it with the idea that expectational errors should be
It was
uncorrelated with publicly available information.
therefore just a call to model expectations as rational and
careful authors distinguished the model of expectations from the
model of market equilibrium — in this case a time invariant term
premium. With the general adoption of rational expectations, the
efficient market hypothesis Is now often understood to refer to
the joint hypothesis described in the text. Purists may prefer
to talk about the rational expectations model of the term
structure, but this quickly becomes tiring. When there is no
risk to confusion, we can simply speak of the expectations model.
48lncluding the contemporaneous change in the short rate
instead of its innovation may introduce spurious results.
Pesando repeats his test with only lagged values. Again, he
finds no evidence against the martingale hypothesis. Although
this last test is consistent, it would be more powerful if the
innovation in the short rate were Included as a regressor.
49lhese matters are elaborated in Melino (1983).
50see Flavin (1983) or Mankiw, Romer and Shapiro (1985) for
a discussion.
51Mishkin (1978) points out that heteroscedasticity is an
important problem for Shiller's regression. He obtains pretty
much the same point estimate, but a larger standard error. The
particular correction which he suggested, however, seems
questionable. Another difficulty with this test is that the long
rate appears to have a unit root so that the standard t—test is
inappropriate.
526ob Shiller informed me that this result was first pointed
out to him many years earlier by Franco Modigliani.

