                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE IMPACT OF RIGHT TO CARRY LAWS AND THE NRC REPORT:
 THE LATEST LESSONS FOR THE EMPIRICAL EVALUATION OF LAW AND POLICY

                                            Abhay Aneja
                                         John J. Donohue III
                                          Alexandria Zhang

                                        Working Paper 18294
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18294


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




The authors wish to thank David Autor, Alan Auerbach, Phil Cook, Peter Siegelman, Hugh LaFollette,
and an anonymous referee for helpful comments, Todd Elder for assistance in understanding the technique
of testing for omitted variable bias, Akshay Rao, Vikram Rao, Andrew Baker, and Kyle Weber for
outstanding research assistance, and Stanford Law School and Yale Law School for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Abhay Aneja, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Right to Carry Laws and the NRC Report: The Latest Lessons for the Empirical
Evaluation of Law and Policy
Abhay Aneja, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 18294
August 2012, Revised November 2014
JEL No. K0

                                            ABSTRACT

For over a decade, there has been a spirited academic debate over the impact on crime of laws that
grant citizens the presumptive right to carry concealed handguns in public – so-called right-to-carry
(RTC) laws. In 2004, the National Research Council (NRC) offered a critical evaluation of the
“More Guns, Less Crime” hypothesis using county-level crime data for the period 1977-2000. 15
of the 16 academic members of the NRC panel essentially concluded that the existing research was
inadequate to conclude that RTC laws increased or decreased crime. One member of the panel
thought the NRC's panel data regressions showed that RTC laws decreased murder, but the other 15
responded by saying that “the scientific evidence does not support” that position.

We evaluate the NRC evidence, and improve and expand on the report’s county data analysis by
analyzing an additional six years of county data as well as state panel data for the period 1979-2010.
We also present evidence using both a more plausible version of the Lott and Mustard specification,
as well as our own preferred specification (which, unlike the Lott and Mustard model presented in
the NRC report, does control for rates of incarceration and police). While we have considerable
sympathy with the NRC’s majority view about the difficulty of drawing conclusions from simple
panel data models and re-affirm its finding that the conclusion of the dissenting panel member that
RTC laws reduce murder has no statistical support, we disagree with the NRC report’s judgment on
one methodological point: the NRC report states that cluster adjustments to correct for serial
correlation are not needed in these panel data regressions, but our randomization tests show that
without such adjustments the Type 1 error soars to 22 - 73 percent.

Our paper highlights some important questions to consider when using panel data methods to resolve
questions of law and policy effectiveness. We buttress the NRC’s cautious conclusion regarding
the effects of RTC laws by showing how sensitive the estimated impact of RTC laws is to different
data periods, the use of state versus county data, particular specifications (especially the
Lott-Mustard inclusion of 36 highly collinear demographic variables), and the decision to control
for state trends.

Across the basic seven Index I crime categories, the strongest evidence of a statistically significant
effect would be for aggravated assault, with 11 of 28 estimates suggesting that RTC laws increase
this crime at the .10 confidence level. An omitted variable bias test on our preferred Table 8a results
suggests that our estimated 8 percent increase in aggravated assaults from RTC laws may understate
the true harmful impact of RTC laws on aggravated assault, which may explain why this finding is
only significant at the .10 level in many of our models. Our analysis of the year-by-year impact of
RTC laws also suggests that RTC laws increase aggravated assaults. Our analysis of admittedly
imperfect gun aggravated assaults provides suggestive evidence that RTC laws may be associated
with large increases in this crime, perhaps increasing such gun assaults by almost 33 percent.
In addition to aggravated assault, the most plausible state models conducted over the entire
1979-2010 period provide evidence that RTC laws increase rape and robbery (but usually only at
the .10 level). In contrast, for the period from 1999-2010 (which seeks to remove the confounding
influence of the crack cocaine epidemic), the preferred state model (for those who accept the
Wolfers proposition that one should not control for state trends) yields statistically significant
evidence for only one crime -- suggesting that RTC laws increase the rate of murder at the .05
significance level. It will be worth exploring whether other methodological approaches and/or
additional years of data will confirm the results of this panel-data analysis and clarify some of the
highly sensitive results and anomalies (such as the occasional estimates that RTC laws lead to higher
rates of property crime) that have plagued this inquiry for over a decade.


Abhay Aneja                                           Alexandria Zhang
Stanford Law School                                   Johns Hopkins University
559 Nathan Abbott Way                                 Baltimore, Maryland
Stanford, CA 94305                                    azhang4@jhu.edu
aaneja@stanford.edu

John J. Donohue III
Stanford Law School
Crown Quadrangle
559 Nathan Abbott Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
donohue@law.stanford.edu
I. Introduction
           The debate on the impact of “shall-issue” or “right-to-carry” (RTC) concealed handgun

laws on crime—which has now raged on for over a decade—is a prime example of the many

difficulties and pitfalls that await those who try to use observational data to estimate the effects

of changes in law or policy.2 John Lott and David Mustard initiated the "More Guns, Less

Crime" discussion with their widely cited 1997 paper arguing that the adoption of RTC laws has

played a major role in reducing violent crime. However, as Ayres and Donohue (2003a) note,

Lott and Mustard’s period of analysis ended just before the extraordinary crime drop of the

1990s. They concluded that extending Lott and Mustard’s dataset beyond 1992 undermined the

“More Guns, Less Crime” (MGLC) hypothesis. Other studies have raised further doubts about

the claimed benefits of RTC laws (for example, see Black and Nagin, 1997 and Ludwig, 1998).

           But even as the empirical support for the Lott and Mustard thesis was weakening, its

political impact was growing. Legislators continued to cite this work in support of their votes on

behalf of RTC laws, and the “More Guns, Less Crime” claim has been invoked often in support

of ensuring a personal right to have handguns under the Second Amendment. In the face of this

scholarly and political ferment, in 2003, the National Research Council (NRC) convened a

committee of top experts in criminology, statistics, and economics to evaluate the existing data in

hopes of reconciling the various methodologies and findings concerning the relationship between

firearms and violence, of which the impact of RTC laws was a single, but important, issue. With

so much talent on board, it seemed reasonable to expect that the committee would reach a

decisive conclusion on this topic and put the debate to rest.

           The bulk of the NRC report on firearms, which was finally issued in 2004, was

uncontroversial. The chapter on RTC laws was anything but. Citing the extreme sensitivity of

2   The term “RTC laws” is used interchangeably with “shall-issue laws” in the guns and crime literature.

                                                                                                            3
point estimates to various panel data model specifications, the NRC report failed to narrow the

domain of uncertainty about the effects of RTC laws. Indeed, it may have increased it.

However, while the NRC report concluded there was no reliable statistical support for the “More

Guns, Less Crime” hypothesis, the vote was not unanimous. One dissenting committee member

argued that the committee's own estimates revealed that RTC laws did in fact reduce the rate of

murder. Conversely, a different member went even further than the majority’s opinion by

doubting that any econometric evaluation could illuminate the impact of RTC laws owing to

model specification and endogeneity issues.

       Given the prestige of the committee and the conflicting assessments of both the

substantive issue of RTC laws' impact and the suitability of empirical methods for evaluating

such laws, a reassessment of the NRC’s report would be useful for researchers seeking to

estimate the impact of other legal and policy interventions. Our systematic review of the NRC's

evidence—its approach and findings—also provides important lessons on the perils of using

traditional observational methods to elucidate the impact of legislation. To be clear, our intent is

not to provide what the NRC panel could not—that is, the final word on how RTC laws impact

crime. Rather, we show how fragile panel data evidence can be, and how a number of issues

must be carefully considered when relying on these methods to study politically and socially

explosive topics with direct policy implications.

       The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II offers background on the debate over

RTC laws, and Section III describes relevant aspects of the NRC report in depth. Section IV

discusses how the NRC majority presented some panel data models based on the Lott and

Mustard specification in support of the conclusion that one could not reach a definitive

conclusion about the impact of RTC laws. While this conclusion was correct, the models



                                                                                                   4
contained an array of errors that opened the door for the Wilson dissent to argue that RTC laws

reduce murder. We discuss these errors in depth and show that Wilson would have been unable

to make his dissent if the errors in the presented models (and standard error calculations) had

been corrected.

       Sections V and VI explore two key econometric issues in evaluating RTC laws—whether

to control for state-specific trends (which the NRC panel did not address) and whether to adjust

standard errors to account for serial or within-group correlation (we show that the NRC report

was in error when it concluded such adjustment was not needed). Section VII extends the

analysis through 2006, and Section VIII offers improvements to the NRC model by revising the

regression specification in accordance with past research on crime. Section IX discusses the

issue of whether the impact of RTC laws can be better estimated using county- or state-level

data. Section X delves further into the issue of omitted variable bias in assessing the impact of

RTC laws, and in particular, how the difficult-to-measure effect of the crack epidemic may

influence our estimates. Section XI offers concluding comments on the current state of the

research on RTC laws, the difficulties in ascertaining the causal effects of legal interventions,

and the dangers that exist when policy-makers can simply pick their preferred study from among

a wide array of conflicting estimates.



II. Background on the Debate

       In a widely-discussed 1997 paper, “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed

Handguns,” John Lott and David Mustard (1997) argued, based on a panel-data analysis, that

right-to-carry laws were a primary driving force behind falling rates of violent crime. Lott and

Mustard used county-level crime data (including county and year fixed effects, as well as a set of



                                                                                                    5
control variables) to estimate the impact of RTC laws on crime rates over the time period 1977-

1992. In essence, Lott and Mustard’s empirical approach was designed to identify the effect of

RTC laws on crime in the ten states that adopted them during this time period. Using a standard

difference-in-difference model, the change in crime in RTC regions is compared with the change

in crime in non-RTC regions. The implicit assumption is that the controls included in the

regression will explain other movements in crime across states, and the remaining differences in

crime levels can be attributed to the presence or absence of the RTC laws.

         Lott and Mustard estimated two distinct difference-in-difference-type models to test the

impact of RTC laws: a dummy variable model and a trend, or “spline,” model.3 The “dummy

model" tests whether the average crime level in the pre-passage period is statistically different

from the post-passage crime level (after controlling for other factors). The “spline model”

measures whether crime trends are altered by the adoption of RTC laws. Lott and Mustard noted

that the spline approach would be superior if the intervention caused a reversal in a rising crime

rate. Such a reversal could be obscured in a dummy variable model that only estimates the

average change in crime between the pre- and post-passage periods. An effective RTC law might

show no effect in the dummy model if the rise in the pre-passage crime rate and the fall in the

post-passage rate were to leave the average “before” and “after” crime levels the same.



3 In Lott’s “dummy model” specification, RTC laws are modeled as a dummy variable which takes on a value of
one in the first full year after passage and retains that value thereafter (since no state has repealed its RTC law once
adopted). In Lott’s "trend model," RTC laws are modeled as a spline variable indicating the number of years post-
passage. In prior work, including previous drafts of this article, we had followed this specification choice. But this
approach adds noise to this key RTC variable because of heterogeneity across states in the effective dates of RTC
laws. Accordingly, we decided to modify our approach to these laws in the most recent version of this paper to
more precisely model the impact of the RTC laws based on the actual effective dates of these statutes. Using the
text of relevant statutes and information on the court cases that challenged them, we determined the exact date when
each state’s RTC law took effect. (A more precise description of what was involved in this process can be found in
Footnote 17.) Our “dummy model” specification uses a variable that takes a value of one for every full year after
each law takes effect and is equal to the fraction of the year that the law is in effect the first year it is implemented.
Similarly, our “trend model” specification uses a spline variable indicating the number of years post-passage which
takes into account the portion of the year the law was initially implemented.

                                                                                                                         6
       In both regression models, Lott and Mustard included only a single other criminal justice

explanatory variable -- county-level arrest rates -- plus controls for county population, population

density, income, and thirty-six(!) categories of demographic composition. As we will discuss

shortly, we believe that many criminological researchers would be concerned about the absence

of important explanatory factors such as the incarceration rate and the level of police force.

       Lott and Mustard’s results seemed to support the contention that laws allowing the carry

of concealed handguns lead to less crime. Their estimates suggested that murder, rape,

aggravated assault, and overall violent crime fell by 4 to 7 percent following the passage of RTC

laws. In contrast, property crime rates (auto theft, burglary, and larceny) were estimated to have

increased by 2 to 9 percent. Lott and Mustard thus concluded that criminals respond to RTC

laws by substituting violent crime with property crime to reduce the risk that they would be shot

(since, according to them, victims are more often absent during the commission of a property

crime). They also found that the MGLC contention was strengthened by the trend analysis,

which ostensibly suggested significant decreases in murder, rape, and robbery (but no significant

increases in property crime).

       From this evidence, Lott and Mustard (1997) concluded that permissive gun-carrying

laws deter violent crimes more effectively than any other crime reduction policy: “concealed

handguns are the most cost-effective method of reducing crime thus far analyzed by economists,

providing a higher return than increased law enforcement or incarceration, other private security

devices, or social programs like early education.” They went even further by claiming that had

remaining non-RTC states enacted such legislation, over 1,400 murders and 4,100 rapes would

have been avoided nationwide, and that each new handgun permit would reduce victim losses by

up to $5,000.



                                                                                                  7
         A. The Far-Reaching Impact of “More Guns, Less Crime”

         The first "More Guns, Less Crime" paper and Lott’s subsequent research (and pro-gun

advocacy) have had a major impact in the policy realm. Over the past decade, politicians as well

as interest groups such as the National Rifle Association have continually trumpeted the results

of this empirical study to oppose gun control efforts and promote less restrictive gun-carrying

laws. Lott has repeatedly invoked his own research to advocate for the passage of state-level

concealed-carry gun laws, testifying on the purported safety benefits of RTC laws in front of

several state legislatures, including Nebraska, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin (Ayres

and Donohue 2003a).

         The impact of the Lott-Mustard paper can also be seen at the federal level. In 1997, ex-

Senator Larry Craig (R-Idaho) introduced the Personal Safety and Community Protection Act

with Lott’s research as supporting evidence. This bill was designed to allow state nonresidents

with valid handgun permits in their home state to possess concealed firearms (former football

athlete Plaxico Burress sought to invoke this defense when he accidentally shot himself in a

Manhattan nightclub with a gun for which he had obtained a Florida permit). According to

Craig, Lott’s work confirmed that positive externalities of gun-carrying would result in two

ways: by affording protection for law-abiding citizens during criminal acts, and by deterring

potential criminals from ever committing offenses for fear of encountering an armed response.4

Clearly, Lott’s work has provided academic cover for policymakers and advocates seeking to

justify the view—on public safety grounds—that the 2nd Amendment conferred a private right to

possess handguns.

4 143 CONG. REC. S5109 (daily ed. May 23, 1997) (statement of Sen. Craig). The bill was again introduced in
2000 by Congressman Cliff Stearns (R-Florida), who also cited Lott’s work. 146 CONG. REC. H2658 (daily ed.
May 9) 2000) (statement of Rep. Stearns).
Indeed, this proposed legislation, now derisively referred to as “Plaxico’s Law,” is a perennial favorite of the NRA
and frequently introduced by supportive members of Congress (Collins 2009).

                                                                                                                       8
       B. Questioning “More Guns, Less Crime”

       Immediately after the publication of the Lott-Mustard paper, scholars started raising

serious questions about the theoretical and empirical validity of the “More Guns, Less Crime”

hypothesis. For example, Zimring and Hawkins (1997) claimed that the comparison of crime

between RTC and non-RTC states is inherently misleading because of factors such as

deprivation, drugs, and gang activity, which vary significantly across gun-friendly and non-gun-

friendly states (and are often difficult to quantify). To the extent that the relatively better crime

performance seen in shall-issue states during the late 1980s and early 1990s was the product of

these other factors, researchers may be obtaining biased impact estimates. Underscoring this

point, Ayres and Donohue (2003a) pointed out that crime rose across the board from 1985 to

1992, and most dramatically in non-RTC states. Since the data set used in Lott and Mustard

(1997) ended in 1992, it could not capture the most dramatic reversal in crime in American

history.

       Figures 1-7 depict the trends of violent and property crimes over the period 1970-2010.

For each of the seven crimes, we calculate average annual crime rates for four groupings of

states: non-RTC states (those states that had not passed RTC laws by 2006), states that adopted

RTC laws over the period 1985-1988 (“early adopters”), those that adopted RTC laws over the

period 1989-1991 (“mid-adopters”), and those that adopted RTC laws over the period 1994-1996

(“late adopters”). The crime rate shown for each group is a within-group average, weighted by

population. The figures corroborate Ayres and Donohue’s point: crime rates declined sharply

across the board beginning in 1992. In fact, there was a steady upward trend in crime rates in the

years leading up to 1992, most distinctly for rape and aggravated assault. Moreover, the average

crime rates in non-RTC states seemed to have dropped even more drastically than those in RTC



                                                                                                        9
states, which suggests that crime-reducing factors other than RTC laws were at work.




                                                                                       10
Figure 1:




Figure 2:




            11
Figure 3:




Figure 4:




            12
Figure 5:




Figure 6:




            13
Figure 7:




       Ayres and Donohue (2003a) also recommended the use of a more general model, referred

to as the “hybrid model,” which essentially combined the dummy variable and spline models, to

measure the immediate and long-run impact of RTC laws on crime. Since the hybrid model

nests both the dummy and spline models, one can estimate the hybrid and generate either of the

other models as a special case (depending on what the data show). This exercise seemed to

weaken the MGLC claim. Their analysis of the county data set from 1977-1997 using the Lott-

Mustard specification (revised to measure state-specific effects) indicated that RTC laws across

all states raised total crime costs by as much as $524 million.

       Just as Lott had identified a potential problem with the dummy model (it might understate

a true effect if crime followed either a V-shaped or inverted V-shaped pattern), there is a

potential problem with models (such as the spline and the hybrid models) that estimate a post-

passage linear trend. Early adopters of RTC laws have a far more pronounced impact on the


                                                                                                 14
trend estimates of RTC laws than later adopters, since there may only be a few years of post-

passage data available for a state that adopts RTC laws close to the end of the data period. If

those early adopters were unrepresentative of low crime states, then the final years of the spline

estimate would suggest a dramatic drop in crime, not because crime had in fact fallen in adopting

states, but because the more representative states had dropped out of the estimate (since there

would be no post-passage data after, say, three years for a state that had adopted the RTC law

only three years earlier, but there would be such data for Maine and Indiana, which were the

earliest RTC adopters). We recognize that each model has limitations, and present the results of

all three in our tables below.5



III. Findings of the National Research Council

         The sharply conflicting academic assessments of RTC laws specifically and the impact of

firearms more generally, not to mention the heightened political salience of gun issues, prompted

the National Research Council to impanel a committee of experts to critically review the entire

range of research on the relationships between guns and violence. The blue-chip committee,

which included prominent scholars such as sociologist Charles Wellford (the committee chair),

political scientist James Q. Wilson, and economists Joel Horowitz, Joel Waldfogel, and Steven

Levitt, issued its wide ranging report in 2004.

         While the members of the panel agreed on the major issues discussed in eight of the nine

chapters of the NRC report, the single chapter devoted to exploring the causal effects of RTC

laws on crime proved to be quite contentious. After reviewing the existing (and conflicting)

5We  note that in the latest version of his book, Lott (2010) criticizes the hybrid model, but he fails to appreciate that
the problem with the hybrid model –and with the spline model he prefers—is that they both yield estimates that are
inappropriately tilted down as the more representative states drop out of the later years, which drive the post-passage
trend estimates. An apples to apples comparison that included the identical states to estimate the post-passage trend
would not suggest a negative slope. This is clear in Figure 1 and Table 1 of Ayres and Donohue (2003a).

                                                                                                                      15
literature and undertaking their own evaluation of Lott’s county-level crime data, 15 of the 16

academic members of the committee concluded that the data provided no reliable and robust

support for the Lott-Mustard contention. In fact, they believed the data could not support any

policy-relevant conclusion. In addition, they claimed they could not estimate the true impact of

these laws on crime because: (1) the empirical results were imprecise and highly sensitive to

changes in model specification, and (2) the estimates were not robust when the data period was

extended eight years beyond the original analysis (through 2000), a period during which a large

number of states adopted the law.

       A. The NRC Presents Two Sets of Estimates of the Impact of RTC Laws

       One can get an inkling of the NRC majority’s concern about model sensitivity by

examining Table 1 below, which reports estimates from the NRC report on the impact of RTC

laws on seven crimes. The Table 1b estimates are based on the Lott and Mustard (1997) dummy

and spline models using county data for the period 1977-2000 with the full set of Lott and

Mustard controls. The Table 1a estimates use the same data but provide a more sparse

specification that drops the Lott and Mustard controls and provides estimates with no covariates

other than year and county fixed effects. The vastly different results produced by these different

models gave the majority considerable pause. For example, if one believed the dummy model in

Table 1b, then RTC laws considerably increased aggravated assault and robbery, while the

spline model in Table 1b suggested RTC laws decreased the rate of both of these crimes. Noting

that the RTC impact estimates disagreed across their two models (dummy and spline) for six of

the seven crime categories, the NRC report concluded that there was no reliable scientific

support for the more guns, less crime thesis.




                                                                                                  16
                                                         Table 1
              6
Table 1a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Published NRC Estimates – No Controls, All Crimes, County Data, 1977-2000


    All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                 Auto
                                  Murder        Rape       Assault    Robbery       Theft    Burglary      Larceny
     Dummy Variable Model:         -1.95     17.91***    12.34***     19.99***    23.33***   19.06***      22.58***
                                   (1.48)    (1.39)      (0.90)       (1.21)      (0.85)     (0.61)        (0.59)

                  Spline Model:     0.12      -2.17***     -0.65***    -0.88***   0.57***    -1.99***      -0.71***
                                   (0.32)      (0.30)      (0.20)      (0.26)     (0.19)      (0.13)       (0.13)


Table 1b7
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Published NRC Estimates – Lott-Mustard Controls, All Crimes, County Data 1977-2000


    All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                 Auto
                                  Murder       Rape       Assault     Robbery       Theft    Burglary      Larceny
     Dummy Variable Model:        -8.33***     -0.16      3.05***     3.59***     12.74***   6.19***       12.40***
                                  (1.05)       (0.83)     (0.80)       (0.90)     (0.78)     (0.57)        (0.55)

                  Spline Model:   -2.03***    -2.81***    -1.92***    -2.58***    -0.49**    -2.13***      -0.73***
                                  (0.26)       (0.20)     (0.20)      (0.22)      (0.19)      (0.14)       (0.13)




            Interestingly, the conflicting estimates of Table 1 also led to substantial intra-panel

dissention, with two members of the Committee writing separately from the NRC's majority

evaluation of RTC laws. One sought to refute the majority’s skepticism, and one sought to

reinforce it. Noted political scientist James Q. Wilson offered the lone dissent to the Committee’s

report, claiming that Lott and Mustard’s “More Guns, Less Crime” finding actually held up

under the panel’s reanalysis. Specifically, Wilson rejected the majority’s interpretation of the


6
  Estimations include year and county fixed effects, and are weighted by county population. Standard errors are in
parentheses below estimations. Robust standard errors are not used in the published NRC estimates. * Significant at
10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Throughout this paper, the standard errors appear just below the
corresponding parameter estimate.
7
  Estimations include year and county fixed effects, and are weighted by county population. Standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. Robust standard errors are not used in the published NRC
estimates. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model) include: arrest rate, county population,
population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic composition measures indicating the
percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group. * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; ***
Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                      17
regression estimates seen in Table 1. Although the majority saw sharp conflicts in the Table 1b

results between the dummy and spline models, Wilson was impressed that for one of the seven

crimes -- murder -- the dummy and spline models of Table 1b generated estimates that

seemingly suggested there were statistically significant drops in crime associated with RTC laws.

This agreement in the Table 1b murder estimates led him to heartily endorse the "More Guns,

Less Crime" view. Indeed, after dismissing papers that had cast doubt on the MGLC hypothesis

(such as Black and Nagin, 1998) on the grounds that they were “controversial,” Wilson

concluded: “I find the evidence presented by Lott and his supporters suggests that RTC laws do

in fact help drive down the murder rate, though their effect on other crimes is ambiguous” (NRC

Report, p. 271.).

         The Committee penned a response to Wilson’s dissent (separate from its overall

evaluation of RTC legislation), which stressed that the only disagreement between the majority

and Wilson (throughout the entire volume on gun issues) concerned the impact of RTC laws on

murder. They noted that, while there were a number of negative estimates for murder using the

Lott-Mustard approach, there were also several positive estimates that could not be overlooked.

In addition, as the NRC panel noted, even the results for murder failed to support the MGLC

contention when restricting the period of analysis to five years or less after law adoption.8 The

important task was to try to reconcile these contradictions—and the panel majority believed that

was not possible using the existing data.

         Committee member (and noted econometrician) Joel Horowitz was the ardent skeptic,

and not without merit. Horowitz joined the refutation of Wilson but also authored his own

appendix discussing at length the difficulties of measuring the impact of RTC laws on crime

8 The importance of this restriction on the post-passage data was mentioned earlier: as states dropped out of the
post-passage data, the estimated impact of RTC laws became badly biased (since one was no longer deriving the
estimated effect from a uniform set of states).

                                                                                                                    18
using observational rather than experimental data.9 He began by addressing a number of flaws in

the panel-data approach. First, if factors other than the adoption of the RTC law change but are

not controlled for in the model, then the resulting estimates would not effectively isolate the

impact of the law (we demonstrate the likelihood of this possibility in Section X below).

Second, if crime increases before the adoption of the law at the same rate it decreases after

adoption, then a measured zero-difference would be misleading. The same problem arises for

multiyear averages. Third, the adoption of RTC laws may be a response to crime waves. If such

an endogeneity issue exists, the difference in crime rates may merely reflect these crime waves

rather than the effect of the laws. Lastly, as even Lott (2000) found in his data, RTC states differ

noticeably from non-RTC states (e.g., RTC states are mainly Republican and had low but rising

rates of crime). It would not be surprising if these distinctive attributes influence the measured

effect of RTC laws. In this event, looking at the impact of RTC laws in current RTC states may

not be useful for predicting the likely result if these laws were adopted in very different states.

        Ideally, states would be randomly selected to adopt RTC laws, thereby eliminating the

systematic differences between RTC states and non-RTC states. In the absence of such

randomization, researchers introduce controls to try to account for these differences, which

generates debate over which set of controls is appropriate. Lott (2000) defended his model by

claiming that it included “the most comprehensive set of control variables yet used in a study of

crime” (p. 153). But Horowitz was unimpressed by Lott’s claim, noting that it is possible to

control for too many variables – or too few. He pointed out that Donohue (2003) found a

significant relationship between crime and future adoption of RTC legislation, suggesting the

likelihood of omitted variable bias and/or the endogenous adoption of the laws. Horowitz


9 While his chapter is directed at the analysis of RTC laws, Horowitz's comments applied to an array of empirical
studies of policy that were discussed throughout the entire NRC volume.

                                                                                                                    19
concluded by noting that there is no test that can determine the right set of controls: “it is not

possible to carry out an empirical test of whether a proposed set of X variables is the correct

one…it is largely a matter of opinion which set [of controls] to use” (NRC Report, p. 307).

Noting the likelihood of misspecification in the evaluation of RTC laws, and that estimates

obtained from a misspecified model can be highly misleading, he concluded that there was little

hope of reaching a scientifically supported conclusion based on the Lott-Mustard/NRC model (or

any other).10

        B. The Serious Need for Reassessment

        The story thus far has been discouraging for those hoping for illumination of the impact

of legislation through econometric analysis. If the NRC majority is right, then years of

observational work by numerous researchers, topped off with a multi-year assessment of the data

by a panel of top scholars, were not enough to pin down the actual impact of RTC laws. If

Horowitz is right, then the entire effort to estimate the impact of state right-to-carry policies from

observational data is doomed. Indeed, there may be simply too much that researchers do not

know about the proper structure of econometric models of crime. Notably, however, the

majority did not join Horowitz in the broad condemnation of all observational

microeconometrics for the study of this topic. Perhaps a model that better accounts for all

relevant, exogenous, crime-influencing factors and secular crime trends could properly discern

the effects of RTC laws – whether supporting or refuting the Wilson conclusion that RTC laws

reduce murder. On the other hand, an examination of additional models might only serve to

strengthen the NRC majority conclusion that the models generated estimates that were too


10  Note that this nihilistic conclusion was very close to that found by a more recent NRC report investigating the
deterrent effect of the death penalty. Daniel S. Nagin and John V. Pepper, editors, Deterrence and the Death Penalty
(2012). This recent NRC report reviewed 30 years of studies on this deterrence question and found the entire
literature to be "uninformative."

                                                                                                                 20
variable to provide clear insight into the effect of RTC laws on crime.

IV. Panel Data Estimates in the NRC Report

         Previous research on guns and crime has shown how data and methodological flaws can

produce inaccurate conclusions. In a follow-up to their initial 2003 Stanford Law Review paper,

Ayres and Donohue (2003b) demonstrated how coding errors can yield inaccurate and

misleading estimates of the effect of RTC laws on crime. Commenting on a study in support of

the MGLC premise by Florenz Plassman and John Whitley (2003), Ayres and Donohue (2003b)

described numerous coding flaws. After correcting these errors, the existing evidence supporting

the “More Guns, Less Crime” hypothesis evaporated.

         A. The NRC’s Panel-Data Models

         Since the NRC panel based their reported estimates on data provided by John Lott, we

thought it prudent to carefully examine the NRC committee’s own estimates. With the help of

the NRC committee members who provided the NRC 1977-2000 county data set, we were

ultimately able to generate the NRC panel data estimates.11 Once we fully understood the way in

which these NRC estimates were generated (shown in Table 1 above), it became clear that the

NRC report presented estimates that essentially had three flaws: 1) the specification (used by

Lott and Mustard) was problematic in a number of dimensions; 2) the standard errors were

incorrect in two ways, both of which made the results appear more significant than they were;

and 3) there were some errors in the data, which had been supplied by Lott.

         Given the NRC majority conclusion that the Lott and Mustard thesis was not supported

by the data, it was a reasonable choice to simply take the Lott and Mustard data and

11 The initial published version of this article -- Aneja, Donohue, and Zhang (2011) -- noted that we had originally
failed to replicate the NRC results, with our efforts complicated because the Committee had misplaced the do files
that generated the NRC estimates. After publication, we were informed of the precise specification the NRC had
employed, which did generate the published NRC estimates (although these estimates are flawed in the manner
described in the text).

                                                                                                                  21
specifications and adhere to their method of computing standard errors. In essence, the NRC

majority was shrewdly saying, “Even if we fully accept everything that Lott and Mustard have

argued for, we still find no support for their conclusion.” The only problem with the NRC

majority approach, though, was that presenting the estimates in Table 1b above opened the door

for James Q. Wilson to argue that some support for RTC laws could be gleaned from the

ostensibly conflicting evidence.

       Wilson’s claim, once again, was that Table 1b spoke with clarity, albeit on only one

point. He conceded that the Lott and Mustard dummy and spline estimates conflicted for six of

the seven crime categories, but since they both showed statistically significant reductions in

murder, Wilson claimed that the murder finding was robust and he concluded that RTC laws

save lives. The NRC majority responded that Table 1a did not similarly suggest that RTC laws

reduced murder but Wilson swatted that response aside by saying that a model with no covariates

would not be as persuasive as the Table 1b models with covariates. The NRC majority could

have countered Wilson’s claim far more effectively if they had simply shown that the Lott and

Mustard model was highly assailable and greatly underestimated its standard errors. Indeed,

nothing would have been left standing for Wilson to construct a positive story of RTC laws if the

NRC majority had simply calculated the correct standard errors for the Table 1b models, since

doing so would have eliminated any claim that the RTC laws generated a statistically significant

reduction in murder or any other crime.

       B. Problems with the Lott and Mustard Models and Data Published in the NRC Report

       Our goal in this section is to improve on the estimates presented in the NRC report (Table

1 above) by correcting what we consider to be clear errors in the Lott and Mustard specification,

data, and standard errors. Thus, we began by constructing our own county-level data set, which



                                                                                                 22
we will refer to as the "Updated 2013 Data Set." We create the same variables found in Lott’s

data—crime rates, demographic composition, arrest rates, income, population, and population

density—and extend our new set to 2006 (the NRC data ended in 2000).12 This data extension

will also provide us an opportunity to explore how the NRC’s results are affected when using

more current data. As we will see in Section VII, the additional years of data will also enable us

to estimate the effect of six additional state adoptions of RTC laws not present in the NRC

analysis: Michigan (2001), Colorado (2003), Minnesota (2003), Missouri (2004), New Mexico

(2004), and Ohio (2004).13

         We obtained our county crime data from the University of Michigan’s Interuniversity

Consortium for Political and Social Research, which maintains the most comprehensive

collection of UCR data. Unfortunately, county-level crime data for 1993 is currently

unavailable. The National Archive of Criminal Justice Data recently discovered an error in the

crime data imputation procedure for 1993 and for this reason, has made 1993 data inaccessible

until the error has been corrected. Thus, for all of the following tables with estimates using our

updated county data, we are missing values for 1993.

         In Table 2, we will replicate and extend the Table 1 NRC estimates correcting for three

errors: 1) some data errors that were transmitted to the NRC when they used the Lott county

data set; 2) a clear specification error in the arrest rate controls; and 3) the failure to use both

robust and clustered standard errors. We also modify the RTC variables used in this analysis to

take into account additional information that we have gathered on the effective dates of these

laws.

12 We also add 0.1 to all zero crime values before taking the natural log in our county-level data set, as the NRC
did.
13 Kansas and Nebraska adopted RTC laws which took effect in 2007, which is too late to be captured in our
analysis. A more complete explanation of how these years were determined can be found in Footnote 17 and
Appendix G.

                                                                                                                     23
          1. The Lott Data Errors Used in the NRC Estimates

          In our original efforts at trying to replicate the NRC estimates derived from their Lott

data set, we discovered a number of small errors in that data set.14 First, Philadelphia’s year of

adoption is coded incorrectly—as 1989 instead of 1995. Second, Idaho’s year of adoption is

coded incorrectly—as 1991 instead of 1990. Third, the area variable, which is used to compute

county density, has missing data for years 1999 and 2000. Fourth, we determined that the NRC

data set was missing all county identifiers for 1999 and 2000, which meant that that both these

years were dropped for the NRC estimates depicted in Table 1. Our analysis corrects all these

errors.

          2. Lott and Mustard’s Erroneous Arrest Rate Variables

          Since the NRC report followed the Lott-Mustard specification, the regressions it

presented (which we reproduce in Table 1) used arrest rates as the sole criminal justice control

variable in estimating the effect of RTC laws. Although we have already noted Lott’s claim that

his is “the most comprehensive set of control variables yet used in a study of crime,” in fact, the

Lott and Mustard model omits controls for police and incarceration, which many studies -- e.g.,

Kovandzic, Vieraitis, and Boots, (2009) -- have found to be key influences on crime (we will re-

introduce those variables in Section VIII).

          Lott and Mustard's use of the arrest rate variables is not a good modeling choice in

general, and the particular approach that Lott and Mustard employed is especially problematic.15


14 We know all too well how easy it is to make these small but annoying errors in creating these data sets, since
regrettably we had a few similar errors in our own data set in the Aneja, Donohue, Zhang (2011) published version,
which are all corrected here. None of the main conclusions of the published paper were altered by those errors, some
of which are set forth in footnote 18.
15 Even apart from the considerable data problems with the county arrest rates, the measure is also not well defined.
Ideally, one might like a measure showing the likelihood that one who commits a certain crime will be arrested. The
Lott and Mustard arrest rates instead are a ratio of arrests to crimes, which means that when one person kills many,
for example, the arrest rate falls, but when many people kill one person, the arrest rate rises since only one can be
arrested in the first instance and many can in the second. The bottom line is that this "arrest rate" is not a probability

                                                                                                                      24
To see the concern, note that the NRC's model (Table 1b in this paper) is trying to explain the

level of seven individual Index I crime categories while using a control that is computed as a

crime-specific arrest rate, which is the number of arrests for a given crime divided by the

contemporaneous number of crimes. Thus, murder in 1990 is “explained” by the ratio of arrest

to murders in 1990. Econometrically, it is inappropriate to use this contemporaneous measure

since it leaves the dependent variable on both sides of the regression equation (at a minimum, a

better approach would lag this variable one year, as discussed in Ayres and Donohue (2009)).

Better still, one could alternatively use the broad categories of violent and property crimes to

compute arrest rates, as have many recent papers (such as, Moody and Marvell, 2008). We adopt

this latter approach for all of our regressions in this paper and also lag the arrest rate one year to

reduce the endogeneity problem.

         3. The Erroneous Standard Errors in the NRC Estimates

         Surprisingly, when the NRC presented its estimates (which we reproduce in Table 1), the

NRC report did not make the very basic adjustment to their standard errors to correct for

heteroskedacticity. Since Hal White's paper discussing this correction has been the single most

cited paper in all of economics since 1970,16 the failure to make this standard adjustment was

unexpected. Accordingly, in all of our own estimates, we use robust standard errors.


         Even more significant in terms of the results, though, is the issue of whether one must

cluster the standard errors. The statistical consequence of the NRC committee's failure to use

robust and clustered standard errors is to massively understate the reported standard errors (and

consequently to overstate the level of significance). Unlike the issue of robust standard errors,

and is frequently greater than one because of the multiple arrests per crime. For an extended discussion on the
abundant problems with this pseudo arrest rate, see Donohue and Wolfers (2009).
16 Kim, E.H.; Morse, A.; Zingales, L. (2006). "What Has Mattered to Economics since 1970?". Journal of
Economic Perspectives 20 (4): 189–202.

                                                                                                                  25
the Committee report actually addressed the issue of clustering, concluding that this adjustment

was not necessary. In Section V, we will show that this was an error. Therefore, we will from

this time forward only present results based on the clustering adjustment to our standard errors.


         C. Improving on the Table 1 Estimates by Using Better Data and Slightly Improved

         Lott and Mustard Models

         Having just identified three problems with the estimates presented by the NRC, we now

seek to fix them. To be clear about our approach, we use annual county-level crime data for the

United States from 1977 through either 2000 (to conform to the NRC report) or 2006. We

explore the impact of RTC laws on seven Index I crime categories by estimating the reduced-

form regression:

                                      Yit = ηRTCjt +αi + θt + βjt + γXijt + εit                                    (1)

where the dependent variable Yit denotes the natural log of the individual violent and property

crime rates for county i and year t. Our explanatory variable of interest—the presence of an RTC

law within state j in year t—is represented by RTCjt. The exact form of this variable shifts

according to the three variations of the model we employ (these include our modified version of

the Lott and Mustard dummy and spline models, as well as the Ayres and Donohue hybrid

model.) Owing to new information that we have gathered about the RTC laws of various states,

we use our own modified dummy and spline variables that take into account the exact date when

these laws were implemented.17


17 As noted in Footnote 3, in the dummy variable approach, the RTC variable is a dichotomous indicator that equals
the fraction of the year that the law is in effect the first year the law is implemented and equals one each full year
thereafter. In the spline model, the RTC variable indicates the number of post-passage years (adjusted by the
fraction of the year the law is first in effect). The hybrid specification contains both dummy and trend variables.
Using the effective date when laws were implemented rather than simply assuming that laws take effect one year
after passage changes the initial year of a number of RTC laws. In addition, some states (e.g., Texas) passed RTC
laws that technically “took effect” on one date but which specified another date when permits could begin to be
issued. We treat these states as if their laws took effect on the second date. We also took court-mandated delays in

                                                                                                                   26
         The variable αi indicates county-level fixed effects (unobserved county traits) and θt

indicates year effects. As we will discuss below, there is no consensus on the use of state-

specific time trends in this analysis, and the NRC report did not address this issue. Nevertheless,

we will explore this possibility, with βjt indicating state-specific trends, which are introduced in

selected models. Since neither Lott and Mustard (1997) nor the NRC (2004) focus on state

trends, this term is dropped when we estimate their models. The term Xijt represents a matrix of

observable county and state characteristics thought by researchers to influence criminal behavior.

The components of this term, however, vary substantially across the literature. For example,

while Lott uses only “arrest rates” as a measure of criminal deterrence, we discuss the potential

need for other measures of deterrence, such as incarceration levels or police presence, which are

measured at the state level.

         Table 2 reproduces the regressions depicted in Table 1, while correcting for the three

problems mentioned above (the inaccurate Lott data, the poorly constructed Lott arrest ratios,

and the incorrect standard errors), changing the manner in which RTC dates were determined,

and using our reconstruction of the county dataset from 1977 through 2000 (which omits the

flawed 1993 county data). Tables 2a and 2b represent our improved estimates of what the NRC

reported and we depict in Tables 1a and 1b. Table 2b appends our hybrid model, which

estimates the effect of RTC laws with both a dummy and a spline component (thus nesting the

individual dummy and spline models).

         The bottom line is that the superior Table 2 estimates look nothing like the Table 1

estimates presented in the NRC report. Table 1 shows estimated effects that are almost



implementing RTC laws into account when determining when permits would actually first be issued (and the
corresponding value of the RTC dummy). In short, the process of reviewing the effective dates of different RTC
laws led us to change the effective year of a number of these laws, changes which are described in greater detail in
Appendix G.

                                                                                                                   27
uniformly statistically significant -- at times suggesting crime increases and at times suggesting

crime decreases. Table 2 shows far fewer statistically significant effects, but every one of which

suggests RTC laws increase crime -- for rape, aggravated assault, robbery, auto theft, burglary,

and larceny. There is not even a hint of any crime declines.

         Recall that James Q. Wilson thought that the most important regressions to look at were

those presented in Table 1b, because they provided the full set of controls from the Lott and

Mustard specification. While for six of the seven crime categories the story that emerged from

Table 1b varied sharply on whether one looked at the dummy or the spline model, Wilson was

content to find a beneficial RTC effect on murder because the Table 1 estimates for murder both

appeared to be negative and significant.

         When we switch to Table 2b, however, we see that there is nothing resembling a

statistically significant impact of RTC laws on murder. In fact, we see that assault, auto theft,

and larceny now have estimates that are simultaneously statistically significant and positive for

both the dummy and spline model. Thus, the results that Professor Wilson found to be consistent

evidence of RTC laws reducing murder (see Table 1b) disappear with better data and a superior

specification.18



18
   In the process of reviewing our previous published models and data from ADZ (2011), we discovered some errors
in the two data sets that we had constructed (the so-called updated 2009 county data and updated 2009 state data),
which are corrected in this paper. For the county data set, we miscoded the state trend variable for Arkansas.
Second, Kansas counties had been incorrectly coded as belonging to Kentucky for years 1997-2006. Third, our
spline and hybrid models had included a counter variable to capture the effect of a post-passage trend, but they
inadvertently omitted the overall trend variable off of which this post-passage trend was to be estimated. Fourth,
Vermont was coded as a “may issue” state instead of a “shall issue” state, although this did not affect our results
owing to the inclusion of state fixed effects in our regressions. Fifth, the real per capita income measures from our
previous datasets had been calculated incorrectly, and these changes have been made for real per capita income and
income maintenance, unemployment insurance, and retirement payments. (This last change was also made to the
state data set.)
          In addition to these errors that we discovered, Moody, Lott, Marvell, and Zimmerman (2012) identified
three other errors: duplicative observations for Alaska county 2060 were improperly included for 1996, Kansas' year
of adoption was coded incorrectly as 1996 instead of 2006, and South Dakota's year of adoption was coded
incorrectly as 1986 instead of 1985. All of these errors have been corrected in the tables prepared for this paper.

                                                                                                                  28
         In fact, this was essentially the message of the NRC report. Small changes made the

estimates bounce around so much that it was difficult to reach any conclusion about the true

causal impact of RTC laws. Perhaps it might have been helpful to Wilson if the majority had

gone one step further and presented something like the alternative results from Table 2. As we

will see in the ensuing sections, there are many additional avenues that could have been explored

to probe the robustness of the Table 1b findings that Wilson had accepted so unquestioningly.

         We will explore these factors in subsequent sections: Section VI will explore whether

one should control for individual state trends in crime, section VII will look at additional years of

data (adding data beyond 2000 to 2006), section VIII will alter the Lott and Mustard

specification (beyond the already mentioned correction for the contemporaneous, crime-specific

arrest rates and changing the method used to construct the two RTC variables), section IX will

go beyond the county data to look at state data, and Section X will consider the additional

problem of potential omitted variable bias. But a key aspect of the Table 2 results is that the

standard errors were adjusted using the cluster command, and this is one area where the NRC

majority stumbled in concluding that this adjustment was not needed. Section V will now

address the clustering question.




          Moody, Lott et al also claimed that Florida's year of adoption was coded incorrectly as 1989 instead of
1987 but this simply reflects their misreading of our coding. Our county data does not have crime information for
Florida counties in the year 1988 (this is evident in the NRC data set as well), so observations for Florida’s counties
in this year are dropped. Thus, while it may seem that our first year of adoption is erroneously coded as 1989, this
simply reflects the fact that we have not included observations for 1988. Note that we maintained consistency with
our other trend variables by beginning the post-passage variable counter with a value of "2" in year 1989 to
demonstrate 2 years since the passage of RTC legislation.
          For the state data set in ADZ (2011), we note the following corrections: both North and South Dakota
should show RTC adoption in year 1985. Similarly, Oregon’s date of adoption for its RTC law should have been
1989 instead of 1990 in the state data set.
          Additional changes made to the RTC indicator variables used in this paper are described in footnotes 3 and
17, as well as Appendix G. The state dataset has also been re-constructed with the most recently available data, the
sources of which are provided with this paper at http://works.bepress.com/john_donohue/.


                                                                                                                    29
                                                        Table 2
             19
Table 2a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – with ADZ Changes – No Controls, All Crimes, 1977-2000
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)
Changes: Updated Dataset, Robust and Clustered Standard Errors, Alternative RTC Dates
   All figures reported in %                               Aggravated                     Auto
                                  Murder       Rape         Assault        Robbery        Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:      -0.07       34.43         22.85          26.21*        32.76      32.24         38.42
                                   (8.48)     (24.72)       (19.88)        (15.02)       (21.20)    (22.51)       (26.15)

                  Spline Model:     0.65       4.41*         3.83*           2.96        4.41*        4.65*        5.59*
                                   (0.88)      (2.61)        (2.07)         (1.86)       (2.44)       (2.42)       (2.93)


Table 2b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – with ADZ Changes – Lott-Mustard Controls, All Crimes, 1977-2000
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)
Changes: Updated Dataset, Lagged Violent/Property Arrest Rates, Robust and Clustered Standard Errors, Alternative RTC Dates
   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                       Auto
                                Murder        Rape          Assault        Robbery        Theft      Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:       -1.13       17.60        17.01***         11.69*      19.54***      10.70**      20.89***
                                 (7.15)      (11.88)         (6.16)         (6.11)        (7.15)       (5.07)       (5.75)

                  Spline Model:    -0.08        1.35         1.76*           0.70        1.99**        0.86        1.97*
                                   (0.82)      (1.42)        (0.92)         (0.84)       (0.77)       (0.71)       (1.01)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:        -1.11       16.41        13.14**         12.04*       15.28*       9.73*      17.28***
                                   (7.96)     (10.34)        (6.04)         (6.93)       (7.74)       (5.63)      (4.71)

                  Trend Effect:    -0.00        0.28          0.91           -0.08        1.00         0.23         0.85
                                   (0.90)      (1.26)        (0.99)         (0.83)       (0.71)       (0.78)       (0.92)




   19
     All table estimations include year and county fixed effects, and are weighted by county population. Standard
   errors are robust and clustered at the state level. * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.
   In Table 2b, the control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model) include: lagged arrest rates, county
   population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic composition measures indicating
   the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group.

                                                                                                                              30
V. Debate over the Clustering of Standard Errors

       A. Is Clustering Necessary?

       Aside from neglecting to use heteroskedastic-robust standard errors, the NRC committee

also did not use a cluster adjustment. Research has found that the issue of whether to “cluster”

the standard errors has a profound impact on assessments of statistical significance. This issue

gained prominence beginning primarily with a 1990 paper by Brent Moulton. Moulton (1990)

pointed to the possible need for the clustering of observations when treatments are assigned at a

group-level. In such cases, there is an additive source of variation that is the same for all

observations in the group, and ignoring this unique variation leads to standard errors that are

underestimated. Lott, however, suggests that clustered standard errors are not needed (Lott

2004), claiming that county-level fixed effects implicitly control for state-level effects, and

therefore, clustering the standard errors by state is unnecessary.

       The NRC committee (2004) sided with Lott on this point, stating that “there is no need

for adjustments for state-level clustering.” (p. 138). However, we strongly believe the committee

was mistaken in this decision. One must account for the possibility that county-level

disturbances may be correlated within a state during a particular year by clustering the standard

errors by state. There is also a second reason for clustering that the NRC report did not address.

Specifically, serial correlation in panel data can lead to major underestimation of standard errors.

Indeed, Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) point out that even the Moulton correction

alone may be insufficient for panel-data estimators that utilize more than two periods of data due

to autocorrelation in both the intervention variable and the outcome variable of interest.

Wooldridge (2003, 2006), as well as Angrist and Pischke (2009), suggest that clustering the

standard errors by state (along with using heteroskedasiticity-robust standard errors) will help



                                                                                                   31
address this problem, and at least provide a lower bound on the standard errors.

        B. Using Placebo Laws to Test the Impact of Clustering

        Our Table 2 estimates (which include clustering) reveal that this adjustment makes a

major difference in the results generated by the Lott and Mustard models that the NRC report

adopted in its analysis -- completely wiping out any sign of statistically significant crime

reductions attributable to RTC laws. But who is correct on the clustering issue—Lott, Mustard,

and the NRC panel on the one hand, or Angrist, Pischke, and several other high-end applied

econometricians on the other? To address this important question we run a series of placebo

tests. In essence, we randomly assign RTC laws to states, and re-estimate our model iteratively

(1000 times), recording the number of times that the variable(s) of interest are “statistically

significant” at the 5% level. For this experiment, we use our most flexible model: the hybrid

model (that incorporates both a dummy and a trend variable) with the controls employed by the

NRC.

        We run five versions of this test. In our first test, we generate a placebo law in a random

year for all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Once the law is applied, it persists for the rest

of our data period (beginning the year after the law’s randomly generated effective date), which

is how laws were coded in our original analysis. We run 1000 trials (where each trial consists of

a randomly generated set of RTC passage years) and then proceed to take a simple average of the

percentage of significant dummy variable and spline variable estimates. In our second test, we

apply a placebo law in a random year to the 32 states that had actually implemented right-to-

carry laws between 1979 and 2006. The remaining 19 states are assumed to either have no RTC

law or to have had one during the entire analysis period.20 Here again we run 1000 trials in


20 For the purposes of this analysis we do not consider Nebraska or Kansas to have passed an RTC law during this
period. These states passed RTC laws in 2006; however, their laws did not take effect until 2007.

                                                                                                               32
which each iteration consists of randomly generated RTC passage years and proceed to take a

simple average of the percentage of significant estimates. Third, we randomly select 32 states to

receive a placebo law in a random year (to ensure that any random sample of 32 states does not

have the potential to inaccurately bias results, we repeat this entire procedure 5 times – that is,

we take 5 samples of 32 random states and for each sample, run the aforementioned process of

assigning a random year of RTC adoption 1000 times). Then, we take a simple average of the

number of statistically significant dummy variable and spline estimates. Thus, we are, in effect,

counting the number of significant dummy and trend estimates generated from 5000 hybrid

regressions. Fourth, we apply a placebo law in a random year to the 19 states which did not pass

RTC laws within the period, dropping the other 32 states from our dataset, and take the simple

average of the statistically significant dummy variable and spline estimates. Finally, we

randomly select 12 of the 19 states (to correspond to the previous randomly generated 32 states)

to receive an RTC in a randomized year of adoption and iterate this process 1,000 times over five

separate samples. The results of these five tests are presented in Table 3.

       Given the random assignment, one would expect to reject the null hypothesis of no effect

of these randomized “laws” roughly 5 percent of the time if the standard errors in our regressions

are estimated correctly. Instead, the table reveals that the null hypothesis is rejected 21-69

percent of the time for murder and robbery with the dummy variable and even more frequently

with the trend variable (35-73 percent). Clearly, this exercise suggests that the standard errors

used in the NRC report are far too small.

       Table 3b replicates the exercise of Table 3a, but now uses the cluster correction for

standard errors (by state). Table 3b suggests that clustering standard errors does not excessively

reduce significance, as the NRC panel feared. In fact, the percentages of “significant” estimates



                                                                                                      33
produced in all three versions of the test still lie well beyond the 5% threshold. Similar results

are found when we replicate Tables 3a and 3b using a random selection of either 32 or 12 states

while employing the dummy model instead of the hybrid model (we do not show those results

here). All of these tests show that if we do not cluster the standard errors, the likelihood of

obtaining significant estimates is astonishingly (and unreasonably) high. The conclusion we

draw from this exercise is that clustering is clearly needed to adjust the standard errors in these

panel-data regressions. Accordingly, we use this clustering adjustment for all remaining

regressions in this paper.




                                                                                                     34
                                                      Table 321
Table 3a
Percentage of Significant Estimates (5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2006 – No Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)
Hybrid Model
                                                     Dummy              Trend
  All figures reported in %
                                                     Variable         Variable
                                     Murder            45.8              67.5
   1. All 50 States + DC:
                                    Robbery            53.8              63.9

                                  Murder             64.6             72.0
        2. Exact 32 States:
                                  Robbery            68.9             73.0

                                  Murder             56.1             68.3
    3. Random 32 States:
                                  Robbery            56.6             62.7

                                  Murder             21.7             34.9
         4. All 19 States:
                                  Robbery            36.3             45.4

    5. Random 12 States:          Murder             23.6             42.1
                                  Robbery            39.0             46.6


Table 3b
Percentage of Significant Estimates (at the 5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2006 – With Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)
Hybrid Model
                                                      Dummy             Trend
  All figures reported in %
                                                      Variable         Variable
                                     Murder              8.8             13.2
   1. All 50 States + DC:
                                    Robbery              7.8             8.5

                                  Murder             10.9             11.4
        2. Exact 32 States:
                                  Robbery            8.1              9.8

                                  Murder             11.0             13.3
    3. Random 32 States:
                                  Robbery            8.5              7.6

                                  Murder             13.9             12.9
         4. All 19 States
                                  Robbery            12.7             13.8

                                  Murder             15.9             18.7
    5. Random 12 States:
                                  Robbery            14.1             14.4




   21
     Simulation based on NRC with-controls model, which, similar to above estimations, includes year fixed effects,
   county fixed effects, and weighting by county population. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard
   model) include: lagged arrest rate, county population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36
   demographic composition measures indicating the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender
   group. All ten tests use robust standard errors.

                                                                                                                            35
VI. Debate over the Inclusion of Linear Trends

         An important issue that the NRC did not address was whether there was any need to

control for state-specific linear trends. Inclusion of state trends could be important if, for

example, a clear pattern in crime rates existed before a state adopted an RTC law that continued

into the post-passage period. On the other hand, there is also a potential danger in using state-

specific trends if their inclusion inappropriately extrapolates a temporary swing in crime long

into the future or otherwise mars the estimate of the dynamic effect of the policy shock (Wolfers

2006). Lott and Mustard (1997) never controlled for state-specific trends in analyzing handgun

laws in their main analysis (only adding these trends for one robustness check mentioned in a

footnote), while Moody and Marvel (2008) always controlled for these trends. Ayres and

Donohue (2003a) presented evidence with and without such trends.

         Table 4 replicates the NRC’s full model (with the appropriate clustering adjustment) from

Table 2b with one change: here we add a linear state trend to this county-data model. Strikingly,

Table 4 suggests that RTC laws increase aggravated assault by roughly 3-4 percent each year,

but no other statistically significant effect is observed. Thus, the addition of state trends

eliminates the potentially problematic result of RTC laws increasing property crimes, which

actually increases our confidence in these results. Certainly an increase in gun carrying and

prevalence induced by a RTC law could well be thought to spur more aggravated assaults.

Nonetheless, one must at least consider whether the solitary finding of statistical significance is

merely the product of running seven different models, is a spurious effect flowing from a bad

model, or reflects some other anomaly (such as changes in the police treatment of domestic

violence cases, which could confound the aggravated assault results).22


22 We tested this theory by creating a new right-hand side dummy variable that identified if a state passed legislation
requiring law enforcement officials to submit official reports of all investigated domestic violence cases. Eight

                                                                                                                   36
                                                        Table 423
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2000 – Clustered Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft         Burglary   Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:       -0.82        -5.23         9.90           1.41         5.73           -1.29      3.61
                                  (6.44)      (11.23)       (6.20)         (7.52)       (8.22)         (5.98)     (5.56)

                 Spline Model:    -0.30       -3.77         4.11**          1.00         1.56           0.13      1.34
                                  (1.54)      (4.79)        (1.79)         (2.50)       (1.97)         (1.96)    (2.05)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -0.53       -1.34          5.91           0.38         4.34           -1.51     2.33
                                  (6.06)      (7.60)        (6.07)         (7.49)       (7.88)         (5.94)    (5.41)

                 Trend Effect:    -0.27       -3.70         3.79**          0.98         1.32           0.21      1.22
                                  (1.46)      (4.54)        (1.79)         (2.54)       (1.90)         (1.98)    (2.07)




   VII. Extending the Data Through 2006

             Thus far we have presented panel-data regression results for the period 1977-2000. Since

   more data are now available, we can further test the strength of the MGLC premise over time by

   estimating the NRC Lott and Mustard covariates specification on data extended through 2006.

   Table 5a presents our estimates (with clustering), which can be compared with Table 2b (which

   also clusters the standard errors in the main NRC model, but is estimated on the shorter time

   period). This comparison reveals that the additional six years of data do not substantially change

   the picture that emerged in Table 2b showing that RTC laws increase aggravated assault, auto

   theft, burglary, and larceny (although the results showing an increase in aggravated assault are


   states have passed this legislation of which we are aware: Florida (1984), Illinois (1986), Louisiana (1985), New
   Jersey (1991), North Dakota (1989), Oklahoma (1986), Tennessee (1995), and Washington (1979). We included
   this dummy variable when running both the NRC specification (through 2000) and our preferred specification
   (through 2006) without state-specific trends, and found that this dummy indicator of domestic violence reporting
   statutes did not undermine our general finding that RTC laws increase aggravated assaults.
   23
      Estimations include year and county fixed effects and are weighted by county population. Robust standard errors
   are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model)
   include: lagged arrest rate, county population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic
   composition measures indicating the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group. *
   Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                           37
stronger with the additional years of data for the dummy model).

       Table 5b simply adds state trends to the Table 5a model, which can then be compared to

Table 4 (clustering, state trends, and 1977-2000 county data). Collectively, these results suggest

that the added six years of data do not appreciably change the results from the shorter period.

The inclusion of state trends on the longer data set suggests that RTC laws increase aggravated

assault by roughly 8-9 percent.




                                                                                                  38
                                                        Table 524
Table 5a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape         Assault       Robbery       Theft      Burglary    Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:     -3.03        15.45       15.30***         7.55       17.72**     11.20**     16.40***
                                  (6.46)      (14.68)       (5.12)         (5.23)       (7.59)      (4.67)      (5.15)

                 Spline Model:    -0.20        0.98          1.05           0.43         1.01        0.36       1.05*
                                  (0.59)      (1.25)        (0.71)         (0.53)       (0.63)      (0.46)      (0.53)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -2.61        13.65       13.06***         6.97       16.30**     11.90**     14.45***
                                  (6.72)      (12.51)       (4.58)         (6.15)       (7.08)      (5.41)      (5.29)

                 Trend Effect:    -0.09        0.39          0.49           0.13         0.31        -0.15       0.42
                                  (0.60)      (0.96)        (0.71)         (0.61)       (0.51)      (0.52)      (0.55)


Table 5b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft      Burglary    Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:      0.03        -8.30       9.45**           6.79         9.20        3.71        6.03
                                  (5.61)      (10.75)       (4.33)         (6.19)       (6.16)      (4.93)      (5.14)

                 Spline Model:    -0.44       -5.57          1.65           -0.54       -0.84        -1.37      -1.54
                                  (0.99)      (4.49)        (1.48)         (1.83)       (1.81)      (1.54)      (1.66)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:        0.23       -5.85         8.79**          7.09        9.66*        4.37        6.78
                                  (5.68)      (9.28)        (4.18)         (6.11)       (5.76)      (4.71)      (4.78)

                 Trend Effect:    -0.45       -5.46          1.48           -0.68       -1.03        -1.45      -1.67
                                  (1.01)      (4.40)        (1.47)         (1.83)       (1.76)      (1.53)      (1.65)




   24
     Estimations include year and county fixed effects, and are weighted by county population. Robust standard errors
   are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model)
   include: lagged arrest rate, county population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic
   composition measures indicating the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group. *
   Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                          39
VIII. Revising the Lott-Mustard Specification

         We have already suggested that the Lott and Mustard specification that the NRC

employed is not particularly appealing along a number of dimensions. The most obvious

problem – omitted variable bias has already been alluded to: the Lott and Mustard (1997) model

had no control for incarceration, which Wilson considered to be one of the most important

influences on crime in the last 20 years. In addition to a number of important omitted variables,

the Lott-Mustard model adopted by the NRC includes a number of questionable variables, such

as the dubious ratio of arrests to murders, and the 36 (highly collinear) demographic controls.

         To explore whether these specification problems are influencing the regression estimates,

we revise the NRC models in a number of ways. First, we completely drop Lott and Mustard's

flawed contemporaneous arrest rate variable and add in two preferable measures of state law

enforcement/deterrence: the incarceration rate and the rate of police.25 Second, we add two

additional controls to capture economic conditions: the unemployment rate and the poverty rate,

which are also state-level variables. Finally, mindful of Horowitz’s admonition that the Lott-

Mustard model might have too many variables (including demographic controls that are arguably

irrelevant to the relationship between the guns and crime, and may have a spurious, misleading

effect), we decided not to follow the NRC in using the 36 demographic controls employed by

Lott-Mustard. Instead, we adhered to the more customary practice in the econometrics of crime

and controlled only for the demographic groups considered to be most involved with criminality

(as offenders and victims), namely the percentage of black and white males between ages 10 and



25 We also estimated the model with the arrest rate (lagged by one year to avoid endogeneity concerns), and the
results were qualitatively similar to Table 6a except that dummy variable estimates for Rape (10%), Assault (1%),
Robbery (5%), Auto (5%), Burglary (1%), and Larceny (1%) are now all significant. For Table 6b, the dummy
variable estimates for murder, burglary, and larceny shift from negative to positive (but still remain insignificant)
and assault and auto theft become positive and significant at the 10% level.


                                                                                                                    40
40 in each county.26

         The results with this new specification are presented in Tables 6a-6b (which correspond

to Tables 5a-5b estimated using the Lott and Mustard specification). Note that had the NRC

panel used our preferred specification while maintaining its view that neither clustering nor

controls for state trends are needed, we would have overwhelming evidence that RTC laws

increase crime.27 We don’t show these regression results since we are convinced that clustering

is needed, although of course when we cluster in Table 6a, the point estimates remain the same

(while significance is drastically reduced). Table 6b shows that this model is sensitive to

whether we control for state trends, since adding these trends reverses the sign of most of our

estimates (while making all of them statistically insignificant). Essentially, our preferred

specification shows almost no statistically significant crime effects (with the large standard

errors reflecting a considerable degree of uncertainty).




26 To test the robustness of this specification to changes in the demographic controls, we also estimated the
following variants from our 6 demographic controls: only black males between ages 10 and 40 (three variables);
only black males between ages 10 and 30 (two variables); and black and white males between ages 10 and 30 (four
variables). The results were again qualitatively similar across our tests.
27 Re-estimating Table 6a without clustering (no state trends) shows all dummy variable point estimates (except
murder) positive and significant at the 1% level. The murder dummy variable is positive, but not significant. For the
spline model, all spline estimates (except murder) are positive and significant at the 1% level, whereas murder is
positive and significant at the 5% level.


                                                                                                                  41
                                                       Table 628
Table 6a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder     Rape        Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:        1.59     25.33        22.65           22.27        27.46      30.08         31.33
                                    (7.63)   (18.81)      (19.54)         (14.82)      (21.81)    (23.09)       (26.54)

                   Spline Model:     0.38      2.81          3.19          2.58*         3.07        3.64        4.19
                                    (0.82)    (1.76)        (1.95)         (1.53)       (2.25)      (2.38)      (2.72)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -0.43     14.75          8.74          12.20        15.81       15.49        13.56
                                    (7.75)   (15.38)       (17.15)        (12.83)      (17.82)     (19.46)      (21.54)

                   Trend Effect:     0.40      2.11          2.77           2.01         2.32        2.91        3.55
                                    (0.86)    (1.45)        (1.81)         (1.42)       (1.97)      (2.17)      (2.41)


Table 6b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder     Rape        Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -2.66    -15.99        -2.36            2.73         1.26      -6.39         -7.06
                                    (6.34)   (13.35)      (11.59)          (8.58)      (11.70)    (13.18)       (14.71)

                   Spline Model:    -0.43     -7.93          0.58           -0.60       -0.71        -2.23      -2.68
                                    (1.26)    (5.54)        (2.66)         (2.41)       (2.98)      (3.05)      (3.42)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -2.50    -12.80         -2.62           3.00         1.56       -5.50        -6.00
                                    (6.56)   (12.20)       (12.09)         (8.95)      (12.14)     (13.73)      (15.24)

                   Trend Effect:    -0.38     -7.69          0.63           -0.66       -0.74        -2.13      -2.57
                                    (1.31)    (5.50)        (2.75)         (2.48)       (3.08)      (3.17)      (3.55)




28
  Estimations include year and county fixed effects and are weighted by county population. Robust standard errors
are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. *
Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                     42
IX. State versus County Crime Data

         In their initial study, Lott and Mustard (1997) tested the “More Guns, Less Crime”

hypothesis by relying primarily on county-level data from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports

(UCR).29 These FBI reports present yearly estimates of crime based on monthly crime data from

local and state law enforcement agencies across the country. The NRC report followed Lott and

Mustard in this choice and presented regression estimates using only county data. Unfortunately,

according to criminal justice researcher Michael Maltz, the FBI’s county-level data is highly

problematic.

         The major problem with county data stems from the fact that law enforcement agencies

voluntarily submit crime data to the FBI. As a result, the FBI has little control over the accuracy,

consistency, timeliness, and completeness of the data it uses to compile the UCR reports. In a

study published in the Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Maltz and Targonski (2002)

carefully analyzed the shortcomings in the UCR data set and concluded that UCR county-level

data is unacceptable for evaluating the impact of RTC laws. For example, in Connecticut,

Indiana, and Mississippi, over 50% of the county-level data points are missing crime data for

more than 30% of their populations (Maltz and Targonski 2002). In another thirteen states, more

than 20% of the data points have gaps of similar magnitude. Based on their analysis, Maltz and

Targonski (2002) concluded that:

         “County-level crime data cannot be used with any degree of confidence…The crime rates
         of a great many counties have been underestimated, due to the exclusion of large
         fractions of their populations from contributing to the crime counts. Moreover, counties
         in those states with the most coverage gaps have laws permitting the carrying of
         concealed weapons. How these shortcomings can be compensated for is still an open
         question…it is clear, however, that in their current condition, county-level UCR crime
         statistics cannot be used for evaluating the effects of changes in policy” (pp. 316-317).

29 Lott and Mustard present results based on state-level data, but they strongly endorse their county-level over their
state-level analysis: “the very different results between state- and county-level data should make us very cautious in
aggregating crime data and would imply that the data should remain as disaggregated as possible” (Lott and
Mustard, 1997, p. 39).

                                                                                                                   43
         Because of the concerns raised about county-level crime data, it is prudent to test our

models on state-level data. According to Maltz and Targonski (2003), state-level crime data are

less problematic than county-level data because the FBI’s state-level crime files take into

account missing data by imputing all missing agency data. County-level files provided by

NACJD, however, impute missing data only if an agency provides at least six months of data;

otherwise, the agency is dropped completely (Maltz 2006). As with our estimations using

county-level data, we compiled our state-level data from scratch, and will refer to it as “Updated

2013 State-level Data.”30

         A. State Data Results Using the Lott-Mustard Specification

         Unsurprisingly, the regression results reproduced using state-level data are again different

from the NRC committee’s estimates using county-level data. This is shown in Table 7a, which

presents the results from the NRC’s specification (the Lott-Mustard model) on state data through

2010, with the cluster adjustment.31 Table 7b simply adds state trends. When we compare these

state-level estimates to the county-level estimates (using the Updated 2013 County-Level Data

Set), we see that there are marked differences. Considering the preceding discussion on the

reliability—or lack thereof—of county data, this result may be unsurprising. 32                   Looking across



30 State poverty data for years 1977 and 1978 are unavailable from the census. Thus all regressions run on our state
dataset are effectively using data from 1979 onwards. State poverty figures from 1980 onwards come from the
Census Bureau’s Historical Poverty Table 21 found at
(http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/historical/people.html). The data for 1979 comes from the Census
Statistical Abstract for 1982.
31 Our placebo test on county data showed that standard errors needed to be adjusted by clustering. In Appendix A,
we again find that clustering is needed for state data. Thus, all our state-level estimates include clustering.
32 We also estimated the model on data through 2000 (the last year in the NRC report). Though those results are not
shown here, our point estimates for this model are qualitatively similar to those shown in Tables 7a. Interestingly,
the patterns of statistical significance are extremely different. For example, when Table 7a is estimated through the
year 2000, there is a statistically significant decline in aggravated assault in the hybrid model with no other impact
on violent crime. When estimated to the year 2010, however, Table 7a shows no statistically significant decline in
aggravated assault and evidence of declines in rape and robbery. Moreover, while Table 7b shows some hints of
crime declines for rape and aggravated assault when estimated through 2000, when the data is extended for another

                                                                                                                  44
the models with and without state linear trends, there is evidence of increases in aggravated

assault and murder and decreases in robbery, burglary, auto theft, and rape after the passage of

RTC laws.

         As Ayres and Donohue (2003; 1231) noted, the most important driver of the ostensible

decline in crime from RTC laws comes from the Lott and Mustard use of 36 highly collinear

demographic variables. The Ayres and Donohue finding that “The results are incredibly

sensitive to the inclusion of various seemingly unimportant demographic controls” still

applies even after augmenting the data set with 10 more years of data. To demonstrate the

strong influence of these variables, we rerun the regression shown in Table 7a after substituting a

more defensible set of 6 controls for black and white men in the higher crime ages (the ADZ

demographic variables) for the full set of 36 controls used in the Lott-Mustard specification.

Examining the results of this process (shown in Table 7c) reveals that 27 out of the 28 resulting

estimates of the effect of RTC laws on crime are positive, with at least some evidence of

statistical significant crime increases for 5 of the 7 crime categories. The story is somewhat

muddier when state trends are added (Table 7d), but the strongest effect in this modified version

of the Lott and Mustard specification on more complete data suggests substantial and statistically

significant increases in aggravated assaults.




decade, the table shows only statistically significant evidence of increases in aggravated assault. We also estimate
the NRC's no-controls model through 2010 on the state-level data. See Appendix B for these results.

                                                                                                                   45
                                                       Table 733
Table 7a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                      Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary     Larceny
       Dummy Variable Model:         -2.96   -5.07**       -0.69          -7.53**        1.78      -3.35*        2.24
                                    (3.60)    (2.23)       (4.56)          (2.92)       (4.03)     (1.92)       (1.76)

                  Spline Model:      0.49      -0.23         0.64           0.03        -0.54       -0.26       0.39
                                    (0.36)    (0.38)        (0.62)         (0.45)       (0.32)      (0.35)     (0.25)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          -4.91    -4.70*        -2.94        -8.28***        3.75       -2.75       1.10
                                    (3.59)    (2.68)        (3.76)         (3.01)       (4.48)      (1.90)     (1.59)

                   Trend Effect:    0.62*      -0.12         0.71           0.24       -0.63*       -0.19       0.37
                                    (0.34)    (0.42)        (0.60)         (0.43)      (0.35)       (0.35)     (0.25)


Table 7b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                      Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary     Larceny
       Dummy Variable Model:         -0.87     -3.54       -2.93            -3.91        2.20      -2.28         0.45
                                    (3.48)    (2.43)       (3.07)          (2.76)       (3.10)     (1.51)       (1.36)

                  Spline Model:      0.70      0.03        1.70***          0.23       -1.62**       0.20       0.18
                                    (0.75)    (0.60)        (0.56)         (0.86)       (0.74)      (0.55)     (0.44)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          -1.50     -3.68        -4.49           -4.23        3.68       -2.53       0.31
                                    (3.39)    (2.59)        (3.02)         (2.74)       (3.20)      (1.68)     (1.46)

                   Trend Effect:     0.76      0.17        1.87***          0.39       -1.75**       0.29       0.16
                                    (0.73)    (0.63)        (0.56)         (0.85)       (0.79)      (0.57)     (0.45)




33
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model)
include: lagged arrest rate, state population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic
composition measures indicating the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group. *
Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                    46
                                              Table 7 (Continued)34
Table 7c
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls (with ADZ Demographic Variables), 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                          Aggravated                    Auto
                                    Murder      Rape     Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary     Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:         2.20     9.67*       7.86          12.04        17.15      11.21*      10.40**
                                     (6.84)    (5.37)     (5.42)         (8.97)      (10.70)     (6.22)       (4.55)

                   Spline Model:      0.62      0.86       1.18*         1.59*         1.39        0.95       1.05**
                                     (0.64)    (0.59)      (0.67)        (0.80)       (0.93)      (0.61)      (0.43)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          -1.21      6.54        2.22          4.82        12.55        7.96       6.31*
                                     (5.78)    (4.76)      (4.62)        (6.86)       (8.30)      (4.81)      (3.75)

                    Trend Effect:     0.66      0.61        1.09         1.40**        0.90        0.64       0.80**
                                     (0.59)    (0.56)      (0.68)        (0.69)       (0.70)      (0.51)      (0.39)


Table 7d
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – Lott-Mustard Controls (with ADZ Demographic Variables), 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                          Aggravated                    Auto
                                    Murder      Rape     Assault        Robbery      Theft      Burglary     Larceny
       Dummy Variable Model:          0.77     -4.65*     -3.33           -2.01       3.10       -0.63         0.24
                                     (3.91)    (2.41)     (3.55)         (3.16)      (4.72)      (1.90)       (1.87)

                  Spline Model:       0.46      0.15      1.82**          -0.26      -1.49*       0.02        -0.39
                                     (0.72)    (0.59)     (0.68)         (0.95)      (0.78)      (0.59)       (0.55)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:           0.43     -4.88*      -4.83          -1.86       4.31       -0.66         0.54
                                     (3.95)    (2.50)      (3.38)        (3.29)      (4.63)      (2.15)       (2.05)

                   Trend Effect:      0.45      0.31      1.97***         -0.20      -1.63**      0.04        -0.41
                                     (0.72)    (0.60)      (0.67)        (0.98)       (0.79)     (0.63)       (0.58)




34
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model)
include: lagged arrest rate, state population, population density, per capita income measures, and the six
demographic composition measures used in the ADZ model. * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; ***
Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                   47
        B. State Data Results Using the ADZ Preferred Specification

        Table 8 mimics Table 7 in that we again employ state data through 2010 but now we use

our preferred set of controls. Here the ostensible evidence that RTC laws increase crime is very

strong: all three models in Table 8a have positive coefficients for every crime category, and 12

of the 28 coefficients are statistically significant. Table 8b once again shows highly significant

evidence (in the spline model and in the trend effect of the hybrid model) that RTC laws increase

aggravated assault. Some significant but conflicting predictions for auto theft emerge with both

dummy effects positive and significant, while both trend effects are negative and significant.

None of the remaining coefficients are statistically significant.35

        While there are a number of differences in the modified Lott-Mustard specification

versus the ADZ specification, the most important difference in generating the different estimates

of the impact of RTC laws is the Lott-Mustard use of 36 demographic variables. We illustrate

this in Table 8c, by substituting Lott’s chosen thirty-six demographic variables in place of our

own. Under this specification, RTC laws are no longer associated with any statistically

significant increases in crime and rape, robbery, and auto theft appear to decline. Adding state

trends in Table 8d brings back a result similar to that in Table 7d: aggravated assault rises

sharply and auto theft seems to fall with the adoption of RTC laws.




35
  As a robustness check for the Tables 8a and 8b results, we explored the effect of dropping the states with the
highest residual variances from the aggravated assault regressions in these two tables. Appendix C shows the results
of this exercise. Essentially, the basic patterns of Tables 8a and 8b persist, but evidence of RTC laws increasing
aggravated assault is strengthened when the high variance states are dropped from Table 8a and somewhat
weakened when dropped from Table 8b.

                                                                                                                 48
                                                       Table 836
Table 8a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:        3.31    11.53**       8.03*           13.85*      17.83*      12.54*       10.80**
                                    (6.51)    (5.73)       (4.46)          (8.03)      (8.95)      (6.28)        (4.70)

                   Spline Model:     0.58      0.82         1.05*           1.27         1.20        0.81       0.85*
                                    (0.64)    (0.63)        (0.60)         (0.82)       (0.80)      (0.63)      (0.49)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          0.82     9.23*          3.91           9.58       14.59*      10.46*       8.18**
                                    (5.35)    (4.79)        (4.01)         (6.86)      (7.47)      (5.21)       (4.00)

                   Trend Effect:     0.56      0.51          0.92           0.95         0.72        0.46        0.58
                                    (0.58)    (0.58)        (0.62)         (0.77)       (0.66)      (0.55)      (0.46)


Table 8b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                      Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -0.74     -3.16        -1.80            1.66        8.72*       0.87          1.03
                                    (3.94)    (2.30)       (3.61)          (3.16)       (4.50)     (2.19)        (1.83)

                   Spline Model:     0.77     -0.25         1.88**          -0.23      -1.32*        -0.08      -0.59
                                    (0.74)    (0.65)        (0.80)         (0.79)      (0.76)       (0.64)      (0.52)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -1.33     -3.05         -3.23           1.87       9.90**        0.95        1.49
                                    (3.86)    (2.34)        (3.51)         (3.33)      (4.42)       (2.31)      (1.98)

                   Trend Effect:     0.81     -0.16         1.99**          -0.29      -1.64**       -0.11      -0.64
                                    (0.72)    (0.65)        (0.79)         (0.83)       (0.73)      (0.66)      (0.55)




36
  These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard
errors are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures.
* Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                     49
                                             Table 8 (Continued)
              37
Table 8c
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with Lott-Mustard demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered
Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault        Robbery       Theft      Burglary     Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -4.55    -5.46**        0.48         -6.62**        3.87        -3.29        0.98
                                    (3.46)    (2.50)       (4.23)         (3.23)       (3.14)      (2.16)       (1.95)

                   Spline Model:     0.21     -0.30          0.64          -0.26       -0.75*       -0.38        0.13
                                    (0.35)    (0.35)        (0.58)        (0.46)       (0.38)      (0.33)       (0.27)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -5.51     -4.91*        -1.47         -6.27*       6.43*        -2.34        0.66
                                    (3.46)    (2.73)        (3.59)        (3.49)       (3.45)      (2.22)       (2.01)

                   Trend Effect:     0.33     -0.19          0.68          -0.12      -0.89**       -0.33        0.11
                                    (0.35)    (0.37)        (0.56)        (0.46)       (0.37)      (0.33)       (0.28)



Table 8d
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with Lott-Mustard demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered
Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault        Robbery        Theft     Burglary     Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -0.32     -2.36        -2.50           -0.21       5.29**       -0.74        1.12
                                    (3.27)    (2.54)       (3.08)         (2.60)       (2.30)      (1.61)       (1.19)

                   Spline Model:     0.96      0.05        1.92***         0.49        -1.36*       0.38         0.09
                                    (0.73)    (0.60)        (0.69)        (0.88)       (0.75)      (0.56)       (0.46)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -1.17     -2.49         -4.26          -0.64      6.65***       -1.10        1.08
                                    (3.10)    (2.65)        (3.00)        (2.59)       (2.32)      (1.68)       (1.30)

                   Trend Effect:     1.01      0.14        2.09***         0.51       -1.62**       0.43         0.05
                                    (0.69)    (0.62)        (0.69)        (0.89)       (0.76)      (0.58)       (0.48)




37
  These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard
errors are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and thirty-six demographic composition measures.
* Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                     50
Given the strong influence that demographic variables have on the estimated effect of RTC laws

on crime, it is important to reflect on why we prefer our demographic variables to the

specification used in the Lott-Mustard model. The first thing to note about the Lott-Mustard

specification is that it is entirely idiosyncratic: no other major study in the entire empirical

literature on crime has used the sheer number of demographic controls found in the Lott-Mustard

model. In fact, many published papers use fewer demographic controls than the six that we

include in our own preferred model. Table 9 modifies our specification by reducing our six

demographic controls to only three that represent the size of the younger black male population

(in the three age groups of 10-19, 20-29 and 30-39). The effect of this change can be seen by

comparing Table 9a to 8a (no state trends) and Table 9b to 8b (with state trends). Beginning

with the first comparison, we see that using even fewer demographic controls only strengthens

our finding that RTC laws are generally associated with higher, not lower, crime rates. Table 9a

suggests that RTC laws caused every crime category apart from murder to rise by 9.5 percent or

more. The comparison of Tables 9b and 8b (with state trends) shows that changing the

demographic variables has a small influence on the results when controls are included for state

trends. Nevertheless, reducing the number of demographic variables in Table 9b does not

change our finding that there is no evidence that RTC laws decrease violent crime.38




38
  A fairly standard set of demographics that can be seen in the crime literature includes controls for a few age
categories across all races combined with a single identifier of the percentage of blacks in the state. Table D1 and
D2 in Appendix D provide this tweak to the ADZ model by putting in four such demographic variables – the percent
of the population falling into the three age categories of 10-19, 20-29, and 30-39 plus the percent black -- in place of
the ADZ six demographic variables. The results for violent crime are not dramatically different from the main ADZ
models of Tables 8a and 8b. Table D1’s and Table 8a’s estimated violent crime increases for rape, aggravated
assault, and robbery are substantial in both sets of dummy variable estimates and significant at the .10 level or
better, but only Table 8a has one of these estimates rise to the level of significance at the .05 level (for rape).

                                                                                                                    51
                                                       Table 939
Table 9a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with 3 demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                      Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault        Robbery        Theft     Burglary     Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:        3.01    10.77**      9.69**         14.66**       19.65**    13.26**      11.24**
                                    (5.71)    (5.36)       (3.84)         (7.29)        (7.76)     (5.51)       (4.25)

                   Spline Model:     0.50      0.87         1.04*           1.26         1.08       0.89        0.88*
                                    (0.60)    (0.59)        (0.54)         (0.75)       (0.72)     (0.56)       (0.45)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          0.84     8.00*          5.79          10.49       17.37**     10.87**      8.51**
                                    (4.71)    (4.43)        (3.78)         (6.71)       (6.82)      (4.85)      (3.82)

                   Trend Effect:     0.47      0.60          0.84           0.90         0.49       0.52         0.59
                                    (0.56)    (0.55)        (0.57)         (0.74)       (0.65)     (0.52)       (0.44)


Table 9b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with 3 demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                      Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault        Robbery        Theft     Burglary     Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:        0.23     -3.46         1.01           4.24        11.14**      1.93         1.67
                                    (3.81)    (2.76)       (3.33)         (3.19)        (4.41)     (2.21)       (1.79)

                   Spline Model:     0.48     -0.16         1.52*           -0.31       -0.77       -0.20       -0.95*
                                    (0.67)    (0.58)        (0.79)         (0.74)       (0.74)     (0.64)       (0.48)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -0.06     -3.41          0.08           4.50       11.78**      2.08         2.28
                                    (3.74)    (2.80)        (3.18)         (3.34)       (4.44)     (2.30)       (1.97)

                   Trend Effect:     0.48     -0.08         1.52*           -0.41       -1.04       -0.25       -1.00*
                                    (0.65)    (0.59)        (0.79)         (0.76)       (0.73)     (0.65)       (0.50)




39
  These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard
errors are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and three demographic composition measures.
* Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                       52
         C. The 36 Demographic Controls Should Not be Used in Crime Regressions

         In his book More Guns, Less Crime, Lott concedes that he “overcontrolled” for

demographic composition out of an abundance of caution, in order to avoid potentially

problematic omitted variable bias. However, it is well known that introducing a large number of

highly collinear variables into a regression model can lead to highly unstable results.40 To test

for the degree of collinearity among the independent variables when the Lott-Mustard

demographic variables are used in Table 8c, we run auxiliary regressions of one independent

variable on the remaining explanatory variables and analyze the resulting variance inflation

factor (VIF).41 Table 10 shows that the RTC variable has an uncomfortably high VIF greater

than 5 in both the dummy and spline models when the 36 demographic controls are used. Using

the 6 ADZ variables (or the more limited set of 3 demographics) reduces the multicollinearity for

the RTC dummy to a tolerable level (with VIFs always below 5). Nonetheless, the degree of

multicollinearity for the individual demographics (showing three different black-male categories)

can be seen to be astonishingly high with 36 demographic controls and still high with even more

limited demographic controls. This analysis makes us highly skeptical of any estimates of the

impact of RTC laws that employ the Lott-Mustard set of 36 demographic controls.




40
   For a longer discussion of the consequences that multicollinearity can have on a regression model, see
Studenmund (1997).
41
   The VIF is an estimate of the extent to which multicollinearity has increased the variance of the estimated
coefficient. A VIF of five or more, calculated as the inverse of the difference between 1 and the coefficient of
determination (R2) from the auxiliary regression, is evidence of severe multicollinearity.

                                                                                                                   53
Table 1042
                                                                      Black Male:     Black Male:    Black Male:
        VIF Calculations                                   RTC
                                                                         10-19           20-20          30-39
                               Dummy Variable Model:       5.9          13888.9          1733.1         1788.9
 36 Demographic Controls:
                                       Spline Mode:        7.0          13888.9          1733.1         1785.7

                               Dummy Variable Model:       4.1           158.8            91.4           74.1
     6 Demographic Controls:
                                      Spline Model:        4.8           158.4            90.8           75.6

                               Dummy Variable Model:       3.8           136.5            82.1           67.7
     3 Demographic Controls:
                                      Spline Model:        4.4           136.8            82.6           68.8




            D. Addressing the Problem of Endogenous Adoption of RTC Laws

            The problem of endogenous adoption of RTC laws during a period of rising crime that is

unique to a state is obviously a concern, since this would likely bias the estimated effect of the

law in a way that would make the law appear more favorable in reducing crime (as crime

ultimately returned to prior mean levels). One way to address this concern is to restrict the

analysis to a period such as 1999-2010, which is a far more stable period of crime in the US.

The 1999-2010 period does not include the immense increases and then declines associated with

the rise and fall of the crack epidemic, which threatened a key assumption of the panel data

model of crime (since these dramatic crime shifts were not uniform across states and thus could

not be expected to be adequately captured by year fixed effects). Table 11a restricts the analysis

of the basic ADZ model to this date range, with the hope that this estimation on a more limited

sample involving only 8 states that adopted RTC laws during that time frame will eliminate

enough endogeneity bias to offset the cost of having a smaller sample size. This approach

generates evidence that RTC laws increased the rate of murder but had no other statistically


42
   These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. The control variables
for this “preferred” specification include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential
endogeneity issues), unemployment rate, poverty rate, population density, and per capita income measures. The
number of demographic variables (excluding the explanatory variable for which the VIF is calculated) varies by row
in the table. The VIF is calculated as 1/(1-R2).

                                                                                                                   54
significant impact on crime for the 8 changing states. Table 11b shows that if state trends need

to be controlled for, the results become more varied, with some crime declines (in rape and

larceny and possibly auto theft) and a possible crime increase in aggravated assault.



                                                       Table 1143
Table 11a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1999-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:        7.40        3.00          4.76           -3.55       -0.21       1.79         -3.18
                                  (5.84)      (3.50)        (3.73)         (5.23)       (4.07)     (3.40)        (2.64)

                 Spline Model:    1.47**       0.34          1.10           0.12        -0.61        0.59        0.15
                                  (0.55)      (0.42)        (0.67)         (0.43)       (0.73)      (0.38)      (0.33)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:        6.73        2.85          4.26           -3.62        0.08        1.52       -3.27
                                  (6.06)      (3.51)        (3.82)         (5.31)       (4.05)      (3.52)      (2.66)

                 Trend Effect:   1.42***       0.32          1.07           0.14        -0.61        0.58        0.18
                                  (0.53)      (0.42)        (0.67)         (0.44)       (0.73)      (0.39)      (0.33)


Table 11b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1999-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:        5.70        4.66         6.00*           1.04         1.66       1.91         -0.38
                                  (5.30)      (3.57)        (3.24)         (6.66)       (5.48)     (4.11)        (2.43)

                 Spline Model:     1.03      -2.94**        -1.70           -1.41      -5.36*        -0.92      -1.72**
                                  (3.24)      (1.22)        (1.40)         (1.93)      (2.79)       (1.41)       (0.85)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:        5.79        4.44         5.87*           0.93         1.24        1.84       -0.52
                                  (5.32)      (3.53)        (3.21)         (6.75)       (5.26)      (4.07)      (2.34)

                 Trend Effect:     1.10      -2.89**        -1.64           -1.40      -5.35*        -0.90      -1.72**
                                  (3.23)      (1.22)        (1.35)         (1.91)      (2.76)       (1.37)       (0.85)




                                                                                                                     55
X. Additional Concerns in the Evaluation of Legislation Using Observational Data

         We now turn to three critical issues that must be considered when using panel data to

evaluate the impact of legislation and public policy (and gun laws in particular). First, we

discuss the possibility of difficult-to-measure omitted variables and how such variables can

shape estimates of policy impact. We are particularly concerned with how the crack epidemic of

the 1980s and 1990s may bias results in the direction of finding a beneficial effect. Second, we

explore pre-adoption crime trends in an attempt to examine the potentially endogenous adoption

of right-to-carry legislation. Finally, given that the intent of right-to-carry legislation is to

increase gun-carrying in law-adopting states, we explore whether these laws may have had a

particular effect on gun-related assaults (which is the one crime category that has generated

somewhat consistent results thus far).

         A. Further Thoughts on Omitted Variable Bias

         As discussed above, we believe it is likely that the NRC’s estimates of the effects of RTC

legislation are marred by omitted variable bias. In our attempt to improve (at least to a degree) on

the original Lott-Mustard model, we included additional explanatory factors, such as the

incarceration and police rates, and removed extraneous variables (such as unnecessary and

collinear demographic measures). We recognize, however, that there are additional criminogenic

influences for which we cannot fully control. In particular, we suspect that a major shortcoming

of all of the models presented is the inability to account for the possible influence of the crack-




43
   These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard
errors are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. The
states that adopted shall issue laws during the time period are Colorado (2003), Kansas (2007), Michigan (2001),
Minnesota (2003), Missouri (2004), Nebraska (2007), New Mexico (2004), and Ohio (2004).
* Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                  56
cocaine epidemic on crime.44

         Many scholars now suggest that rapid growth in the market for crack cocaine in the late

1980s and the early 1990s was likely one of the major influences on increasing crime rates (and

violent crimes in particular) during this period (Levitt 2004). Moreover, the harmful

criminogenic effect of crack was likely more acute in urban areas of states slow to adopt RTC

laws. Meanwhile, many rural states adopted such laws during this era. If this was indeed the

case, this divergence between states could account for much of the purported “crime-reducing”

effects attributed by Lott and Mustard to gun laws (which were then supported by scholars such

as James Q. Wilson). The regression analysis would then identify a relationship between rising

crime and the failure to adopt RTC legislation, when the actual reason for this trend was the

influence of crack (rather than the passage of the RTC law).

         We now explore how results from our main models vary when we restrict the analysis to

the time periods before and after the peak of the American crack epidemic. According to Fryer et

al. (2005), the crack problem throughout most of the country peaked at some point in the early

1990s. Coincidentally, the original Lott-Mustard period of analysis (1977-1992) contains years

that likely represent the height of crack-induced crime problem. With this in mind, we run our

main regressions after breaking up our dataset into two periods: the original Lott-Mustard period


44  Although Lott and Mustard (1997) do attempt to control for the potential influence of crack cocaine through the
use of cocaine price data based on the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency's STRIDE program, we find their approach
wanting for both theoretical and empirical reasons. First, a control for crack should capture the criminogenic
influence of the crack trade on crime. We know that prior to 1985, there was no such influence in any state and that
after some point in the early to mid-1990s this criminogenic influence declined strongly. Since there is little reason
to believe that cocaine prices would be informative on the criminogenic influence of crack in particular geographic
areas, it is hard to see how the cocaine price data could be a useful control. Second, the data that Lott and Mustard
use is itself questionable. Horowitz (2001) argues forcefully that STRIDE data is not a reliable source of data for
policy analyses of cocaine. The data are mainly records of acquisitions made to support criminal investigations in
particular cities, and are not a random sample of an identifiable population. Moreover, since the STRIDE data is at
the city-level, we are not sure how this would be used in a county-level analysis. The data was collected for 21
cities, while there are over 3,000 counties in the U.S. In addition, the data is missing for 1988 and 1989, which are
crucial years in the rise of the crack epidemic in poor urban areas. Lott and Mustard drop those years of analysis
when including cocaine prices as a control.

                                                                                                                   57
of analysis (1979-1992) as well as the post-Lott-Mustard period (1993-2010). We first present

the results for the era that includes the crack epidemic (1979-1992) 45 on our preferred model.

We run these regressions (with clustered standard errors) on state-level data, with and without

state trends. These results are presented in Tables 12a and 12b. We then estimate the same

models on the post-crack period (see Tables 13a and 13b).

        Note that, with a simple naive reading, the regression results in Table 12 from the initial

14-year time period (1979-1992) do suggest that violent crime rates are dampened by RTC laws

if state trends are not needed and that murder, rape, and robbery may have declined if state trends

are needed. If we look at the following 18 year period from 1993 – 2010 in Table 13, however,

there is no longer any evidence of a statistically significant decline in violent crimes. Instead,

RTC laws are associated with higher rates of murder, aggravated assault, robbery, and burglary.

This evidence supports the theory that the initial Lott and Mustard finding was likely the result of

the crime-raising impact of crack in non-RTC states.




45 As mentioned in footnote 29, poverty data is not available before 1979. Thus, although the Lott-Mustard period
originally was 1977-1992, for our preferred specification the analysis covers 1979-1992.

                                                                                                                58
                                                       Table 1246
Table 12a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-1992 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -4.88    -7.28**       -9.71**          -5.46       7.95*       -3.12        -0.20
                                    (4.28)    (3.40)        (4.48)         (4.02)       (4.38)     (2.70)        (1.51)

                   Spline Model:    -1.48     -0.93         -0.30        -2.49***        0.27        -0.42       0.04
                                    (1.18)    (0.63)        (1.53)         (0.60)       (0.83)      (0.75)      (0.30)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         -1.02     -7.20*       -13.75**         2.58       11.14**       -2.97      -0.49
                                    (5.02)    (3.67)         (5.64)        (5.06)       (5.13)      (3.56)      (1.69)

                   Trend Effect:    -1.35     -0.03          1.42        -2.81***       -1.12        -0.05       0.10
                                    (1.40)    (0.77)        (1.19)         (0.86)       (0.81)      (0.84)      (0.31)


Table 12b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-1992 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       -4.83    -6.19**        -2.93           -2.80        1.37       -1.86         2.75
                                    (4.27)    (2.81)        (2.75)         (5.25)       (4.54)     (3.07)        (2.32)

                   Spline Model:   -5.56**    -0.39         -0.72          -4.03*       -1.17        -1.96       0.86
                                    (2.34)    (1.22)        (1.07)         (2.21)       (1.79)      (1.19)      (1.07)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          5.65    -7.95***       -2.56           5.11         4.58        1.76        1.98
                                    (6.22)     (2.83)       (3.61)         (6.88)       (4.20)      (3.99)      (2.54)

                   Trend Effect:   -6.62**     1.11         -0.23          -5.00*       -2.03        -2.29       0.49
                                    (2.95)    (1.15)        (1.34)         (2.76)       (1.87)      (1.44)      (1.23)




46
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification include:
incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate, poverty
rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. * Significant at
10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                     59
                                                       Table 1347
Table 13a
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1993-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:        4.77     -1.53          2.03           2.91         5.18      6.29**         2.26
                                    (4.68)    (3.45)        (4.49)         (4.57)       (4.32)     (3.09)        (2.77)

                   Spline Model:    1.25**     0.28         1.37**        1.28**         0.61        0.68        0.16
                                    (0.51)    (0.55)        (0.60)        (0.62)        (0.87)      (0.57)      (0.43)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          4.15     -1.68          1.34           2.27         4.89       5.96*        2.19
                                    (4.94)    (3.55)        (4.58)         (4.74)       (4.11)      (3.23)      (2.77)

                   Trend Effect:    1.22**     0.29         1.36**        1.26**         0.58        0.65        0.15
                                    (0.52)    (0.54)        (0.61)        (0.63)        (0.86)      (0.57)      (0.43)


Table 13b
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1993-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                     Auto
                                   Murder      Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:       6.30*      0.94          1.85           4.38         4.22       1.12         -0.94
                                    (3.38)    (3.29)        (3.27)         (3.26)       (4.25)     (2.54)        (2.30)

                   Spline Model:    -0.26      0.43          1.66           -0.21      -3.87**       -1.14      -1.61**
                                    (1.40)    (0.87)        (1.24)         (0.93)       (1.50)      (0.73)       (0.65)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:         6.62*      0.74          1.03           4.61         6.38        1.76       -0.12
                                    (3.46)    (3.23)        (3.01)         (3.54)       (4.07)      (2.47)      (2.13)

                   Trend Effect:    -0.62      0.39          1.61           -0.46      -4.22**       -1.23      -1.60**
                                    (1.32)    (0.86)        (1.24)         (1.03)       (1.61)      (0.77)       (0.70)




47
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification include:
incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate, poverty
rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. * Significant at
10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                     60
        Figure 8 depicts a measure of crack prevalence for the period 1980-2000 in the five states

with the greatest crack problem, as well as the five states with the least crack, according to Fryer

et al. (2005). Figure 9 shows the murder rates over time for these two sets of states. We see that

crime rose in the high crack states when the crack index rises in the mid-to-late 1980s, but that

the crack index does not turn down in those states at the time crime started to fall. Apparently,

the rise of the crack market triggered a great deal of violence, but once the market stabilized, the

same level of crack consumption could be maintained while the violence ebbed.

        Of course, omitting an appropriate control for the criminogenic influence of crack is

problematic if the high-crack states tend not to adopt RTC laws and the low-crack states tend to

adopt. This is in fact the case: all of the five “high-crack” states are non-RTC states during the

time period of Figure 9, whereas four of the five “low-crack” states are RTC states (all four

adopted an RTC law by 1994).48 The only exception is Nebraska, a state that did not adopt an

RTC law until 2007.49




48
   New Mexico, one of the five highest crack states, became an RTC state in 2004. Wyoming and Montana adopted
RTC laws in 1994 and 1991, respectively. North Dakota and South Dakota both adopted their laws by 1985.
49
   Out of the ten states with the lowest crack cocaine index, seven adopted an RTC law by 1994. The exceptions are
Nebraska (2007), Minnesota (2003), and Iowa (2011).

                                                                                                               61
Figure 8: Prevalence of Crack in the 5 Most and 5 Least Crack-affected States




Source: Authors’ calculations based on the crack index of Fryer et al (2005).



Figure 9: Murder Rates in the 5 Most and 5 Least Crack-affected States




Source: FBI UCR Data.



        Moreover, as Table 14 reveals, the 13 states that adopted RTC laws during the initial


                                                                                                62
Lott-Mustard period (1977-1992) had crack levels substantially below the level of the five high-

crack states shown in Figures 8 and 9. Of the RTC adopters shown in Table 14, the largest has

an average crack index of 1.46 (Georgia), while the high-crack states had an average population

weighted crack level of 1.76.


                    Table 14: Population-weighted Statistics of RTC-Adopting
                                 States between 1977 and 199250
                                        Year of RTC
                         State          Law Adoption         Murder Rate         Crack Index
                       Indiana              1980                6.56                 0.30
                        Maine               1985                2.34                 0.09
                     North Dakota           1985                1.32                 0.04
                     South Dakota           1985                1.96                -0.04
                       Virginia             1986                7.97                 1.13
                        Florida             1987               11.53                 1.24
                       Georgia              1989               12.89                 1.46
                     Pennsylvania           1989                5.75                 1.13
                     West Virginia          1989                5.53                 0.42
                         Idaho              1990                3.04                 0.34
                      Mississippi           1990               11.50                 0.44
                       Oregon               1990                4.85                 1.14
                       Montana              1991                3.69                 0.07
                    Top Five Crack
                       States51                                  10.64               1.76
                    RTC Adopters                                  8.04               0.96



        In other words, over the initial Lott-Mustard period of analysis (ending in 1992), the

criminogenic influence of crack made RTC laws look beneficial since crack was raising crime in

non-RTC states. In the later period, crime fell sharply in the high-crack states, making RTC

states look bad in comparison. Therefore, the effects estimated over this entire period will

necessarily water down the initial Lott-Mustard results. The hope is that estimating the effect


50
   The crack index data comes from Fryer et al (2005), which constructs the index (beginning in 1980) based on
several indirect proxies for crack use, including cocaine arrests, cocaine-related emergency room visits, cocaine-
induced drug deaths, crack mentions in newspapers, and DEA drug busts. The paper does suggest that these values
can be negative. The state with the lowest mean value of the crack index over the data period from 1980 to 1990 is
South Dakota (-0.03), and the state with the highest mean value is New York (1.58).
51
   The top five states with the highest population weighted average crack index in the period 1980-1992 were
California, Maryland, Massachusetts, New York, and Rhode Island. None of these states adopted RTC laws during
this period.

                                                                                                                63
over the entire period will wash out the impact of the omitted variable bias generated by the lack

of an adequate control for the effect of crack.

       As an additional test for potential omitted variable bias in both the NRC and our own

preferred model specification, we perform an analysis inspired by Altonji et al. (2005). In their

influential paper, the authors provide a practical method to test the extent to which potential

omitted variable bias drives the results of a multivariate analysis. This test assumes that the

selected, observable variables are chosen from a broader set of possible controls, and then

explores how strong selection on unobserved variables would have to be relative to selection on

observed variables to produce an OLS estimate if the true effect (in our case the effect of RTC

laws on crime trends) were zero. We provide further details on this test procedure in Appendix F.

       Using the Altonji et al (2005) test procedure, we analyzed the relative strength of the

Table 1b estimate from the NRC Report that RTC laws were associated with an 8.33% reduction

in murder rates (using the Lott-Mustard county data estimate for 1977-2000). The Altonji test

procedure suggests that this Lott-Mustard estimate has a potential bias of -1.03, which implies

that the ostensible finding of a crime-reducing estimate would be entirely driven by selection

bias if selection on unobservables were only 8 percent as strong as selection on observables.

This is strong evidence that the NRC/Lott model suffers fatally from omitted variable bias. In

comparison, an analogous test of our preferred specification using state data from 1979 to 2010

(Table 8a) – which showed an estimated increase in murder of 3.31% (albeit not statistically

significant) – shows that the potential bias in the murder effect was -0.35. In other words, in our

case, the implied bias is negative, which means that the positive and statistically insignificant

effect of RTC laws on murder that we found is a likely a lower bound for the true effect.




                                                                                                    64
        B. Endogeneity and Misspecification Concerns

        To this point, our analysis has remained within the estimation framework common to the

NRC/Lott-Mustard analyses, which implicitly assumes that passage of right-to-carry legislation

in a given state is an exogenous factor influencing crime levels. Under this assumption, one can

interpret the estimated coefficient as an unbiased measure of RTC laws’ collective impact.

        We probe the validity of this strong claim by estimating a more flexible year-by-year

specification, adding pre- and post-passage dummy variables to the analysis.52 Pre-passage

dummies can allow us to assess whether crime trends shift in unexpected ways prior to the

passage of a state's RTC law. Figures 10 through 13 present the results from this exercise in

graphical form. Using our preferred model as the base specification, we introduce dummies for

the eight years preceding and the first eight years following adoption. We first estimate this

regression for each violent crime category over the full sample of 50 states plus the District of

Columbia. However, because of the presence of five states that adopted their RTC law within

eight years of 1979, and seven states that adopted laws within the eight years before our dataset

ends, we have twelve states that cannot enter into the full set of pre- and post-adoption dummy

variables.53 Because Ayres and Donohue (2003) showed that the year-by-year estimates can

jump wildly when states drop in or out of the individual year estimates, we also estimate the

year-by-year model after dropping out the earliest (pre-1987) and latest (post-2002) law-adopting

states. In this separate series of regressions, our estimates of the full set of lead and lag variables

for the 22 states that adopted RTC laws between 1987 and 2002 are based on a trimmed data set




52 In Appendix C, we further analyze the issue of misspecification and model fit by analyzing residuals from the
regression analysis.
53 We also include a control for more than 8 years before the passage of RTC laws, although these are not shown in
the following charts.

                                                                                                               65
that omits the 12 early and late adopters.54

        Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006) point out that when analyzing the impact of state-

level policies using panel data, one would ideally see lead dummies that are near zero. For the

crime of aggravated assault (Figure 12), this desirable pattern is roughly approximated.

Therefore, we would expect these estimates to perhaps be the most reliable among the four

violent crime categories. The graphs for murder, rape, and robbery, though, suggest the possible

presence of systematic differences between RTC law adopters that can complicate or thwart the

endeavor of obtaining clean estimates of the impact of right-to-carry laws. Rather than being

close to zero in the pre-passage period, the levels of murder, rape, and robbery seemed to be

lower in the pre-passage period and rising rapidly. Such a pattern raises concerns about the

presence of endogenous adoption that complicate our thinking about the influence of right-to-

carry laws on violent crime.




54The states that drop out (with dates of RTC law passage in parentheses) include: Indiana (1980), Maine (1985),
North Dakota (1985), South Dakota (1985), Virginia (1986), Colorado (2003), Minnesota (2003), Missouri (2004),
New Mexico (2004), Ohio (2004), Kansas (2007), and Nebraska (2007).

                                                                                                              66
Figure 1055

                                    Figure 10: Normalized Year-by-Year Estimates of the Impact of RTC
                                                 Laws on Murder (State Data, 1979-2010)
                      25%
                                                                                                                      Full Sample



                                                                                                                      Dropping Florida and
                      20%
                                                                                                                      Georgia


                                                                                                                      Dropping Early and Late
                      15%                                                                                             Adopters


                                                                                                                      Dropping Early and Late
                                                                                                                      Adopters, Florida and
     Percent Change




                      10%                                                                                             Georgia




                       5%




                       0%




                      -5%




                      -10%
                               -8    -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8


                                                              Years Relative to Law Passage




                             If one looks at the four lines in Figure 10, one sees four different sets of year-by-year

estimates of the impact of RTC laws on murder. The lines have been normalized to show a zero

value in the year of adoption of a RTC law. Let's begin with the bottom line (looking at the right

hand side of the figure) and the line just above it. The lower line represents the naive year-by-

year estimates from the preferred model estimated on the 1979-2010 period, while the line just

above it drops out the early and late adopters, so that the estimated year-by-year estimates are

based on the "clean" sample of all non-adopting states (over the sample period) plus the 22 RTC

adopters for which complete data is available from 8 years prior to adoption through 8 years after

55 Estimations include year and state fixed effects and are weighted by county population. The control variables
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures.

                                                                                                                                             67
adoption. One sees that the trimmed estimates are different and less favorable to the “More

Guns, Less Crime” hypothesis, as evidenced by the higher values in the post-passage period.

       How should we interpret these trimmed sample estimates? One possibility is to conclude

that on average the pre-passage estimates are reasonably close to zero and then take the post-

passage figures as reasonable estimates of the true effect. If we do this, none of the estimates

would be statistically significant, so one could not reject the null hypothesis of no effect.

       Perhaps, though, what is most important is the trend just prior to passage. This might

suggest that rising crime in fact increases the likelihood that a state would adopt a RTC law. In

particular, since murder is typically the crime most salient in the media, we suspect it has the

greatest effect on the implementation of purported crime control measures such as RTC

legislation. Of course, this would suggest an endogeneity problem that would also likely lead to

a bias in favor of finding a deterrent effect. The mechanism driving this bias would presumably

be that rising crime strengthens the NRA push for the law, and the mean reversion in crime

would then falsely be attributed to the law by the naive panel data analysis (incorrectly premised

on exogenous RTC law adoption). But in the trimmed model, there is no sign of mean

reversion. Murder rates keep increasing after RTC adoption. There is certainly no evidence of a

beneficial impact from RTC laws, but conclusions about causation are difficult given the strong

pre-passage crime trends.

       Another striking feature we note is the strong influence of Florida and Georgia on our

estimates of the impact of RTC laws on murder (Figure 10). When we remove these two states,

the post-adoption trend lines for murder clearly shift upwards. Moreover, when dropping them

from the set of RTC states that already excludes the early and late adopters—still leaving us with

20 RTC states to analyze—we see that murder increases in each post-adoption year. As previous



                                                                                                   68
papers have noted, Florida experienced enormous drops in murder during the 1990s that may

have been completely unrelated to the passage of its right-to-carry policy. Donohue (2003)

points out that the 1980 Mariel boat lift temporarily added many individuals prone to committing

crimes to Florida's population, causing a massive increase in crime in Florida during the 1980s.

Thus, it is plausible that the massive 1990s crime reductions in Florida were not driven by the

adoption of the state's RTC law but rather a return to traditional population dynamics that were

less prone to violent crime (again, a reversion to the mean). This is important to consider given

the strong downward pull of Florida on aggregate murder rates.

       The line based on dropping Florida and Georgia from the trimmed sample would suggest

that for the 20 other states, the impact of RTC laws on murder was highly pernicious. Again a

number of interpretations are possible: 1) Florida and Georgia are unusual and the best estimate

of the impact of RTC laws comes from the trimmed sample that excludes them (and the early

and late adopters); 2) there is heterogeneity in the impact of RTC laws, so we should conclude

that the laws help in Florida and Georgia, and tend to be harmful in the other 21 states; and 3)

omitted variables mar the state-by-state estimates but the aggregate estimates that include Florida

and Georgia may be reasonable if the state-by-state biases on average cancel out.

       Note that Figure 11, which presents the comparable year-by-year estimates of the impact

of RTC laws on rape, shows a similar yet even more extreme pattern of apparent spikes in crime

leading to the adoption of RTC laws. The rape estimates are less sensitive than the murder

estimates to the dropping of the early and late adopters (or Georgia and Florida). Clearly, the

rate of rape is higher in the post-passage period but Figure 11 shows why the controls for state

trends can be influential for this crime. If one believes that the pre-passage trend of increasing

rapes would have continued without the adoption of RTC laws then you might conclude that the



                                                                                                     69
RTC laws moderated that upward trend. Alternatively, a dummy variable model that just

compared pre- and post-passage would show greater evidence of RTC laws increasing the rate of

rape.



Figure 1156

                                  Figure 11: Normalized Year-by-Year Estimates of the Impact of RTC
                                                Laws on Rape (State Data, 1979-2010)
                      10%
                                                                                                               Full Sample

                       8%

                                                                                                               Dropping Florida and Georgia
                       6%

                                                                                                               Dropping Early and Late Adopters
                       4%


                       2%                                                                                      Dropping Early and Late Adopters, Florida
                                                                                                               and Georgia
     Percent Change




                       0%


                      -2%


                      -4%


                      -6%


                      -8%


                      -10%


                      -12%
                             -8    -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0    1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                         Years Relative to Law Passage




56 Estimations include year and state fixed effects, state trends, and are weighted by state population. The control
variables include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues),
unemployment rate, poverty rate, state population, population density, per capita income, and six demographic
composition measures.

                                                                                                                                                     70
Figure 1257

                                  Figure 12: Normalized Year-by-Year Estimates of the Impact of RTC
                                                Laws on Assault (State Data, 1979-2010)

                      25%
                                                                                                               Full Sample


                      20%
                                                                                                               Dropping Florida and Georgia


                      15%                                                                                      Dropping Early and Late Adopters



                                                                                                               Dropping Early and Late Adopters, Florida
     Percent Change




                      10%
                                                                                                               and Georgia



                       5%




                       0%




                      -5%




                      -10%
                             -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1    2    3    4   5   6   7   8


                                                           Years Relative to Law Passage




57 Estimations include year and state fixed effects, state trends, and are weighted by state population. The control
variables include: incarceration and police rates, unemployment rate, poverty rate, state population, population
density, per capita income, and six demographic composition measures.

                                                                                                                                                     71
Figure 1358

                                    Figure 13: Normalized Year-by-Year Estimates of the Percent Change
                                                   in Robbery (State Data, 1979-2010)
                      35%
                                                                                                                 Full Sample

                      30%
                                                                                                                 Dropping Florida and Georgia

                      25%
                                                                                                                 Dropping Early and Late Adopters

                      20%

                                                                                                                 Dropping Early and Late Adopters, Florida
                                                                                                                 and Georgia
                      15%
     Percent Change




                      10%


                       5%


                       0%



                      -5%



                      -10%



                      -15%
                               -8    -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0    1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                           Years Relative to Law Passage




                             As noted, the pattern of near-zero pre-passage estimates for the crime of assaults gives us

greater confidence that we are able to estimate the impact of RTC laws on this crime. The

general story here seems to be that assault increases markedly over the time period after law

passage, which squares with our results discussed in previous sections. One observes positive

coefficient changes that are initially modest, but that increase dramatically and uniformly over

the second half of the post-passage period. Moreover, in contrast to the year-by-year murder

estimate, assault trends are not demonstrably different when we alter the sample to exclude early

58 Estimations include year and state fixed effects, state trends, and are weighted by state population. The control
variables include: incarceration and police rates, unemployment rate, poverty rate, state population, population
density, per capita income, and six demographic composition measures.

                                                                                                                                                       72
and late adopters, as well as Florida and Georgia. The pattern is generally unaffected by sample,

giving us some confidence that RTC laws may be having an adverse impact on the rate of

assault. Robbery rates similarly increase over time after the passage of RTC laws.

       If the near uniform increases in assault coefficients means that aggravated assault did

actually increase over time with the passage of right-to-carry legislation, this would strongly

undercut the "More Guns, Less Crime" thesis. Interestingly, the robbery data (Figure 13) either

suggests a pernicious effect similar to that on aggravated assault (particularly for the trimmed

estimates dropping only early and late adopters) or a strong upward trend in crime, starting well

before passage, that might be taken as a sign of the absence of any impact of RTC laws on

robbery.

       C. Effects of RTC Laws on Gun-related Assaults

       A general concern in evaluating the impact of generic law X is that there is not some

other law or policy Y that is generating the observed effect. In this case, the apparent finding

that RTC laws increase aggravated assaults raises the question of whether changes in reporting or

documenting aggravated assaults might be a possible confounding factor. Specifically, over the

last two decades a number of states and municipalities have launched programs designed to

combat domestic violence by increasing the arrests of likely perpetrators. These programs could

influence the count of aggravated assaults appearing in the FBI crime data we employ. If such

programs are more likely to be adopted in either RTC or non-RTC states than the potential for

bias must be considered.

       One way to address this problem would be to collect data on the various state or

municipal initiatives that lead to higher rates of arrest of those committing acts of domestic

violence. However, collecting uniform panel data along these lines that also fully captures the



                                                                                                   73
nature and intensity of the police initiatives is extremely difficult. An alternative approach is to

look at assaults that we think are less likely to be influenced by these domestic violence

initiatives (or by other shifts in the likelihood of arrest for potentially assaultive conduct), but

which are most likely to be influenced by RTC laws (if there is in fact such an influence).

Counts of gun assaults would seem to meet these two criteria, because assaults with a gun tend to

be serious enough that the level of discretion as to whether to arrest is reduced, and because gun

assaults are precisely the types of crimes that we might expect would be influenced if more guns

are on the street because of the passage of RTC laws. For this reason, we may get more reliable

estimates of the impact of RTC laws by looking at gun-related aggravated assaults than at overall

aggravated assaults.

         To test this possibility, we estimate our preferred regression using gun-related aggravated

assaults as the dependent variable (both with and without state-specific trends) in Table 15

below. Unfortunately, our confidence in these results is undermined by data quality issues

similar to those described in section IX. Since agencies report gun assault data to the FBI on a

voluntary basis, there are significant gaps in which areas are reporting their gun assault totals in a

given year. In addition, if reporting bias were correlated with either the gun assault rate or a

state’s adoption of an RTC statute, our coefficient estimates of the effect of RTC laws on the gun

assault rate would be biased (although the direction of this bias would depend on the nature of

this correlation). Nevertheless, we report our results for these regressions to examine whether

they are consistent with our other evidence that right-to-carry laws increase aggravated assault

rates.

         Comparing these new results with the assault estimates in Tables 8a and 8b and Figure 12

above, our bottom-line story of how RTC laws increase rates of aggravated assault is further



                                                                                                       74
strengthened when limiting our analysis to assaults involving a gun. Without state trends, we

uniformly see very large, positive estimates, some of which are significant at the 5% and 10%

level. With state trends, we again see some evidence that gun-related aggravated assault rates

are increased by RTC legislation, although none of the resulting coefficients are statistically

significant. These results again suggest that RTC laws may be generating higher levels of

assaultive conduct, although more refined tools (or cleaner data) will be needed before confident

predictions can be made.




                                                        Table 1559
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws on Gun-Related Aggravated Assaults –
ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %        Gun-Related              Gun-Related
                                   Aggravated Assault       Aggravated Assault
                                    (No State Trends)       (With State Trends)
       Dummy Variable Model:            32.96**                    4.36
                                         (13.24)                  (8.19)

                  Spline Model:          2.86*                     3.07
                                         (1.47)                   (2.13)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:             23.49**                    2.08
                                         (9.77)                   (8.01)

                   Trend Effect:          2.08                     3.00
                                         (1.30)                   (2.11)




59
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification include:
incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate, poverty
rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. * Significant at
10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. The gun assault data comes from the FBI master file, available
upon request from the agency. The data is provided at the local level; thus for state values we sum the reported gun
assaults over all of the reporting agencies by year. However, not all agencies report their estimates during each
reporting period, leaving our gun assault figures likely to be undervalued.

                                                                                                                  75
XI. Conclusion

       In this paper, we have explored the question of the impact of RTC laws on crime and the

NRC panel’s 2004 report concluding that the then-current literature was too fractured to reach a

conclusion on what that impact is. We agree with the conclusion that the NRC panel reached at

that time, as well as with the pointed rebuke the panel gave to James Q. Wilson who argued --

without scientific merit according to the NRC majority -- that RTC laws reduce murder. We do

take issue, though, with the NRC majority report in a few respects.

       First, as we show in this paper, there is a clear need to employ the cluster correction to

the standard errors when estimating panel data models of crime, and the NRC majority erred

when it concluded otherwise. As our placebo tests show, the standard errors that the NRC

presented in their panel data models were far too low and greatly exaggerated the statistical

significance of their results. Indeed, the clustering gaffe was on top of the NRC failure to use the

robust correction for heteroskedascticity, which created additional downward bias in the standard

errors (although less dramatically than the failure to cluster). Both corrections are needed, and

this error alone set the stage for Wilson's dissent. With correct standard errors, none of the

estimates that Wilson thought established a benign effect of RTC laws on murder would have

been statistically significant. Thus, getting the standard errors right might have kept Wilson

from writing his misguided dissent -- to the benefit of Wilson, the NRC majority, and the public.

       Second, beyond getting the standard errors correct and therefore undermining the

ostensible statistical significance of their presented murder regression, the NRC majority could

have said much more than they did to refute Wilson's reliance on extremely limited statistical

evidence to endorse the view that RTC laws reduce murder. Wilson's conclusion essentially

rested on the NRC report's presentation of two Lott and Mustard models (the dummy and the



                                                                                                    76
spline) based on county data from 1977-2000. The NRC majority did point out that the

estimates for six out of 7 crimes were contradictory (some suggesting crime increases and some

suggesting crime decreases), so the fact that for the seventh crime -- murder -- both models

suggested RTC laws reduced crime might well be a spurious result. But the NRC majority could

have given many more reasons to be cautious about relying on the two Lott and Mustard

regressions.

         Specifically, the NRC response to Wilson could easily have noted that Wilson had

previously written that incarceration was perhaps the most important factor explaining the drop

in crime in the United States in the 1990s, and he had also written on the importance of police

(Wilson, 2008). Yet the Lott and Mustard model that the NRC presented (and that Wilson relied

on) did not control for either of these factors.60 Thus, on these grounds alone, one would have

thought Wilson would have been particularly wary not to rely on a regression which was

potentially subject to a charge of omitted variable bias. Neither the NRC majority nor Wilson

ever noted this omission.

         Moreover, we note in this paper some of the data problems with the Lott data set that the

NRC panel used and then address an array of issues about data and model specification that

Wilson ideally should have explored before he uncritically accepted the ostensible finding of a

RTC impact on murder. These issues included the danger of omitted variable bias concerning

the crack epidemic, the choice of county over state-level data, the inclusion of state-specific

linear trends, and the over-use of highly collinear demographic variables, all of which have

enough impact on the panel data estimates to influence one's perception of the "More Guns, Less

Crime" theory and thus warrant closer examination than they received from Wilson.

60 The Lott and Mustard model omitted a control for the incarceration and police rates (which is indicated implicitly
—though not explicitly highlighted — in the notes to each table of the NRC report, which listed the controls
included in each specification).

                                                                                                                  77
       Perhaps Wilson was so wedded to his position that nothing could have persuaded him not

to write his ill-conceived dissent, but the NRC majority could have done more to buttress their

entirely correct assessment that “the scientific evidence does not support [Wilson's] position”

(pg. 275). As a result, Lott now claims that Wilson, one of the most eminent criminologists of

our time, supports his position (Lott, 2008). If one of the goals of the NRC report was to shield

the public and policymakers from claims based on inadequate empirical evidence, the Wilson

dissent represents a considerable failure.

       A number of important lessons emerge from this story for both producers and consumers

of econometric evaluations of law and policy. The first and most obvious is that a single

statistical study cannot resolve an important question. Instead, one must wait until a literature

has developed. But even then, the conclusion that emerges may be one of uncertainty as the

NRC report showed.

        A second lesson is how easy it is for mistakes to creep into these empirical studies. The

pure data errors that entered into the NRC data set when Lott transmitted an imperfect data set or

the error in the 1993 Uniform Crime Reports data (or the errors that entered into our own work in

Aneja et al (2011), which are described in greater detail in Footnote 18) were not major enough

to have an impact, but at times the errors will be decisive (and the process of peer review is not

well-equipped to detect such errors). This episode underscores the value of making publicly

available data and replication files that can reproduce published econometric results. This

exercise can both help to uncover errors prior to publication and then assist researchers in the

process of replication, thereby aiding the process of ensuring accurate econometric estimates that

later inform policy debates.

       A third lesson is that the "best practices" in econometrics are evolving. Researchers and



                                                                                                    78
policymakers should keep an open mind about controversial policy topics in light of new and

better empirical evidence or methodologies. Prior to the important work of Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan (2004) on difference-in-differences estimation, few researchers understood that

clustering standard errors on the state-level in order to account for serial correlation in panel data

was necessary. The results in many pre-2004 published papers would be wiped out with this

single adjustment. Despite its impressive array of talent, the NRC report in 2004 got this

important issue wrong, even though most applied econometricians today would make this cluster

adjustment to avoid greatly increasing the level of Type I error.

       While the NRC majority decision of uncertainty was clearly influenced by the sensitivity

of the estimates to various modeling choices, the separate statement by Horowitz was even more

categorical in its nihilism, essentially rejecting all applied econometric work on RTC legislation,

as indicated by his independent statement in an appendix to the NRC’s (2004) report:

       “It is unlikely that there can be an empirically based resolution of the question of whether
       Lott has reached the correct conclusions about the effects of right-to-carry laws on
       crime.” (p. 304, NRC Report.)

Of course, if there can be no empirically based resolution of this question, it means that short of

doing an experiment in which laws are randomly assigned to states, there will be no way to

assess the impact of these laws. But there is nothing particularly special about the RTC issue, as

the recent National Research Council report on the deterrence of the death penalty shows

(essentially adopting the Horowitz position on the question of whether the death penalty deters

murders). The econometrics community needs to think deeply about what these NRC reports and

the Horowitz appendix imply more broadly for the study of legislation using panel data

econometrics and observational data.

       Finally, despite our belief that the NRC’s analysis was imperfect in certain ways, we

agree with the committee’s cautious final judgment on the effects of RTC laws: “with the current

                                                                                                      79
evidence it is not possible to determine that there is a causal link between the passage of right-to-

carry laws and crime rates.” Our results here further underscore the sensitivity of guns-crime

estimates to modeling decisions.61 But not being able to “determine” with the level of certainty

one strives for in academic work does not mean that one cannot offer conclusions at some lower

level of certainty such as “more probable than not.” Since policymakers need to act, it is more

useful to offer guidance as to which evidence is likely to be most reliable than to simply reject all

evidence until the highest level of certainty has been attained.

        Clearly, we now have more believable panel data models of the type used in the NRC

report estimated on more complete state and county data, coupled with the additional evidence

presented in this article examining gun assaults (Table 15) and estimating year by year effects on

crime (Figures 10-13). Can a consistent story be distilled from this evidence?

        We would consider our preferred regression models run on either the most complete data

(state data from 1979-2010) or the data likely to be free of the confounding effect of the crack

cocaine epidemic (state data from 1999-2010) as likely to yield more reliable estimates of the

effect of RTC laws on crime than the Lott-Mustard specification. If we estimate both the

dummy and spline models using our preferred specification without state trends for each of these

two time periods (overall or after 1999), then we have 4 estimates of the impact of RTC laws for

each of seven crime categories (Tables 8a and 11a). In each of the seven crime categories, at

least one of these four estimates suggests that RTC laws increase crime at the .10 level of

significance, with murder, rape, and larceny estimates reaching significance at the .05 level.

These crime increases are substantial, with the dummy variable model for the complete period

(Table 8a) suggesting that RTC laws increased every crime category by at least 8 percent, except


61For a quick and clear sense of how sensitive estimates of the impact of right-to-carry laws are, see Appendix E,
where we visually demonstrate the range of point estimates we obtain throughout our analysis.

                                                                                                                 80
murder (in that model, murder rose 3 percent but it is not statistically significant). For the post-

1999 regressions, spline estimate (Table 11a) suggests that RTC laws increased the rate of

murder by 1.5 percentage points each year (significant at the .05 level). In none of those 28

regressions was there any statistically significant estimate suggesting that RTC laws decreased

crime.

         Thus, the evidence that RTC laws increase crime is strongest if one accepts the dummy

variable model with our preferred specification on state data (the Table 8a and 11a results) and

accepts the Wolfers (2006) critique that one should avoid controlling for state trends.62 But even

here questions remain. First, one might argue that the fact that estimates suggest that RTC laws

increase property crime is an indication that these models are not giving credible causal estimates

since this link is not based on a strong theoretical foundation.63 Second, for all but aggravated

assault, the state year by year estimates of Figures 10-13 raise endogeneity concerns that may

undermine the state panel data results.

         But the fact that Figure 12 shows a more ideal pattern of no pre-RTC adoption effects

followed by sharp rises in aggravated assault and that the data on gun aggravated assaults also



62
   If one were to reject the Wolfers proposition and conclude that one must control for state trends in estimating the
impact of RTC laws, the story becomes even more complicated. Exhibit E shows (using the .10 level or better for
significance) that there are two estimates with state trends suggestive of crime decreases in rape, six suggestive of
crime increases in aggravated assault and one suggesting a decrease in this crime, four suggestive of decreases in
auto theft and one suggesting an increase in this crime, and one suggestive of decreases in larceny.
63
   It is not clear why the property crimes of burglary, auto theft, and larceny would rise as a result of RTC passage.
Three possible explanations for this finding come to mind. First, the results are correctly capturing the impact of
RTC laws and perhaps the indirect effect of increasing the weapons available to criminals (through loss or theft)
facilitates all criminal activity (perhaps by emboldening newly armed criminals) or the increase in violent crime
diverts police resources so that property crime is stimulated. Second, it is possible that states adopting RTC laws
were less successful in fighting crime than non-adopting states, so the RTC law was not itself increasing crime but
was simply a proxy for states that on the whole adopted less successful crime-fighting strategies over the last quarter
century. Third, it is possible that states chose to adopt RTC laws at a time when crime was on the rise, so their post-
passage crime experience reflects an adverse crime shock that is incorrectly causally attributed to RTC laws. If this
endogenous timing argument is correct, then it might suggest that post-1999 estimates of Table 11a are preferable,
since that has been a period of greater crime stability (as opposed to the dramatic crime swings of the late 1980s and
1990s). The Table 11a estimates show that RTC laws only affected one crime category – with the laws causing a
substantial increase in murder.

                                                                                                                    81
provides evidence that RTC laws increase these crimes may provide the strongest conclusion of a

causal impact of RTC laws on crime. The evidence that RTC laws increase aggravated assault is

not overwhelming but it does find support in different models and different time periods using

both state and county data sets in different panel data regressions both for all assaults and gun

assaults (Table 15), and in models estimating year-by-year effects. As Tables E5 and E6 reveal,

eleven of the 28 estimates of the impact of RTC laws on aggravated assault meet at least the

minimal standard of significance at the .10 level and show evidence of crime increases (against

only one model showing a significant decline – the Lott/Mustard county data model with year

fixed effects). Moreover, the omitted variable bias test suggests that if anything our 8 percent

estimate of the increase in aggravated assault from RTC laws (at the .10 level, see Table 8a) is

likely to understate the true increases in aggravated assault caused by RTC law.64

        Further research will hopefully further refine our conclusions as more data and better

methodologies are employed to estimate the impact of RTC laws on crime.




64 Note that the assaults can be committed either by RTC permit holders or those who have acquired their guns --
either via theft or appropriation of lost guns.

                                                                                                                   82
                                          References

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed

       and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of

       Political Economy 113(1): 151-184.

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics.

       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Autor, David, John J. Donohue, and Stewart Schwab. 2006. "The Costs of Wrongful-

       Discharge Laws." Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2): 211-231.

Ayres, Ian and John J. Donohue. 2003a. “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime

       Hypothesis.” Stanford Law Review, 55(4): 1193-1312.

Ayres, Ian and John J. Donohue. 2003b. “The Latest Misfires in Support of the More Guns,

       Less Crime Hypothesis.” Stanford Law Review, 55(4): 1371-1398.

Ayres, Ian and John J. Donohue. 2009. “More Guns Less Crime Fails Again: The Latest

       Evidence from 1977-2006.” Econ Journal Watch, 6(2): 218-238.

       http://www.aier.org/aier/publications/ejw_com_may09_ayresdonohue.pdf

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should

       We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

       119(1): 249-275.

Black, Dan A., and Daniel S. Nagin. 1998. ‘‘Do Right-to-Carry Laws Deter Violent Crime?’’

       Journal of Legal Studies, 27: 209-219.

Cramer, Clayton E., and David B. Kopel. 1995. “‘Shall Issue’: The New Wave of Concealed

       Handgun Permit Laws.” Tennessee Law Review, 62 (3): 679-757.

Collins, Gail. 2009. “Have Gun, Will Travel.” The New York Times. 31 July 2009.



                                                                                           83
Donohue, John J. 2003. “The Impact of Concealed-carry Laws.” Evaluating Gun Policy. J.

       Ludwig & P. J. Cook (Eds.). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 287–324.

Donohue, John J. 2004. “Guns, Crime, and the Impact of State Right-to-Carry Laws.” Fordham

       Law Review, 73: 623-652.

Donohue, John J. and Justin Wolfers. 2009. “Estimating the Impact of the Death Penalty on

       Murder.” American Law and Economics Review, 11 (2): 249-309

Elder, Todd and Christopher Jepsen. 2013. “Are Catholic Primary Schools More Effective

       Than Public Primary Schools?” Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.

Fryer, Roland, Paul Heaton, Steven Levitt, and Kevin Murphy. 2005. “Measuring the Impact

       of Crack Cocaine.” NBER Working Paper Series No. W11318. National Bureau of

       Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Horowitz, Joel L. "Should the DEA's STRIDE Data Be Used for Economic Analyses of

       Markets for Illegal Drugs?" Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96(465):

       1254-1271.

Kovandzic, T. V., Vieraitis, L. M. and Boots, D. P. (2009), Does the death penalty save lives?

       Criminology & Public Policy, 8: 803–843.

Levitt, Steven D. 2004. “Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990’s: Four Factors that

       Explain the Decline and Six that Do Not,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17: 163-

       190.

Lott, John R. 2000. More Guns, Less Crime. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lott, John R. 2004. “Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime Revisited: Clustering,

       Measurement Error, and State-by-State Breakdowns.” http://ssrn.com/abstract=523002

       or doi:10.2139/ssrn.523002.



                                                                                               84
Lott, John R. 2008. "Do Guns Reduce Crime?" Intelligence Squared Debate Series.

       http://intelligencesquaredus.org/wp-content/uploads/Guns-Reduce-Crime-102808.pdf

Lott, John R. and David Mustard. 1997. “Crime, Deterrence and Right-to-Carry Concealed

       Handguns.” Journal of Legal Studies, 26(1): 1-68.

Ludwig, J. 1998. “Concealed Gun-carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from State Panel

       Data.” International Review of Law and Economics, 18: 239-254.

Maltz, Michael D. 2006. Analysis of Missingness in UCR Crime Data. NCJ 215343

       Washington: U.S. Department of Justice.

Maltz, Michael D., and J. Targonski. 2002. “A note on the use of county-level crime data.”

       Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 18(3): 297-318.

Maltz, Michael D., & J. Targonski. 2003. “Measurement and other errors in county-level UCR

       data: A reply to Lott and Whitley.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 19: 199-206.

Moody, Carlisle E. and Thomas B. Marvell. 2008. “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws.” Econ

       Journal Watch, 5(3): 269-293. http://www.aier.org/ejw/archive/doc_view/3610-ejw-

       200809?tmpl=component&format=raw.

Moody, Carlisle E. John R Lott, Jr., Thomas B. Marvell, and Paul R. Zimmerman. 2012.

       "Trust but Verify: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy."

Moulton, Brent. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate

       Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72: 334-338.

Nagin, Daniel S. and John V. Pepper, editors, 2012. Deterrence and the Death Penalty.

       Washington: The National Academies Press.

National Research Council. 2004. Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review. Washington: The

       National Academies Press.



                                                                                               85
Plassman, Florenz and John Whitley. 2003. “Confirming More Guns, Less Crime.” Stanford

       Law Review, 2003: 1313-1369.

Studenmund, AH. 1997. Using Econometrics: A Practical Guide. Reading, MA: Addison-

       Wesley.

Wilson, James Q. 2000. “Guns and Bush.” Slate Politics. http://slate.msn.com/?id=91132.

       (accessed on November 29 2009).

Wilson, James Q. 2008. “What Do We Get From Prison?” The Volokh Conspiracy.

       http://volokh.com/posts/chain_1213046814.shtml. (accessed on 20 November 2009).

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2003. “Cluster-sample Methods in Applied Econometrics” American

       Economic Review, 93: 133-138.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2006. “Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics: An

       Extended Analysis.” Unpublished manuscript. Michigan State University.

Wolfers, Justin. 2006. "Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation

       and New Results." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1802-1820.

Zimring, Franklin and Gordon Hawkins. 1997. “Concealed handguns: The counterfeit

       deterrent.” The Responsive Community, 7:46-60.




                                                                                            86
    Appendix A: Using Placebo Laws to Test the Impact of Clustering in the State Data



       Table 3 reports the results of our placebo tests using county data. In this appendix, we

use state-level data to again conduct our experiment with placebo laws to examine the effects of

clustering the standard errors. As seen in Tables 1-4 of Appendix A, we find results similar to

those generated with our county data: without clustering, the Type 1 error rates are often an

order of magnitude too high or worse for our murder and robbery regressions (see Tables A1 and

A3). In fact, even with clustered standard errors (Tables A2 and A4), the rejection of the null

hypothesis (that RTC laws have no significant impact on crime) occurs at a relatively high rate.

This finding suggests that, at the very least, we should include clustered standard errors to avoid

unreasonably high numbers of significant estimates.




                                                                                                  87
                                                    Appendix A65
Table A1
Percentage of Significant Estimates (5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1979-2010 – Hybrid Model
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data

                                                    Dummy              Trend
  All figures reported in %
                                                    Variable          Variable
                                   Murder             47.6              63.9
    1. All 50 States + DC:
                                   Robbery            46.5              63.7

                                   Murder             46.9              61.6
        2. Exact 34 States:
                                   Robbery            51.5              64.4

                                   Murder             52.4              68.0
    3. Random 34 States:
                                   Robbery            53.0              67.1


         4. All 17 States:         Murder             36.4              58.5
                                   Robbery            45.4              72.5


    5. Random 11 States:           Murder             35.4              64.4
                                   Robbery            43.4              73.0



Table A2
Percentage of Significant Estimates (5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1979-2010 – Hybrid Model and Clustered Standard
Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data

                                                    Dummy              Trend
  All figures reported in %
                                                    Variable          Variable
                                   Murder             16.1              28.5
    1. All 50 States + DC:
                                   Robbery            13.4              18.3

                                   Murder             15.8              23.0
        2. Exact 34 States:
                                   Robbery            14.6              15.3

                                   Murder             21.5              35.1
    3. Random 34 States            Robbery            17.1              25.8

                                   Murder             23.9              45.5
         4. All 17 States          Robbery            24.2              53.0

                                   Murder             23.7              48.7
    5. Random 11 States:
                                   Robbery            23.0              53.7




   65
      Simulation based on NRC with-controls model, includes year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and weighting by
   state population. The control variables (adopted from the Lott-Mustard model) include: lagged arrest rate, state
   population, population density, per capita income measures, and 36 demographic composition measures indicating
   the percentage of the population belonging to a race-age-gender group.

                                                                                                                          88
                                              Appendix A (Cont.)
Table A3
Percentage of Significant Estimates (5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1979-2010 – Dummy Model
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data

                                                   Dummy
  All figures reported in %
                                                   Variable
                                  Murder             47.1
   1. All 50 States + DC:
                                  Robbery            46.9

                                  Murder             46.3
     2. Exact 34 States:
                                  Robbery            50.6

                                  Murder             61.6
    3. Random 34 States:
                                  Robbery            56.8


      4. All 17 States:           Murder             35.9
                                  Robbery            45.4


    5. Random 11 States:          Murder             37.5
                                  Robbery            49.8



Table A4
Percentage of Significant Estimates (5% Level) – Lott-Mustard Controls, 1979-2010 – Dummy Model and Clustered Standard
Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data

                                                   Dummy
  All figures reported in %
                                                   Variable
                                  Murder             16.3
   1. All 50 States + DC:
                                  Robbery            13.2

                                  Murder             13.7
     2. Exact 34 States:
                                  Robbery            13.1

                                  Murder             29.6
    3. Random 34 States           Robbery            21.4

                                  Murder             22.2
       4. All 17 States           Robbery            24.4

                                  Murder             25.2
    5. Random 11 States:
                                  Robbery            28.0




                                                                                                                         89
          Appendix B – Panel Data Models over the Full Period with No Covariates
        The NRC panel sought to underscore the importance of finding the correct set of

covariates by presenting county panel data estimates (on data through 2000) of the impact of

RTC without covariates but including county and year fixed effects. For completeness, this

Appendix presents these same no controls estimates for models (with and without state trends)

estimated on both county and state data for the periods from 1977-2006 and 1977-2010

(respectively).

        If one compares the results from these four tables with no controls with the analogous

tables using the preferred model for the same time period, one sees some interesting patterns.

For example, if we compare the county results without state trends from both our preferred

specification (Table 6a) and the no-controls specification (Table B1), we see that both sets of

results are always positive (suggesting crime increases) but rarely statistically significant when

covariates are added (although quite frequently for the no-controls model). The basic story in

these two different county data regressions seems to be that there is no evidence of an effect of

RTC laws on murder, while if there is any RTC effect on other crimes generally, it is a crime-

increasing effect. When we compare those from the county models that include state trends

(Tables 6b and B2), some negative point estimates emerge, although there is no sign of any

statistically significant results at even the .10 level in either Table.

        When we shift to a comparison of the state-level results, we again see similarities

between the preferred and no-controls specifications. When looking at the results without state

trends (Tables 8a and B3), we see that the estimates are fairly similar in terms of direction,

although the no-controls estimates are often larger in magnitude and more statistically significant

(with Table B3 showing statistically significant increases at the .05 level in all crime categories

other than murder and rape). When doing a similar comparison of the specifications that now

                                                                                                  90
add in state trends (Tables 8b and B4), we also see similar results. In both tables, the only

statistically significant effect on violent crime at the .05 level is that RTC laws increase

aggravated assaults.




                                                                                                91
                                                  Appendix B66
Table B1
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – No Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                    Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft        Burglary   Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:      0.53        35.43        28.59          28.64*       36.66         39.79*     41.22
                                  (8.91)      (23.88)      (19.84)        (15.18)      (22.40)       (22.93)    (26.50)

                 Spline Model:     0.35       3.25*         2.96*          2.75**       3.30*         3.68*     4.08*
                                  (0.73)      (1.92)        (1.61)         (1.32)       (1.96)        (1.95)    (2.23)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -2.02        24.26         16.86         18.64        25.58         27.02      25.84
                                  (9.13)      (20.04)       (18.53)       (13.86)      (19.05)       (20.58)    (23.32)

                 Trend Effect:     0.45        1.99          2.08           1.78         1.97          2.27      2.73
                                  (0.71)      (1.24)        (1.29)         (1.07)       (1.47)        (1.54)    (1.70)


Table B2
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – No Controls, 1977-2006 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 County Data (without 1993 data)


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                    Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft        Burglary   Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:     -1.93       -13.42         3.00           4.37         5.28         -0.25      -0.04
                                  (6.33)      (12.08)      (11.00)         (8.89)      (10.58)       (12.16)    (13.23)

                 Spline Model:     0.04       -5.77          2.50           0.29         0.51          -0.43    -0.39
                                  (1.26)      (4.40)        (2.36)         (2.41)       (2.59)        (2.44)    (2.59)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -1.98        -9.90          1.43          4.24         5.03          0.03       0.21
                                  (6.45)      (11.32)       (11.62)        (9.40)      (11.19)       (12.99)    (14.14)

                 Trend Effect:     0.09       -5.55          2.47           0.19         0.40          -0.43    -0.40
                                  (1.28)      (4.40)        (2.46)         (2.49)       (2.69)        (2.59)    (2.76)




   66
     Estimations include year and county fixed effects, and are weighted by county population. Robust standard errors
   are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at
   1%.

                                                                                                                          92
                                              Appendix B (Cont.)
Table B3
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – No Controls, 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                    Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft        Burglary   Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:        1.07       13.83        13.38**        21.63**      26.88**       23.32***   17.63***
                                  (8.23)      (8.98)        (5.51)         (8.99)      (12.81)        (8.00)     (5.73)

                 Spline Model:     0.37        1.10         1.33**         1.86**        1.79         1.70**     1.32**
                                  (0.72)      (0.84)        (0.61)         (0.85)       (1.16)        (0.73)     (0.52)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -1.62        9.48          6.96          13.62*      21.32**       17.27**    12.75**
                                  (6.86)      (6.26)        (4.36)         (7.59)       (9.10)        (6.52)     (4.98)

                 Trend Effect:     0.44        0.70         1.04*           1.29         0.90          0.98       0.79
                                  (0.66)      (0.70)        (0.61)         (0.80)       (0.93)        (0.63)     (0.47)


Table B4
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – No Controls, 1977-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


   All figures reported in %                              Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft        Burglary   Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:       -0.83       -4.56*         0.57           4.45         9.59          3.10       1.98
                                  (4.57)      (2.67)        (3.64)         (4.59)       (5.92)        (3.60)     (2.50)

                 Spline Model:     1.09       -0.53         2.03**          0.13         -0.27        -0.41     -1.03**
                                  (0.73)      (0.88)        (0.86)         (1.03)       (1.12)        (0.62)     (0.48)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -1.36        -4.34         -0.40          4.42         9.78          3.32       2.48
                                  (4.43)      (2.70)         (3.39)        (4.76)       (5.94)        (3.76)     (2.54)

                 Trend Effect:     1.10       -0.47         2.04**          0.07        -0.41         -0.46     -1.07**
                                  (0.73)      (0.88)        (0.86)         (1.05)       (1.13)        (0.65)     (0.51)




             Note: In earlier tables, our data period begins in 1979 for models that include the

   poverty rate as a control since that is when that information becomes available.




                                                                                                                          93
             Appendix C – Trimming the Sample to Address Questions of Model Fit


         Given our concerns about how well the guns-crime econometric models fit all 50 US

states (plus D.C.), we decided to examine the residuals from various regressions models. For

example, one potentially important issue is whether one should include linear state trends in our

models. To further explore this issue, we examined the variance of the residuals for the

aggravated assault regression estimates using our preferred models on state data for the period

through 2010—both with and without state trends.67 In particular, we found that the residual

variance was high for smaller states, even when we do not weight our regressions by

population.68

         We explored how these “high residual-variance” states (defined from the aggravated

assault regressions on our preferred model through 2010) might be influencing the results. We

estimated our preferred model (both with and without state trends) after removing the 10 percent

of states with the highest residual variance. This step is also repeated after removing the highest

20 percent of states in terms of residual variance. Our results for our preferred specification

(which includes clustered standard errors and is run over the 1979-2010 time period) are shown

in Table 8a and 8b (without and with state trends, respectively). The results from our two

trimmed set of states are presented below. Tables C1 and C2 should be compared to Table 8a (no

state trends), and Tables C3 and C4 should be compared to Table 8b (adding in state trends).

         Removing high residual-variance states (based on the aggravated assault regressions)


67 Since evidence that RTC laws increased aggravated assault appeared in a number of different models and with
different data sets, we focused specifically on the residuals obtained using assault rate as the dependent variable.
68 We removed the population weight for this exercise because it is likely that when regressions are weighted by
population, the regression model will naturally make high-population states fit the data better. As a result, we
expect that residuals for smaller states will be higher. We find, however, that the results are qualitatively similar
even when we obtain the residuals from regressions that include the population-weighting scheme (although the
patterns of statistical significance sometimes change significantly when dropping the highest variance 20% of states
from the sample).

                                                                                                                  94
does not alter the story told in Table 8a (no state trends) that there is no hint that RTC laws

reduce crime and this message comes through again in Tables C1 and C2. Indeed, removing the

high variance states has increased the statistical significance of the finding that RTC laws

increase aggravated assault from the .10 level in Table 8a to the .05 level in both Tables C1 and

C2. Removing the high residual-variance states from the models with state trends again reveals

the same Table 8b estimates of a statistically significant increase in aggravated assault at the .05

level (Table C3), but reduces this level of significance to the .10 level in Table C4.

        Of the states dropped from Tables C1 because of their high residual variance, all adopted

RTC laws during the 1977-2010 period (with date of adoption in parentheses): Montana (1991),

Maine (1985), West Virginia (1989), North Dakota (1985), and Tennessee (1996). Of the

additional states dropped from Table C2, the following two states adopted RTC laws during the

1977-2010 period (with date of adoption in parentheses): Nebraska (2007) and Oregon (1990).

Results from Table C3 come from dropping Montana, North Dakota, New Hampshire, Nebraska,

and Vermont.69 Finally, in addition to the five RTC states that were dropped in Table C3, Table

C4 dropped the following five RTC states: West Virginia (1989), Nevada (1995), Kentucky

(1996), Indiana (1980), and South Dakota (1985).




69The dropped states are slightly different between Tables C1 and C3, as well as between Tables C2 and C4,
because the state ranks based on residual variances differed when the models were run with and without state trends.

                                                                                                                 95
                                                  Appendix C70
Table C1
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data
Dropping States with Highest Residual Variance (Top 10%: ND, MT, WV, TN, ME)
     All figures reported in %                           Aggravated                    Auto
                                   Murder      Rape       Assault        Robbery      Theft    Burglary     Larceny
       Dummy Variable Model:         3.54    11.70**      8.48**          14.12*     19.32**    12.40*      10.43**
                                    (6.66)    (5.74)       (3.93)         (8.13)      (9.15)    (6.26)       (4.76)

                  Spline Model:      0.61     0.65         1.03*           1.21        1.31      0.79        0.87*
                                    (0.65)   (0.64)        (0.59)         (0.84)      (0.80)    (0.61)       (0.50)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          0.95    10.35**        4.51          10.22      15.82**    10.44*       7.66*
                                    (5.60)    (4.96)       (3.39)         (7.13)      (7.83)    (5.40)       (4.06)

                   Trend Effect:     0.57     0.30          0.88           0.87        0.78      0.44         0.61
                                    (0.60)   (0.60)        (0.60)         (0.80)      (0.67)    (0.55)       (0.48)


Table C2
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data
Dropping States with Highest Residual Variance (Top 20%: ND, MT, WV, TN, ME, NE, NH, HI, OR, VT)
   All figures reported in %                             Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder         Rape      Assault       Robbery        Theft  Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:        3.93       12.52**     10.21**        15.19*       20.26**  13.11*       10.85**
                                  (7.01)       (5.91)      (3.92)        (8.48)        (9.54)  (6.56)        (4.97)

                  Spline Model:      0.80     0.78         1.30**         1.49*       1.43*      0.91        0.91*
                                    (0.65)   (0.65)        (0.58)         (0.83)      (0.83)    (0.62)       (0.53)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:          0.47    10.62**        5.23          10.06       16.33*    10.64*       8.01*
                                    (5.83)    (5.20)       (3.58)         (7.35)      (8.17)    (5.64)       (4.26)

                   Trend Effect:     0.78     0.43         1.13*           1.16        0.89      0.56         0.64
                                    (0.59)   (0.60)        (0.59)         (0.78)      (0.70)    (0.55)       (0.50)




70
  Estimations include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are
provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification include:
incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate, poverty
rate, population density, per capita income measures, and six demographic composition measures. * Significant at
10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                  96
                                             Appendix C (Cont.)
Table C3
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data
Dropping States with Highest Residual Variance (Top 10%: MT, ND, NH, NE, VT)
   All figures reported in %                             Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder        Rape       Assault         Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:       -0.13       -3.20        -0.33            1.86       9.64**       1.12          1.11
                                  (4.02)      (2.34)       (3.62)          (3.21)      (4.52)      (2.24)        (1.88)

                 Spline Model:     0.86       -0.23         1.71**          -0.26      -1.41*        -0.10      -0.57
                                  (0.76)      (0.65)        (0.79)         (0.83)      (0.76)       (0.65)      (0.53)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -0.78       -3.10         -1.63           2.10       10.95**       1.23        1.57
                                  (3.93)      (2.38)        (3.51)         (3.40)       (4.43)      (2.37)      (2.06)

                 Trend Effect:     0.89       -0.13         1.76**          -0.33      -1.76**       -0.14      -0.62
                                  (0.74)      (0.65)        (0.79)         (0.86)       (0.73)      (0.67)      (0.56)


Table C4
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls, 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data
Dropping States with Highest Residual Variance (Top 20%: MT, ND, NH, NE, VT, WV, NV, KY, IN, SD)
   All figures reported in %                             Aggravated                     Auto
                                 Murder          Rape     Assault        Robbery       Theft      Burglary      Larceny
      Dummy Variable Model:        -0.30        -3.11       1.36           2.56       10.91**        0.89         1.24
                                  (4.26)        (2.47)     (3.44)         (3.25)       (4.38)       (2.36)       (1.97)

                 Spline Model:     0.94       -0.15         1.38*           -0.11       -1.39        -0.13      -0.55
                                  (0.83)      (0.71)        (0.78)         (0.89)       (0.84)      (0.73)      (0.57)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:       -0.98       -3.07          0.40           2.70      12.16***       1.01        1.67
                                  (4.16)      (2.51)        (3.38)         (3.49)      (4.30)       (2.50)      (2.18)

                 Trend Effect:     0.97       -0.06         1.37*           -0.20      -1.78**       -0.17      -0.60
                                  (0.81)      (0.71)        (0.79)         (0.94)       (0.80)      (0.76)      (0.61)




                                                                                                                     97
              Appendix D – Alternative Demographic Variable Specification


        A fairly standard set of demographics that can be seen in the crime literature includes

controls for a few age categories across all races combined with a single identifier of the

percentage of blacks in the state. Table D1 and D2 in Appendix D provide yet another

robustness check to the ADZ model by putting in four such demographic variables – the percent

of the population falling into the three age categories of 10-19, 20-29, and 30-39 plus the percent

black -- in place of the ADZ six demographic variables. The results are not dramatically

different from the main ADZ models of Tables 8a and 8b, and they essentially show only

evidence of RTC laws increasing crime. Table D1’s and Table 8a’s estimated violent crime

increases for rape, aggravated assault, and robbery are substantial in both sets of dummy variable

estimates and significant at the .10 level or better, only Table 8a has one of these estimates rise to

the level of significance at the .05 level (for rape).




                                                                                                   98
                                                   Appendix D
               71
Table D1
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with four demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                    Auto
                                    Murder     Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:         2.25    9.45*         8.15*          12.06*      15.06*     11.33**       11.06**
                                     (5.75)   (5.43)        (4.27)         (6.51)      (8.15)      (4.88)        (4.29)

                    Spline Model:     0.47     0.97          1.07           1.27         1.12        0.83        0.93*
                                     (0.63)   (0.64)        (0.64)         (0.76)       (0.76)      (0.58)       (0.49)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:           0.08     5.90          3.81           7.31        11.73      8.90**       8.02**
                                     (4.69)   (4.21)        (3.77)         (5.52)       (7.12)     (4.00)       (3.49)

                    Trend Effect:     0.47     0.77          0.94           1.03         0.72        0.52         0.66
                                     (0.60)   (0.60)        (0.66)         (0.75)       (0.70)      (0.55)       (0.47)



Table D2
Estimated Impact of RTC Laws – ADZ Preferred Controls (with four demographic variables), 1979-2010 – Clustered Standard
Errors and State Trends
Dataset: ADZ Updated 2013 State Data


     All figures reported in %                            Aggravated                    Auto
                                    Murder     Rape        Assault        Robbery       Theft     Burglary      Larceny
        Dummy Variable Model:         0.60    -2.86         -0.73           3.25       9.47**       1.74          1.52
                                     (3.99)   (2.57)        (3.97)         (3.17)      (4.34)      (2.13)        (1.72)

                    Spline Model:     0.59    -0.28         1.53*           -0.70       -1.06        -0.42       -0.71
                                     (0.70)   (0.63)        (0.78)         (0.94)       (0.79)      (0.61)       (0.48)

 Hybrid Post-Passage Dummy:           0.15    -2.71         -1.95           3.88       10.54**       2.11         2.12
                                     (3.89)   (2.63)        (3.90)         (3.41)       (4.23)      (2.29)       (1.86)

                    Trend Effect:     0.59    -0.19         1.59**          -0.82      -1.39*        -0.49       -0.78
                                     (0.68)   (0.64)        (0.78)         (0.97)      (0.75)       (0.63)       (0.52)




71
  These regressions include year and state fixed effects, and are weighted by state population. Robust standard
errors are provided beneath point estimates in parentheses. The control variables for this “preferred” specification
include: incarceration and police rates (lagged one year to avoid potential endogeneity issues), unemployment rate,
poverty rate, population density, per capita income measures, and four demographic variables (percent of the
population that is between 10 and 19, 20 and 29, and 30 and 39 as well as percent black in the state).
* Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%.

                                                                                                                      99
Appendix E – Summarizing Estimated Effects of RTC Laws Using Different Models, State
                   v. County Data, and Different Time Periods


       This appendix provides graphical depictions of 14 different estimates of the impact of

RTC laws for both the dummy and spline models for specific crimes using different data sets

(state and county), time periods (through 2000, 2006, or 2010), and models (Lott and Mustard

versus our preferred model and with and without state trends). For example, Figure E1 shows

estimates of the impact on murder using the dummy model, designed to capture the average

effect of RTC laws during the post-passage period. The first bar in each of the first six

groupings corresponds to county-level estimates; the second bar corresponds to state-level

estimates, for a total of 14 estimates per figure. Since our county model estimates are generally

run through 2006 and our state model estimates are run through 2010, we generally paired state

and county model results that were otherwise identical and which were run through 2010 and

2006 (respectively). Additionally, the last two estimates only contain one bar corresponding to

state models run between 1999 and 2010. The value of the figures is that they permit quick visual

observation of the size and statistical significance of an array of estimates. Note, for example,

that only one of the estimates of RTC laws on murder in either Figure E1 or Figure E2 is

significant at even the .10 threshold. This is the estimate for the 1999-2010 period on state data,

which shows a statistically significant increase in murder (at the .05 level) in the spline model.

This sharp contrast to the conclusion drawn by James Q. Wilson on the NRC panel is in part

driven by the fact that all of the estimates in this appendix come from regressions in which we

adjusted the standard errors by clustering.

       In contrast to the solitary statistically significant estimate for murder (suggesting an

increase), the estimates of the impact of RTC laws on aggravated assault in Figures E5 and E6


                                                                                                  100
are significant at at least the .10 level suggesting crime increases in 11 of the 28 estimates

depicted, as indicated by the shading of the columns.72 Note that the overall impression from

Figure E6 is suggestive that RTC laws increase aggravated assault, although the evidence is not

uniformly strong in the more preferred models. No other crime category has as strong evidence

of an impact of RTC laws as the findings on aggravated assault.




72
  No shading indicates insignificance, and the shading darkens as significance increases (from a light grey
indicating significance at the .10 level, slightly darker indicating significance at the .05 level, and black indicating
significance at the .01 level).

                                                                                                                      101
102
103
104
 Appendix F – Methodological Description of Using Selection on the Observables to Assess
                                    Selection Bias

           Altonji et al. (2005) provides a test for whether there is omitted variable bias in a

regression that attempts to quantify whether selection bias drives the OLS estimate. An

underlying assumption of this approach is that the observable controls are selected independently

from the larger set of possible controls. Elder and Jepsen (2013) provides a useful description of

the methodological features of the test, and footnote 6 of that paper states that potential bias can

be calculated with the given equation                      =            , where CS corresponds to our right-to-

carry dummy variable.73


             Drawing on this equation and equation (3) of the Elder and Jepsen paper, one can

generate an expression for the potential bias:                               . Here        is given by the formula

                        (that is,     is simply the residual from the regression of               on      ). Putting

this formula in terms of our RTC dummy variable gives the expression

Because the beta coefficient of the bivariate regression of the RTC dummy on the fitted values of

the regression of Yi (murder rate) on our full set of controls (less the RTC dummy variable)

amounts to                      , the only remaining variables needed are                   and

                   With this information one can calculate the “potential bias,” which then can be

compared to the beta coefficients we estimate in this paper.


           The ratio of this implied bias to the estimate of the beta coefficient represents how strong

selection on unobserved variables would have to be relative to selection on observed variables to


73
     In Elder and Jepsen’s (2013) paper, CS refers to the effect of Catholic schools on educational achievement.

                                                                                                                   105
attribute the entire estimated effect to selection bias. For the ADZ preferred specification (Table

8a), we find a beta coefficient of 0.0331, with a potential bias of -0.3549. This implied ratio is

negative, implying that selection on observables and unobservables would have to be of opposite

signs to be consistent with a true effect of zero. This finding implies that our slightly positive

coefficient is a lower bound of the true effect of RTC laws on murder.


       In contrast, the Altonji test applied to the NRC regression (Table 1b) finding of a

statistically significant beta coefficient on murder of -0.0833 indicates strong evidence of

omitted variable bias. The test reveals an estimate of potential bias of -1.0304, which implies

that the -0.0833 OLS estimate would be solely driven by selection bias if selection on

unobservables were only 8 percent as strong as selection on observables.


       Finally, owing to the frequency with which RTC laws are associated with statistically

significant increases in aggravated assault rates, we analyze the results of the Altonji test when

using the ADZ preferred specification (Table 8a) and aggravated assaults as the relevant

dependent variables. The coefficient associated with this model is .080334, with a potential bias

of -.07211. Thus, our results again suggest that selection on observables and unobservables

would have to be biased in opposite directions to eliminate our estimated effect of RTC laws on

aggravated assault. This strongly suggests that our finding that RTC laws increase aggravated

assaults is, if anything, biased toward zero.




                                                                                                 106
                   Appendix G – Summarizing Changes to Our RTC Dates


       In this appendix, we detail all of the changes that we have made to the years when RTC

laws took effect. As noted in Footnote 3 and Footnote 17, the most recent version of our analysis

includes a change in how the RTC dummy was defined. Whereas in earlier work, we modeled

RTC laws on the assumption that their impact would take effect only during the first full year

after they were passed, we now assume that they take effect immediately after they are actually

implemented.


Missouri: While the state’s right-to-carry law was originally intended to take effect in 2003 (the

date that we used in earlier versions of this paper), a legal challenge based on the state’s

constitution prevented the law from taking effect until February 26, 2004. For this reason, we

use the date that the law’s legal challenges were dismissed rather than the statutory date that the

law was originally intended to take effect as its effective date.


New Mexico & Oklahoma: This law passed in 2003 but took effect January 1st, 2004. For this

reason, while the initial year of the law switches from 2003 to 2004 in our most recent version of

the paper, New Mexico’s RTC dummy does not change after this revision. Similarly,

Oklahoma’s RTC law passed in 1995 (our passage year) but took effect January 1st, 1996 (our

new effective date).


South Dakota: Earlier versions of this paper inaccurately identified the state’s 1986 legislation

modifying its concealed carry laws as making the state “shall issue,” but a careful re-examination

of the details of this statute reveals that the state’s 1985 legislation is a more appropriate

candidate.



                                                                                                 107
Tennessee: While we earlier identified the state’s 1994 law as making the state’s concealed

carry permitting system “shall issue,” this law continued to allow sheriffs to deny permits “for

good cause and in the exercise of reasonable discretion” without precisely defining what “good

cause” entails. For this reason, we now use the state’s 1996 law (which took effect the same

year) as the basis for determining the effective date of the state’s RTC status.


Texas: Texas’s RTC law passed in 1995 and took effect that same year, but the state’s statute

specifies that permits (even those issued in 1995) are not supposed to have legal backing before

January 1st, 1996. For this reason, while our original passage year for RTC legislation was 1995,

our new effective date for this legislation is actually in 1996.


Virginia: Virginia’s RTC law has undergone so many changes that it is difficult to say which

one eliminated discretion in the issuance of permits. While our earlier analysis used the state’s

1988 revisions as the proper year for this transition, our decision to use this date was based on

the date used in Lott (2000), which was based on research by Cramer and Kopel (1995).

Surprisingly, the language that he identified as coming from the state’s 1988 law was actually

introduced in earlier legislation passed in 1986, so we accordingly changed our chosen effective

date from 1988 to the effective date of this 1986 law.




                                                                                                108
