NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEGISLATING STOCK PRICES
Lauren Cohen
Karl B. Diether
Christopher Malloy
Working Paper 18291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18291

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We would like to thank Yakov Amihud, Jonathan Berk, Simon Gervais, Roni Michaely, Daniel Paravisini,
Andrei Shleifer, Clemens Sialm, Pietro Veronesi, and seminar participants at Jane Street Capital, the
IDC Conference in Herzliya, and the Western Finance Association (WFA) meeting in Las Vegas for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lauren Cohen, Karl B. Diether, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Legislating Stock Prices
Lauren Cohen, Karl B. Diether, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 18291
August 2012
JEL No. G02,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
In this paper we demonstrate that legislation has a simple, yet previously undetected impact on firm
stock prices. While it is understood that the government and firms have an important relationship,
it remains difficult to determine which firms any given piece of legislation will affect, and how it will
affect them. By observing the actions of legislators whose constituents are the affected firms, we can
gather insights into the likely impact of government legislation on firms. Specifically, focusing attention
on “interested” legislators’ behavior captures important information seemingly ignored by the market.
A long-short portfolio based on these legislators’ views earns abnormal returns of over 90 basis points
per month following the passage of legislation. Further, the more complex the legislation, the more
difficulty the market has in assessing the impact of these bills. Consistent with the legislator incentive
mechanism, the more concentrated the legislator’s interest in the industry, the more informative are
her votes for future returns.

Lauren Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
Karl B. Diether
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
karl.b.diether@tuck.dartmouth.edu

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu

An important but understudied relationship that impacts firms is the one between
firms and the government.

Specifically, governments pass laws that affect firms’

competitive environment, products, labor force, and capital, both directly and indirectly.
While this relationship is well-understood, it is often difficult to determine which firms
any given piece of legislation will affect, and how it will affect them. However, we do
observe the behavior of agents with a direct interest in the firms affected by legislation.
By observing the actions of legislators whose constituents are the affected firms (its
employees, suppliers, other local stakeholders, etc.), we can gather insights into the likely
impact of government legislation on firms.

Specifically, focusing attention on the

legislators who have the largest vested interests in firms affected by a given piece of
legislation gives a powerful lens into the impact of that legislation on the firms in
question; a lens that the market does not appear to be gazing through.
It turns out that very rich data exists on the behavior of legislators. Legislator
voting behavior is public and detailed going back decades for both chambers of the U.S.
Congress (the Senate and House of Representatives).

Further, this data gives a fair

amount of power in that each firm (by definition) is headquartered in at least one
legislator’s constituency, but for each firm and industry being affected by a given bill
there will be a large group of "un-interested" legislators to compare against. There are
enough "un-interested" legislators that are alike in nearly every other dimension (partyaffiliation, ideology, voting on all other bills, etc.) that we can form very fine control
groups to tease out solely the part of legislators’ voting behaviors that is driven by their
direct interest in a given firm or industry.
If the market does not fully incorporate the information in legislator behavior to
infer each bill’s full effect on firms, then that leaves rich, important information for firms’
underlying values that is unincorporated into market prices.

The advantage of this

approach is that we can use the actions of legislators to predictably identify the
subsequent impact of each law on each firm.
An important issue will of course be how much of a bill’s impact on firm values is
already incorporated by the market into firms’ prices. To answer this question, we show
that there is almost no run-up in terms of firm returns in the 6- (or 12-) month period

Legislating Stock Prices — Page 3

prior to the bill’s passage.

Additionally, and interestingly, there are zero abnormal

returns in the month that the bill is actually passed. Only over the post-passage period
does the market sluggishly begin to realize the impact of the bill for firm values.
The measurement of which firms are materially impacted by a given bill is at the
crux of this paper.

As mentioned above, we measure this by using the simple but

powerful method of listening closely to only those legislators who have a vested interest in
the given bill.

We identify interests by the amount of economic activity in that

legislator’s state that is likely affected by the bill in question. Specifically, we look at
number of firms, number of employees, and aggregate size of firms, for each industry in
each state, and assign each legislator’s interests based on these measures. We focus on
industries rather than firms as only very rarely can a legislator put language into a bill
that solely affects an individual firm (empirically, we only see this a handful of times in
our 20 year sample of all legislation).

This may be for cosmetic reasons, or simply

because a legislator often has many firms from a given industry in her state, and so does
not want to appear to favor one, at the perceived detriment to others. This also may be
impacted by (or be the driver behind) most powerful lobbying groups (which we measure
and discuss later in the paper) forming at the industry level.
Given that our classification scheme of bills (described in Section II) assigns
affected industries to bills based on the text of the bill regarding each industry, we can
then see how these “interested” legislators vote versus uninterested legislators on each
respective bill. Given that these interested and uninterested legislator groups change for
each bill depending solely on industry, this forms finely specified treatment and control
groups that allow us to control for other voting determinants, and identify solely this
vested interest impact on each vote.
We then simply see whether interested legislators are more positive or more
negative for the bill (relative to the uninterested control group).

If the interested

legislators vote more in favor of a bill covering their vested industries than uninterested
legislators, we code this as a positive bill for the underlying industry. If they vote more
negatively for a bill that passes1 than uninterested legislators, we code this as a negative
1

We limit to bills that pass as these are the bills that have the potential to actively change the regulatory
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 4

bill for the industry.
Using this simple method, we show that a long-short portfolio of industry returns
in the month following the passage of a bill where we listen solely to vested interest
legislators (i.e., long the affected industries when interested senators are especially
positive about the bills passing, and short the affected industries when interested senators
are especially negative about the bills passing), yields returns of 76 basis points per
month. These returns are virtually unaffected by controls for known risk determinants.
For example, the four-factor alpha of this long-short portfolio yields abnormal returns of
92 basis points (t=3.01) per month, or over 11 percent per year.
As mentioned above, we see no run-up in returns before the bill passage, and no
abnormal return in the announcement month. Further, the large abnormal returns that
we document in month t+1 continue to accrue for a number of future months, suggesting
that this interested legislator behavior does contain important information for underlying
firm values. Collectively, these results are consistent with the market having difficulty in
deciphering the information contained in bills for future firm value. More strikingly, the
market does not seem to be taking into account the seemingly simple information in the
vested interest legislators voting on these exact bills following bill passage, when it is
completely in the public domain.
One alternative explanation is that any simple manner in which you code these
bills may lead to abnormal returns if the market is truly ignoring the legislation. There
may be nothing special, then, about isolating those legislators with the largest vested
interests, per se. To get a feel for this, we look at two other logical methods to see their
ability to pick up this same information for firm values. If you believe that legislators on
average bring positive bills to passage to help their constituent industries, then a simple
strategy of longing the industries when bills about them pass, and shorting industries
when bills about them fail, would yield abnormal returns.

A second, more nuanced

method, uses the text of the bill itself along with established dictionaries of positive and
negative words, to classify each bill as positive or negative for an industry. We construct
environment for the treated firms. We understand that bills that fail also likely contain information for
firms even if they keep the status-quo regulatory regime (if the market probabilistically weights the
likelihood of passage), and we show evidence on these, as well.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 5

both of these measures, and find that neither the more naïve strategy nor the textual
analysis strategy have any predictive ability over firm returns.2 Thus, it appears to be
something unique about exploiting the incentives and vested interests of legislators that
gives an especially informative measure of the impact of bills on firm values.
We also conduct a number of tests designed to isolate the mechanism driving our
main results. For example, if we truly are identifying important information in interested
legislators’ behaviors for future firm values, then if we could find even more concentrated
interests, these accompanying legislators should have even more informative behavior.
We approach this idea in several ways. The first is to measure concentrated interests by
looking at legislators whose largest state industry (e.g., oil) also makes up a large fraction
of their total state’s economic activity.

We find, consistent with more concentrated

interests being even more informative, that the long-short portfolio following these
especially concentrated vested legislators yields four-factor abnormal returns of 105 basis
points per month (t=2.37).
The second way we link these returns more directly to the interests of legislators is
by looking at how important the given bill is for each industry mentioned in the bill.
Although a number of industries may be mentioned in a given bill, a bill may largely
focus on a single industry and only peripherally touch on a number of others. If legislator
interest really is the driving force behind our return results, we should see the most
informative votes being those most directly impacted by the bill; thus, the industry that
dominates the bill’s text. When we focus on the voting of solely the interested legislators
who are impacted by the most dominant industry in the bill, the long-short portfolio
returns rise to 130 basis points per month (t=2.78), or 15.6% per year. To focus even
further on these most important mentioned industries, we also look solely at those firms
in the most important mentioned industry who are headquartered in interested
legislators’ states. The idea here is that legislators, while not able to mention specific
firms, still can have some latitude to focus industry-wide legislation in a way that most
benefits the firms in their states (e.g., loosening offshore drilling regulations, while
keeping oil fracking regulations constant). While this reduces the sample size quite a bit,
2

It is important to note that we again see no pre-vote run up, nor any announcement effects, using either
of these two measures to classify positive legislation and negative legislation for firms.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 6

the effect on the magnitude is large: the long-short portfolio has returns of 184 basis
points per month (t=1.89).
To explore the question of what allows the return predictability we document to
persist, we also examine the complexity of the bills in question. Specifically, we test the
idea that the market may have a harder time deciphering the likely impact of a
complicated bill as opposed to a simpler bill, and hence we should observe more return
predictability following the passage of complex bills. Using the number of times a bill is
voted on as a measure of bill complexity, we show that the spread portfolio on complex
bills earns large positive abnormal returns (ranging from 85 basis points in raw returns
(t=2.19) to 90 basis points (t=2.28) in four-factor alphas), while the set of non-complex
bills is associated with much smaller (and insignificant) return predictability, consistent
with the idea that the market has more difficulty processing the likely impact of
complicated pieces of legislation as opposed to more routine bills.
We also examine the impact of lobbying on our results. The motivation behind
this test is that when see industry lobbying organizations spending large amounts of
money, it presumably is to sway the opinion of legislators. If this works, and if lobbyists
spend even part of this money outside of states that already have a vested interest in the
law (which is not unreasonable, given that constituent interest may be a substitute for
this, and so the marginal lobbying may be better spent on a legislator who does not
already have a vested interest), then we would expect formerly “uninterested” legislators
to be treated by lobbyists, so in a sense to now become somewhat “interested.” This
reduces the distance between our “interested” and “uninterested” legislator measure (as
some of the previously uninterested legislators are now interested), and so reduces the
power and predictability of the measure. We find exactly this to be true: when industry
lobby groups have large amounts of spending in a given year, the predictability of our
measure of interested versus uninterested legislators by simply location of economic
activity drops by almost half.
As a final robustness check, we show that the effect we document has actually
gotten stronger over time: in the more recent period, the magnitudes of the return effects
are 15-20% larger.

Legislating Stock Prices — Page 7

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the setting
and related literature. Section II describes the data. Section III presents the main
portfolio and regression results. Section IV explores the mechanism in more detail.
Section V presents additional examining lobbying expenditures and our main results.
Section VI concludes.

I. Related Literature
Our paper adds to a vast literature that studies the impact of government policies
on firms.

While a large literature studies the impact of government actions (e.g.,

spending policies) on broader state-level outcomes (see, for example Clemens and Miran
(2010), Chodorow-Reich, et al. (2010), Wilson (2011), Fishback and Kachanovskaya
(2010), Serrato and Wingender (2011) and Shoag (2011)), our approach in this paper is
closest to a recent strand of the literature that explores firm-level outcomes.

These

papers examine the benefits that firms perceive (and receive) from currying favor and/or
making connections with politicians, such as higher valuations (Roberts (1990), Fisman
(2001), Jayachandran (2006), Faccio (2006), Faccio and Parsley (2006), Fisman et. al
(2007), Goldman et. al (2007)), corporate bailouts and government intervention (Faccio
et. al (2006), Duchin and Sosyura (2009), Tahoun and Van Lent (2010)), and lucrative
procurement contracts (Goldman et. al (2008)).3

Our focus in this paper is on all

Congressional legislation, not simply budget bills or spending polices, and our outcome
variable of interest is the stock returns of affected firms. In this sense, our paper is also
related to a recent literature examining the impact of government policy on asset prices
(Pastor and Veronesi (2012), Belo, Gala, and Li (2012)). Our approach in this paper is
unique in that we focus on politician-level voting behavior and bill-level legislation in
order to identify the impact of legislation on firms.
Finally, since our empirical strategy relies on the idea that firm-level constituent
interests affect Congressional voting, our paper is also related to a large literature
studying the factors that influence the behavior of elected officials.

3

Much of this

See also Cohen, Coval, and Malloy (2011) for evidence on the impact of state-level earmark spending on
firm-level outcomes such as investment and employment, and Julio and Yook (2012) who document that
corporate investment varies with the timing of national elections around the world.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 8

literature (see, for example, Stigler (1971) and Peltzman (1985)) argues that political
party and constituent interests are key determinants of politicians’ voting behavior.
Hibbing and Marsh (1991), Stratmann (2000), Pande (2003), Chattopadhyay and Duflo
(2004), and Washington (2007) also provide evidence that personal characteristics such as
service length, age, religion, race, gender, and the presence of a daughter in one’s family
can affect the behavior of elected officials.

Finally, a variety of papers stress the

importance of political ideology in explaining Congressional voting behavior (see Clinton,
Jackman, and Rivers (2004), Kau and Rubin (1979, 1993), Lee, Moretti, and Butler
(2004), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (1997), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2006), and
Poole and Rosenthal (1985), (1997), (2007)). Meanwhile, Levitt (1996), Ansolabehere et.
al (2001), Synder and Groseclose (2000), Kalt and Zupan (1990), and Mian et. al (2009)
provide a number of different perspectives on separating out the impact of ideology
versus party interests, constituent interests, and special interests. Since our interested
and uninterested legislator groups change for each bill depending solely on industry, this
forms finely specified treatment and control groups that allow us to control for other
voting determinants, and identify solely this vested interest impact on each vote.

II. Data and Summary Statistics
We combine a variety of novel data sources to create the sample we use in this
paper. Our primary source of data is the complete legislative record of all Senators and
all Representatives on all bills from the 101st through 110th Congresses. We collect this
from the Library of Congress’ Thomas database. Each "Congress" is two years long, and
is broken into two one-year-long "Sessions." Therefore, 10 Congresses represents twenty
years of Congressional data from 1989-2008. We collect the result of each roll call vote
for the twenty-year period in each chamber of the Congress, and record the individual
votes for every Congressman voting on the bill (or abstaining). We choose to start with
the raw bill data, rather than use alternate, publicly available versions of the
Congressional roll call data (see, for example, the Voteview website, as well as McCarty,
Poole and Rosenthal (1997), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2006), Poole and Rosenthal
(1985), (1997), (2007), among many others), or the Political Institutions and Public
Choice (PIPC) House Roll Call Database (Aldrich, Brady, de Marchi, McDonald, Nyhan,
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 9

Rohde, and Tofias (2008)), because we exploit the text of each piece of legislation as
described below.
A key aspect of our empirical strategy is that we utilize the content of the bills
being voted on. To do so, we download the full text of all bills being voted on over our
sample.

We collect the full-text data jointly from the websites of the Government

Printing Office (GPO), and from the Thomas database. As in Cohen and Malloy (2011),
we then parse and analyze the full bill text to classify each bill into its main purpose.
For our tests, we attempt to assign each bill to one (or more) of the 49 industry
classifications used in Fama and French (1997).4 To do this we first construct a set of
keywords for each industry.

We then create an executable (shown in Figure A1), in

which we input all bills and their corresponding full-text and assign bills to industries
based on the count of the number of times these keywords appear in a given bill. We
only assign a bill to an industry if the number of instances of a particular keyword
exceeds a certain threshold of frequency on a given bill relative to its overall frequency in
the entire population of bills.5 Individual bills can be assigned to more than one industry;
however, we use a conservative assignment procedure such that our procedure only
results in industry assignments of any kind for less than 20% of all bills, and specifically
only those bills where we can confidently gauge that an industry is likely to be affected
by the bill in question.

Figure A1 presents an example of a particular bill that was

assigned only to the Fama-French industry #30: Petroleum and Natural Gas, based on
the relative frequency of pre-specified keywords in the bill that pertain to this industry.
Figure A1 displays the summary text at the top of the bill, which indicates that the bill
clearly pertains to the oil and gas industry. The data Appendix provides more details on
our bill assignment procedure. We have compared our bill categorizations to those used
in other work (see, for example, Aldrich, Brady, de Marchi, McDonald, Nyhan, Rohde,
and Tofias (2008), among others), but prefer our approach because it achieves our
explicit goal of assigning each bill to the specific industries (and thus firms) that are
potentially affected, rather than to the specific policy issues under consideration.
4

The “Fama-French 49” industry definitions map specific 4-digit SIC (standard industry classification)
codes to 49 different industry categories, and are publicly available online from:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/.
5
We have experimented with various thresholds, and our results are not sensitive to the particular
threshold we employ. Please see the Appendix for more details on our bill classification procedure.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 10

Importantly, our empirical approach in this paper also requires us to “sign” the
impact of each bill, as positive or negative, for the given industry it affects. We do so by
exploiting the voting record of those Senators who are likely to identify it as a relevant
industry to their constituents. To identify the constituent interests of a given Senator,
we assign each firm domiciled in a Senator’s home state to one of the Fama-French 49
industries; “relevant” industries to a particular Senator on a particular bill are those
industries that: i.) are assigned to that bill using the procedure described above, and ii.)
have at least one firm headquartered in the Senator’s home state that belongs to the
given industry. We then rank all the industries in each Senator’s state by aggregating all
firms in each industry by size (sales and market cap), and define “important” industries
as those that rank in the top three for each state in terms of size. Next we sign each bill
by looking at the voting records of those Senators who have “important” industries that
are mentioned in the bill; we term these Senators as “interested” Senators, and term all
the remaining Senators as “uninterested” Senators. The rationale behind this procedure
is that a Senator’s vote on a particular bill that affects important firms in his state is
likely to suggest how that bill will affect those firms in his state; thus we can infer that a
yes vote by a Senator with a vested interest in a bill is likely to mean that the bill is
positive for the industry he cares about, and vice versa for a no vote.
Figure A2 displays the executable program we created to implement our signing
procedure for the same bill depicted in Figure A1. The summary text indicates that the
goal of this bill is "to provide energy price relief and hold oil companies and other entities
accountable for their actions with regard to high energy prices, and for other purposes,"
so the bill is likely to be perceived as negative for the oil and gas industry. And not
surprisingly, even though this vote lined up largely along party lines, none of the 6
Republican Senators who voted in favor of the bill were Senators who were "tied" to this
industry via constituent interests in their home state (all 8 industry-tied Republicans
voted against), and 1 of the 2 Democrats who voted against the bill was Mary Landrieu
of Louisiana, a state heavily represented by oil and gas interests (the other Democrat who
voted against was Henry Reid from Nevada, a consistent supporter of oil and gas
companies); the 6 industry-tied Democrats who voted in favor of the bill did so largely on
party and ideological grounds (variables that we control for in our tests, as described
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 11

below).
Specifically, we “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by
comparing the votes of “interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of “uninterested”
Senators on that bill.

Again, interested Senators on a given bill are those where an

industry affected by the bill is a “Top 3” industry in that Senator’s home state (where
industries are ranked within each state by total aggregate firm sales, or total market
capitalization). We then compute an Economic Interest signing measure as follows: we
compute the ratio of positive votes of all interested Senators by dividing their total
number of yes votes on a bill by their total number of votes, and compare this to the
ratio of positive votes of all uninterested Senators; if the ratio of positive votes by
interested Senators is greater than that for uninterested Senators, we call this a
“positive” bill for the industry in question, and if the ratio of positive votes for interested
Senators is less than that for uninterested Senators, we call this a “negative” bill for the
industry. Our results are very similar regardless of whether we use this ratio difference
(“R-R” in Figure A2) measure, or alternative signing measures such as the absolute ratio
("Ratio" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of industry-tied Senators who vote for the
bill), or the relative ratio ("R/R" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of industry-tied
Senators who vote for the bill divided by the percentage of all Senators who vote for the
bill). and the ratio difference ("R-R" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of industry-tied
Senators who vote for the bill minus the percentage of all Senators who vote for the bill);
our results are not sensitive to the particular signing measure we employ. We have also
tried within-party signing measures that are computed identically to those above, except
aggregated within each party (since many votes are along party lines) and again the
results are very similar.

The data Appendix contains more details on our signing

procedure.6
For some of our ancillary tests, we also hand-collect lobbying data from the
OpenSecrets.org website (sponsored by the Center for Responsible Politics). Finally, we
draw monthly firm-level stock returns, shares outstanding, and volume capitalization
from CRSP, and extract firm-specific accounting variables, such sales, research and

6

The data Appendix provides more details about the industry assignment keywords, procedure, cut-offs,
etc.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 12

development (R&D) expenditures, capital expenditures (CAPEX), and book equity, from
Compustat.
Table I presents summary statistics from our sample. As Table I shows, over 82
percent of bills in our sample pass. As a result, for a given bill, an average of 73 votes
are “Yea” votes.

For our Top 3 classification of “interested” Senators, the average

number of Yea votes is around 8. Finally, the mean industry-level value-weight return
over our sample period (199001-200812) is 78 basis points per month.

III. Results
A. Portfolio Returns on Naïve Classifications
Our primary tests examine the impact of legislation on the stock returns of
industries affected by a given bill. Since our bill assignment procedure is at the industrylevel (rather than at the firm-level, since individual firms are rarely mentioned in bills),
we compute the value-weighted returns to all 49 Fama-French industries, and use these
value-weight industry returns as our outcome variables.
We begin by examining the returns to a naïve strategy for signing the direction of
impact of legislation on the underlying affected industries. Specifically, in Panel A of
Table II we perform a calendar-time portfolio approach as follows: for each final Senate
vote on a bill, we examine the stock returns of affected firms following the passage or
failure of the bill. We form a “Long” portfolio that buys the firms in each industry that
we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) when the bill passes, and a
“Short” portfolio that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted
by market capitalization) when the bill fails. Affected stocks do not enter the portfolio
until the month following the passage of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly.
Panel A reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that
goes buys the “Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM
alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the
Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index (see Fama
and French (1996)). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the
intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on
the value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return on
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 13

the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a riskadjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short
portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size
(SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year
return momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)).
As Panel A shows, the returns to this naïve strategy for signing bills are
essentially zero. Also, there does not appear to be any price run-up in the period prior to
and including the month of passage/failure of a bill, as the long-short portfolio return in
the pre-vote period (using returns from months t-6 to t, where month t is the month of
passage/failure) is also negligible.

This suggests that on average there is no new

information in whether a bill passes or fails regarding how these bills will impact the
underlying firms.
Our next set of tests uses a slightly more nuanced approach for determining the
impact of legislation on firms. Specifically, in Panels B and C, we focus on the set of bills
that ultimately passed, and attempt to “sign” each bill using different forms of textual
analysis. In Panel B, we form a “Long” portfolio that buys the firms in each industry
that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) when the bill contains a
below-median number of negative words (defined using the Harvard psychosocial
dictionary (see Tetlock (2007)), and a “Short” portfolio that sells the firms in each
industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) when the bill
contains an above-median number of negative words.

Panel C conducts the identical

tests as in Panel B, except that negative words are defined using alternative definition
categories (see Loughran and McDonald (2011)).
Panels B and C show that in both the post-passage period (month t+1) and in the
pre-vote period (months t-6 to t, where month t is again the month of passage), there is
no impact on the returns of the underlying affected industries. Thus, trying to infer the
impact of legislation on firms by using textual analysis that seeks to measure the
“negativity” of a bill is unhelpful in trying to sign a bill’s likely impact. This is perhaps
not surprising given the way bills are typically written, in that they are legal documents
that are less likely to easily convey sentiment. Thus the findings in Table II help to
motivate our approach, since simple methods for inferring the likely impact of legislation
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 14

on firms reveal no systematic impact in terms of returns, both in the period leading up to
a bill’s passage, and in the period immediately after a bill’s passage.

B. Economic Interest Portfolio Returns
Table III presents our key result. Rather than using a naïve signing approach, or
a signing approach based on textual analysis, we simply use the votes of “interested”
Senators as a vehicle for determining the likely impact of a piece of legislation.
Specifically, as noted above, we “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by
comparing the votes of “interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of “uninterested”
Senators on that bill. Recall that interested Senators on a given bill are those where an
industry affected by the bill is a “Top 3” industry in that Senator’s home state (where
industries are ranked within each state by total aggregate firm sales). We then compute
an Economic Interest signing measure as follows: we compute the ratio of positive votes
of all interested Senators by dividing their total number of yes votes on a bill by their
total number of votes, and compare this to the ratio of positive votes of all uninterested
Senators; if the ratio of positive votes by interested Senators is greater than that for
uninterested Senators, we call this a “positive” bill for the industry in question, and if the
ratio of positive votes for interested Senators is less than that for uninterested Senators,
we call this a “negative” bill for the industry. We then form a “Long” portfolio that
buys the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market
capitalization) where the Economic Interest signing measure is positive, and a “Short”
portfolio that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market
capitalization) where the Economic Interest signing measure is negative. In Panel A of
Table III, affected stocks do not enter the portfolio until the month following the passage
of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly.
Panel A of Table III shows that the Long/Short portfolio based on this strategy
earns large abnormal returns. Using excess returns, CAPM alphas, 3-factor alphas, or 4factor alphas, the Long/Short portfolio consistently earns large abnormal returns, ranging
from 76 basis points per month (t=2.44) to 92 basis points per month (t=3.01). Most of
this spread comes on the short side, with the abnormal returns to the short portfolio
ranging from 71 to 83 basis points per month (t=2.40 and t=2.80, respectively),
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 15

suggesting that focusing on cases when interested Senators are disproportionately
negative with respect to a bill that ultimately passes is particularly profitable.

This

result suggests that simply by focusing on the votes of interested Senators, one can
determine the subsequent impact of legislation after its passage, and that the market does
not recognize this impact.7
Panels B and C of Table III then examine the returns to these industry portfolios
in the months leading up to and including the month of passage. Again there is little
evidence of run-up in the pre-period, and also virtually no effect in the month of passage,
suggesting that the market’s response to the information in legislation is indeed delayed.

C. Announcement Effects and Event-Time Returns
Table III examined the six months leading up to the bill, the month of passage,
and the month following the passage of the bill. From Table III, there did not appear to
be any significant run-up in pre-passage returns (i.e., probabilistic revelation of passage of
the bill). In Figure 1, we examine more closely the days leading up to (and following) the
passage of the bill, and extend the window to six months following bill passage. Figure 1
shows the event-time Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CARs) to the spread (Long-Short)
portfolio returns (equivalent to Column 3 of the panels in Table III). CARs are computed
for each side of the portfolio individually using market-adjusted returns, with the figure
showing the returns to the spread portfolio of these CARs.
First, from Figure 1 there seems to be little run-up in the days leading up to the
passage of the bill, as the average CAR from day -10 to 0 is only 4 basis points.
Importantly, following passage of the bill, the returns then significantly drift upward for
the next three months (60 days), then flatten, and remain flat thereafter.
Note that uncertainty leading up to the vote could impact this return pattern in
Figure 1. Thus, close votes may see less of a return run-up, but then have an amplified
initial return (passage-day return), as the uncertainty is resolved. However, the median
bill in our sample from Table III and Figure 1 passes with a wide margin: 85 yea
votes. Even the 25th percentile has 69 yea votes, suggesting we simply do not have that
7

We have also computed this Economic Interest signing measure within party (i.e., comparing an
interested Senator’s vote only to the other uninterested Senator’s within her party). The raw spread is
actually slightly larger using this measure, 88 basis points per month (t=3.26).
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 16

many bills that had much uncertainty of passage leading up to the vote. Even with these
non-close votes, we are finding that the average bill (which is not a close vote) appears to
have very little pre-passage run-up in return, and has returns that drift upward for a long
period of time following passage. Thus, the delayed updating to information shown in
Figure 1 appears to have little to do with the closeness of the vote, or the immediate
updating of a previously uncertain vote outcome. Instead, it is more consistent with the
market not fully understanding and taking into account the economic interests of the
legislators involved, their impact on voting behavior, and the resulting impact of
legislation on firms.

D. Short Side Returns
One of the interesting aspects of Panel A of Table III is that most of the return
predictability seems to be coming through the short side of the portfolio. That is to say,
the bills where interested senators seem to be especially negative relatively to
uninterested senators seem to result in the large, significantly negatively future returns
that comprise most of the long-short portfolio return. A trading-cost friction (i.e., shortsale constraint) argument for the pattern seems a bit less plausible here than in many
studies, as we are trading using simple value-weighted industry returns.8 We thus do a
number of things to examine these returns in more depth.
First, we simply examine all months of signals for the long and short portfolios.
The results in Table III report only those calendar months where both a long and short
signal exist. There can be months where solely a bill on which interested senators were
more positive passed (a long), or solely a bill on which interested senators were more
negative passed (a short).

When looking at all months, we do begin to see modest

predictability on the positive side. When using all of the months (161 and 175 for the
long and short sides, respectively), as opposed to the 155 where both exist, the Carhart
four-factor alpha is 34 basis points a month (t=1.76) on the long side, relative to the 14
basis points from Table III.

The short side alpha is 75 basis points (t=2.76), nearly

identical to that in Table III.
8

We value-weight across industry returns by total industry market capitalization in the portfolio
construction, which (although it does not necessarily need to be the case) ends up empirically placing an
even larger weight on larger capitalization stocks.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 17

To further explore this, though, we next examine the relative “positivity” or
“negativity” of interested senators on the bills in question. For Table III, we code bills as
good or bad for the industry (long or short) based simply if interested senators are more
positive or more negative than the rest of the senate. It turns out that senators are much
more negative on bad bills than they are positive on good bills, which may explain why
the negative bills predict much lower future returns for the associated industries. For
instance, on bills negative for the industry interested senators are on average 19.37%
more negative, while being only 12.00% more positive on good bills. The difference of
7.37 percentage points is highly significant (p<0.01). The difference exists throughout
the distribution with the 75th percentile of negativity being 27.35% (versus 17.02% for
positivity), and the 95th percentile being 61.96% more negative (but only 34.83% more
positive).

The difference in relative voting behavior on good versus bad bills for

industries suggests that a continuous measure of the difference in voting behavior
between interested and uninterested senators, as opposed to the discrete relative measure
from Table III, may better capture the impact of voting differences. This is precisely
what we implement in Section D below (Table IV).

E. Cross-Sectional Regressions
Next we employ monthly Fama and Macbeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions
each month of industry-level returns on industry-level characteristics, to further assess
the predictive power of our economic interest signing approach. Unlike with individual
stock returns, however, which exhibit well-known size (Banz (1981)), book-to-market
((Rosenburg. Reid, and Lanstein (1985), Fama and French (1992)), and momentum
(Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Carhart (1997)) effects, there is much less evidence of
return predictability in industry returns. There does appear to be industry momentum
(see Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1999)), and as such we control for industry-level
momentum (i.e., the industry return from months t-12 to t-2) in our regression tests. We
also include controls on the right-hand size for one-month past industry returns, and
measures of industry-level average size, book-to-market, investment (CAPEX), and
assets.
Table IV presents the results of these monthly cross-sectional predictive
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 18

regressions.

The dependent variable is the value-weighted future industry return (in

month t+1). The variable of interest in these regressions is Interested Vote, which is the
difference between the percentage of interested senators voting in favor of the passed bill
and uninterested senators voting in favor of the bill. So, Interested Vote is positive when
interested senators are more in favor of the bill, and negative when interested senators
are more negative on the bill.
Column 1 of Table IV shows that interested senators’ votes have significant
predictive ability for future industry returns, with the coefficient on Interested Vote being
0.025 (t=3.03). This indicates that the more positive interested senators are relative to
uninterested senators on the given bill, the higher the future returns are for affected
industries of the bill, consistent with the results in Table III. Controlling for industry
momentum, as well as industry-level measures of size, book-to-market, investment, and
assets, has little effect on this result. In the full specification in Column 5, Interested

Vote has a coefficient of 0.037 (t=2.30). This implies that a one standard deviation
higher Interested Vote (interested senators voting roughly 10% more in favor of the bill
than uninterested senators) implies a 37 basis point higher return for the industries
impacted by the bill. These findings reinforce the results from Table III with a continuous
measure, also demonstrating that our economic interest signing approach is not simply
picking up industry-level characteristics.
Lastly, up to this point we have focused on those bills which pass, as these are the
bills that have the potential to actively change the regulatory environment for the treated
firms. We understand that bills that fail could also contain information for firms even if
they keep the status-quo regulatory regime (if the market probabilistically weights the
likelihood of passage). However, as evidence against this probabilistic price revelation,
both Table III and Figure 1 indicate that there is no run-up in returns in the months (or
days) leading up to the passage of these bills. Nonetheless, we explicitly examine failed
bills using our economic interest signing, as well. First, there are only 20 percent as
many failed bills as there are bills that pass, likely reflecting the fact that bills expected
to fail are simply not brought up for vote. For these failed bills, we replicate the exact
specifications of Table IV, with our economic interest signing now measured as interested
senators’ negative voting relative to how negative non-interested senators vote on the
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 19

same bill (so the predicted sign on Interested Vote is again positive). In the analog to
the full specification of Column 5 in Table IV, the coefficient on Interested Vote is 0.023
(t=0.79). Thus, we find that while the direction of the coefficient is as predicted, the
magnitude is about two-thirds the size of that of votes passed, and not statistically
significant, as we might expect given the continuity of regulatory regime.

IV. Tests of the Mechanism: Concentrated Interests, Industry Relevance,
and Bill Complexity
In this section we explore a variety of ancillary tests in order to help pin down the
mechanism behind our main result.

A. Concentrated Interests
We start by refining our economic interest signing measure even further. The idea
behind our first test is that the voting behavior of a particular subset of interested
Senators may be even more informative than the voting behavior of the entire group of
interested Senators.

In particular, focusing on the Senators that have “concentrated”

interests in a particular industry may be especially informative.
In Table V we perform the same calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III,
except that we employ a slightly different signing measure. Rather than looking at all
interested Senators, in Panel A we focus only on the voting behavior of Senator’s whose
largest industry (by market capitalization)9 represents an above-median level of
concentration in that state relative to all other states that have that industry during that
time period. Concentration is measured as the share of a state’s total market cap that is
made up of the industry in question. The idea is that these Senators will have an even
greater vested interest in the fortunes of this particular industry as compared to the other
significant industries in their states; hence their voting signals on the bills that affect
these particular industries may be quite informative. Table V shows that this hypothesis
is confirmed in the data.

9

The value-weight industry returns that accrue to the

All of the results in this section are identical if sales are used in place of market capitalization.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 20

Long/Short portfolio using this refined signing measure are again large and significant,
ranging from 67 to 97 basis points per month. Further, in Panel B when we replace the
“above-median” relative level of concentration with an 80% relative level of concentration
(as shown in Panel B), this result is even stronger: the Long/Short portfolio earns
between 84 (t=1.99) and 105 (t=2.27) basis points in this specification.

This result

suggests that focusing on the Senator’s with the largest vested interests does improve the
signal about the likely impact of the bill in question.

B. Industry Relevance and Home State Firms Only
In Table VI we exploit variation in our industry assignment procedure.
Specifically, we exploit the idea that some bills may pertain mainly to a particular
industry, even though a few industries may be coded as “affected” by a given bill. So
while our industry assignment procedure (as described above, and in the Appendix) is
quite conservative in ensuring that only affected industries are coded as such, there is still
variation in the extent to which one industry may be affected by a bill relative to another
industry. In Table VI we exploit this variation in two ways. First, in Panel A we focus
solely on cases where the industry in question is the “most” affected of all industries in a
given bill; in these cases we only use these industries to compute our industry-level valueweighted return. Panel A shows that exploiting this variation again strengthens the main
result, yielding a Long/Short portfolio return ranging from 92 to 130 basis points per
month. In Panel B we refine this measure even further by only including the returns of
those firms in a given industry who happen to be also located in one of the “interested”
Senators home states. Panel B shows that this refinement strengthens the result even
further: the Long/Short portfolio return in this specification ranges from 174 to 201 basis
points per month.

C. Complex Bills
To further explore the mechanism driving our findings, we also explore the
complexity of the bills in question. Specifically, we test the idea that the market may
have a harder time deciphering the likely impact of a complicated bill as opposed to a
simpler bill, and hence we should observe more return predictability following the passage
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 21

of complex bills.10 One issue with identifying the complexity of bills is that it does not
have a one-to-one mapping with the length of the bill. This is because many routine
annual bills (e.g., routine appropriations bills) are among the longest bills. Thus, in order
to identify complex bills so as to minimize this problem, we simply compute the number
of times a given bill was voted on, with the idea that more complicated bills tend to get
voted on more often. It turns out that while this measure is positively correlated (0.28)
with the number of words in each bill, it captures rich variation unrelated to simple bill
length.
In Table VII, we exploit this variation in bill complexity and re-run our baseline
portfolio tests from Table III. In Panel A, we focus solely on the set of complex bills,
where complex is defined as a bill that was voted on more times than the median bill (the
median number of votes on a bill is 2). Panel A shows that the economic interest spread
portfolio earns large positive abnormal returns, ranging from 85 basis points in raw
returns (t=2.19) to 90 basis points (t=2.28) in four-factor alphas. Meanwhile, Panel B
shows that the set of non-complex bills (the complement of the sample used in Panel A)
is associated with much smaller (and insignificant) return predictability, consistent with
the idea that the market has more difficulty processing the likely impact of complicated
pieces of legislation as opposed to more routine bills.

D. Robustness: Sub-periods and Economic Interest Thresholds
In Table VIII we explore a series of additional tests that help to establish the
robustness of our main result, and help to verify some obvious implications of our
findings. We start by splitting our sample in half, and examining the findings over these
two sub-periods (199001-199912, and 200001-200812). Panel A of Table VIII shows that
our main result is large in magnitude in both sub-periods, but is somewhat stronger in
the more recent sub-period.
In Panel B of Table VIII we test an implication of our empirical strategy, namely
that as we broaden our measure of “interested” Senators, our approach should work less
well. For example, if we focus on the votes of Senators where any of her Top 5 (or Top
10

See Cohen and Lou (2012) for evidence of substantial return predictability from a set of easy-to-analyze
(standalone) firms to their more complicated (conglomerate) peers.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 22

10) industries in her state (as opposed to Top 3) industries are affected by a given bill,
we would expect this signal to be somewhat less informative, since these “extra,” smaller
industries may be less important to the Senator in question. Panel B shows again that
this implication is confirmed in the data, as focusing on the votes of Senators using a Top
5 filter yields a smaller but still significant effect (ranging from 56 to 62 basis points per
month), and using a Top 10 filter yields an insignificant effect.
Overall, the tests in Table V-VIII help to establish the robustness of the main
result in this paper, by showing that logical alterations of our basic economic interest
signing approach yield results in the expected directions; when we broaden our signing
approach, the results are weaker, and when we refine our approach, the results are
stronger.

V. Other Influences: Lobbying
In this final section, we explore an additional potential influence on the voting
behavior of Senators, in addition to the firm-level economic interest approach that we
have utilized throughout this paper.

Specifically, we employ data on lobbying

expenditures.
Table IX presents the results of tests seeking to explore the impact of this “other
influence” on the strength of our economic interest signal. The lobbying data we use
(obtained from OpenSecrets.org) unfortunately is not available at the level of a given
piece of legislation, but is instead available only by industry and by year, and only since
1999. In Panel A of Table IX we first replicate our main result (from Table III) over the
sample period for which lobbying data is available (199901-200812), and verify that our
findings are large and significant over this sub-period as well.
We then examine the subset of affected industries for which lobbying is most
pronounced in a given year (above the 80th percentile of industries in terms of lobbying
dollar expenditures).11

Our hypothesis is that the results should be weaker for these

industries, since we do not know to whom these lobbying dollars are flowing. Thus our
set of interested Senators may no longer be the full set of “interested” Senators; one
would want to include all the Senators that received lobbying dollars from a given
11

Using an above-median threshold yields similar results.
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 23

industry as now potentially treated, or “interested” in the given industry. In fact, one
would expect lobbying dollars to be more likely to go to the other Senators (our
“uninterested” Senators), since lobbyists would not need to waste money lobbying the
interested Senators who already are going to vote to protect the industry in question.
This reduces the distance between our “interested” and “uninterested” legislator measure
(as some of the previously uninterested legislators are now interested), and so reduces the
power and predictability of the measure.

Panel B of Table IX shows that this conjecture

is indeed confirmed in the data: the Long/Short portfolio return ranges from 44 to 65
basis points per month and is no longer significant when we focus solely on the affected
industries for whom lobbying is most pronounced.

VI. Conclusion
In this paper we demonstrate that legislation has a simple, yet previously
undetected impact on firm prices. Specifically, legislators who have a direct interest in
firms often vote quite differently than other, uninterested legislators on legislation that
impacts the firms in question. Taking a simple approach of listening more closely to the
more incented legislators yields a portfolio that has large outperformance. Longing the
industries following the passage of related bills that interested legislators are especially
positive about relative to uninterested legislators (and shorting industries in the
contrasting case), yields abnormal returns of over 90 basis points per month.

These

returns show no run-up prior to bill passage and no announcement effect directly at bill
passage.

Further, the returns continue to accrue past the month following passage.

Collectively, these findings suggest that we are truly capturing information from these
interested legislators important for firm value; information the market does not seem to
be realizing.
We go on to provide more evidence on the proposed mechanism of interested
legislators. For instance, these abnormal returns are larger when we focus solely on the
industries that make up an especially large part of the economic activity in a legislator’s
state. Further, the returns are also higher when we restrict to solely the most important
industries (i.e., the industries that are likely to be most impacted), and the returns are
larger still when we focus within this industry on those firms located solely in interested
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 24

legislators’ states.

In addition, the return predictability we document is large and

significant for complicated bills, but much less so for routine bills, consistent with the
idea that the market has a much harder time deciphering the likely impact of
complicated pieces of legislation relative to more mundane bills. Lastly, when industry
lobbying groups spend large amounts of capital, likely lobbying legislators outside of the
states where the industry is already important, this dampens the predictive impact of
“interested” legislators, as would be expected given that now what we classify as
geographically uninterested legislators will have been treated by the lobbying firms to
become “interested.” Finally, the effect we document in the paper has, if anything, been
becoming stronger over time.
In sum, government’s impacts on firms are incontrovertible.

In this paper, we

formalize an important channel of this relationship, and test whether this relationship
and its impact is fully understood and incorporated by financial markets. We believe
there is a broader implication of our work regarding the critical importance of firms’
relationships with their legal and political environment, and the actors who form this
environment.

Legislating Stock Prices — Page 25

References
Aldrich, John, Michael Brady, Scott de Marchi, Ian McDonald, Brendan Nyhan, David
Rohde, and Michael Tofias, 2006, Party and constituency in the U.S. Senate, 19332004, in Why Not Parties?, Nathan W. Monroe, Jason M. Roberts, and David Rohde,
eds., University of Chicago Press.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks,
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3—18.
Belo, Frederico, Vito Gala, and Jun Li, 2012, Government spending, political cycles and the
cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57—82.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo (2004). “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment in India.” Econometrica, 72, 5, 1405-1443.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Woolston, 2010,
Does state fiscal relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence from the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, Working paper, UC-Berkeley.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Stephen Miran, 2010, The effects of state budget cuts on
employment and income, Working paper, Harvard University.
Clinton, Joshua, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers (2004), The statistical analysis of roll
call voting: A unified approach, American Political Science Review 98, 1-16.
Cohen, Lauren, Joshua Coval, and Christopher Malloy, 2011, Do powerful politicians cause
corporate downsizing, Journal of Political Economy 119, 1015-1006.
Cohen, Lauren, and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics
`
104.
Cohen, Lauren, and Christopher Malloy, 2011, Friends in high places, Working paper,
Harvard University.
Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura (2009), TARP Investments: Financials and Politics,
Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Faccio, Mara, 2006, Politically connected firms, American Economic Review 96, 369-386.
Faccio, Mara, Ronald W. Masulis, John J. McConnell, 2006, Political connections and
corporate bailouts, Journal of Finance 61, 2597-2635.

Faccio, Mara, and David Parsley, 2006, Sudden death: Taking stock of political connections,
Working paper.
Fama, E. and MacBeth, J., 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal
of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
Journal of Finance 46, 427—466.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing
anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry Costs of Equity, Journal of
Financial Economics 43, 153-193.
Fishback, Price V., and Valentina Kachanovskaya, 2010, In search of the multiplier
for federal spending in the States during the Great Depression, NBER Working
Paper No. 16561.
Fisman, Raymond, 2001, Estimating the value of political connections, American Economic
Review 91, 1095-1102.
Fisman, David, Raymond Fisman, Julia Galef, and Rakesh Khurana, 2007, Estimating the
value of connections to Vice-President Cheney, Working paper, Columbia University.
Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl, and Jongil So, 2007, Do politically connected board affect
firm value, Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl, and Jongil So, 2008, Political connections and the allocation of
procurement contracts, Working paper, Indiana University.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, Do industries explain momentum?, The
Journal of Finance 54, 1249-1290.
Hibbing, John and David Marsh (1987). “Accounting for the Voting patterns of British MP’s
on Free Votes.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 12, 2, 275-297.
Jayachandran, Seema, 2006. "The Jeffords effect." Journal of Law and Economics 49,
397-425.
Jegadeesh, N., 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal of
Finance 45, 881-898.
Jegadeesh, N., and Titman S., 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.

Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Political uncertainty and corporate investment
cycles, Journal of Finance 67, 45-83.
Kalt, Joseph P. and Mark A. Zupan, 1990. "The Apparent Ideological Behavior of
Legislators: Testing for Principal-Agent Slack in Political Institutions," Journal of Law
and Economics, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Apr.), pp. 103-131.
Kau, J.B. and Rubin, P.H., 1979, Self-interest, ideology, and logrolling in congressional
voting, Journal of Law and Economics 22, 365-384.
Kau, J.B. and Rubin, P.H., 1993. "Ideology, voting and shirking." Public Choice 76, 151-172.
Lee, D., Moretti, E. and M. Butler 2004. "Do voters affect or elect policies? Evidence from
the US House." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3) pp. 807-859.
Levitt, Steven (1996). “How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Preferences,
Party Affiliation and Senator Ideology.” American Economic Review, 86, 3, 425-441.
Levitt, Steven, and James Snyder, Jr., 1995, Political Parties and the Distribution of
Federal Outlays, American Journal of Political Science 39, 958-980.
Loughran, Timothy, and William McDonald, 2011, When is a liability not a liability? Textual
analysis, dictionaries, and 10-Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35-65.
Mayhew, David R. (1991). Divided We Govern: Party Control, Lawmaking, and
Investigations , 1946-1990. New Haven: Yale University Press.
McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Income Redistribution
and the Realignment of American Politics, American Enterprise Institute Press.
McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized America: The
Dance of Political Ideology and Unequal Riches, MIT Press.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson, Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence
from U.S. regions, Working paper, Columbia University.
Pande, Rohini (2003) “Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for
Disadvantaged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India.” American Economic
Review 93:4, 1132-1151.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about government policy and stock
prices, Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Peltzman, Sam. 1985. "An Economic Interpretation of the History of Congressional Voting in
the Twentieth Century." American Economic Review 75 (September), 656-75.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. "A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call

Analysis." American Journal of Political Science, 357.384.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1996. "Are Legislators Ideologues or the Agents of
Constituents? European Economic Review, 40: 707-717.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll
Call Voting. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology and Congress. Piscataway, N.J.:
Transaction Press.
Rohde, David (1953-2004). Roll Call Voting Data for the United States House of
Representatives, 1953-2004. Compiled by the Political Institutions and Public Choice
Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 2004.
Roberts, Brian, 1990, A dead Senator tells no lies: Seniority and the distribution of
federal benefits, American Journal of Political Science 34, 31-58.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market
inefficiency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9—17.
Serrato, Juan Carlos Suarez, and Philippe Wingender, 2011, Local fiscal multipliers,
Working paper, UC-Berkeley.
Shoag, Daniel, The impact of government spending shocks: Evidence on the multiplier
from state pension plan returns, Working paper, Harvard University.
Snyder, James (1992). “Artificial Extremism in Interest Group Ratings.” Legislative Studies
Quarterly 17, 3, 319-345.
Snyder, James and Tim Groseclose (2000). “Estimating Party Influence in Congressional
Roll-Call Voting.” American Journal of Political Science, 44, 2, 193-211.
Stigler, G., 1971. "The theory of economic regulation." Bell Journal of Economics 2, 3.21.
Stratmann, Thomas (2000). “Congressional Voting over Legislative Careers: Shifting
Positions and Changing Constraints.” American Political Science Review, 94, 3, 665676.
Tahoun, Ahmed, and Laurence Van Lent (2010), “Personal Wealth Interests of Politicians
And Government Intervention in the Economy: The Bailout of the US Financial
Sector,” Working Paper, University of Manchester.
Tetlock, Paul, 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment, The Journal of Finance 62,
1139-1168.
Theriault, Sean M. (2006). “Procedural Polarization in the U.S. Congress,” Working Paper,

University of Texas at Austin.
Washington, Ebonya (2008). "Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect Their Legislator
Fathers’ Voting on Women’s Issues." American Economic Review, 98, 1, 311-332.
Wilson, Daniel, 2011, Fiscal spending jobs multiplier: Evidence from the 2009 American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.

Figure 1: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CARs) to Economic Interest Spread Portfolio
This figure shows the event-time Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CARs) to portfolios that invest in
industries surrounding legislation passage using the economic interests of senators, specifically the voting
of interested senators (as defined in Table III), to define the legislation’s impact as positive (long) or
negative (short) on the given industry. CARs are computed for each side of the portfolio individually
using market-adjusted returns. This figure then presents the returns to the spread portfolio of industry
CARs (long-short) from 10 days before passage to 6 months following passage of the bill (120 days).

Returns to Economic Interest Spread Portfolio
1.8

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-10
-6
-2
2
6
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
38
42
46
50
54
58
62
66
70
74
78
82
86
90
94
98
102
106
110
114
118

Cumulative Abnormal Returns (in %)

1.6

-0.2

Days Since Passage of Law

Table I: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the sample. The sample period for the main tests is 199001-200812. We
“sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by comparing the votes of “interested” Senators on that bill to
the votes of “uninterested” Senators on that bill. Interested Senators on a given bill are those where an industry
affected by the bill is a “Top 3” industry in that Senator’s home state (where industries are ranked within each state
by total aggregate firm sales). We then compute an Economic Interest Signing measure as follows: we compute the
ratio of positive votes of all interested Senators by dividing their total number of yes votes on a bill by their total
number of votes, and compare this to the ratio of positive votes of all uninterested Senators; if the ratio of positive
votes by interested Senators is greater than that for uninterested Senators, we call this a “positive” bill for the
industry in question, and if the ratio of positive votes for interested Senators is less than that for uninterested
Senators, we call this a “negative” bill for the industry.

Years 1990-2008

Number of Firms in Industry
Industry Market Capitalization ($ Millions)
Industry Value-Weight Monthly Return
Pass (=1)
Vote_Yeas
Vote_Nays
Bill_Sign_Top3Sales
Vote_Yeas_Interested_Top3Sales
Vote_Nays_Interested_Top3Sales
Vote_Yeas_NotInterested_Top3Sales
Vote_Nays_NotInterested_Top3Sales
Bill_Sign_Top5Sales
Vote_Yeas_Interested_Top5Sales
Vote_Nays_Interested_Top5Sales
Vote_Yeas_NotInterested_Top5Sales
Vote_Nays_NotInterested_Top5Sales
Bill_Sign_Top10Sales
Vote_Yeas_Interested_Top10Sales
Vote_Nays_Interested_Top10Sales
Vote_Yeas_NotInterested_Top10Sales
Vote_Nays_NotInterested_Top10Sales

Mean

StdDev

Observations

144.8
288.1
0.775
0.821
73.65
22.49
0.012
7.7
2.4
65.9
20.1
0.003
12.0
3.8
61.6
18.6
0.002
20.4
6.5
53.3
16.0

153.7
361.0
6.33
0.383
18.47
0.399
0.198
10.1
4.6
19.7
17.0
0.178
14.2
6.6
21.2
16.3
0.160
19.9
9.6
24.0
15.2

6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021
6021

Table II: Calendar-Time Industry Portfolio Returns:
Naïve Bill Signing Approaches
This table examines the stock returns of industries that are classified as affected by a given piece of legislation. In Panel
A we perform a calendar-time portfolio approach as follows: for each final Senate vote on a bill, we examine the stock
returns of affected firms following the passage or failure of the bill. We form a “Long” portfolio that buys the firms in
each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) where the bill passes, and a “Short” portfolio
that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) where the bill fails.
Affected stocks do not enter the portfolio until the month following the passage of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced
monthly. This table reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the “Long”
portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept
from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index (see Fama
and French (1996)). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series
regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size
(SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a riskadjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on
a prior-year return momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). In Panels B and C, we focus on the set of bills that
ultimately passed, and attempt to “sign” each bill using different forms of textual analysis. In Panel B, we form a “Long”
portfolio that buys the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) when the bill
contains a below-median number of negative words (defined using the Harvard psychosocial dictionary (see Tetlock
(2007)), and a “Short” portfolio that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market
capitalization) when the bill contains an above-median number of negative words. Panel C conducts the identical tests as
in Panel B, except that negative words are defined using alternative definition categories (see Loughran and McDonald
(2011)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5% statistical significance are indicated with **, and *,
respectively.

Panel A: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Naïve Signing Approach
Future Returns
Pre-Returns
Long (Pass)
Short (Fail)
Month t+1
(Long-Short)
Month t+1
(Long-Short)
Portfolio
Portfolio
Month t-6:t
Month t+1
Portfolio Return
Portfolio Return
Return
Return
0.49
0.57
-0.09
0.02
Average returns
4.36
4.46
0.33
1.53
Standard deviation
CAPM alpha
0.02
0.12
-0.10
0.05
(0.12)

Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

(0.42)

(0.36)

(0.49)

-0.02

0.05

-0.07

0.03

(0.11)

(0.16)

(0.24)

(0.26)

-0.05

-0.02

-0.03

0.03

(0.25)

(0.08)

(0.09)

(0.31)

Panel B: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Textual Analysis (Harvard
Dictionary) Signing Approach
Future Returns
Pre-Returns
Short
Long
(Pass+Harvard
(Long(Long(Pass+Harvard
Neg)
Short)
Short)
Pos)
Month t+1
Month t+1
Month t-6:t
Portfolio
Portfolio
Portfolio
Month t+1
Portfolio Return
Return
Return
Return
Average returns
0.21
0.30
-0.09
-0.09
Standard deviation
4.87
5.01
2.85
1.29
CAPM alpha
-0.23
-0.14
-0.09
-0.10
(1.07)

(0.56)

(0.33)

(1.09)

Fama-French alpha

-0.25

-0.15

-0.10

-0.09

(1.17)

(0.64)

(0.34)

(0.95)

Carhart alpha

-0.14

-0.28

0.14

-0.07

(0.66)

(1.16)

(0.49)

(0.81)

Panel C: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Textual Analysis (Alternate
Dictionary) Signing Approach
Future Returns
Pre-Returns
Short
Long
(Pass+Alternate
(Long-Short)
(Pass+Alternate
Neg)
(Long-Short)
Month t-6:t
Pos)
Month t+1
Month t+1
Portfolio
Portfolio
Portfolio
Month t+1
Portfolio Return
Return
Return
Return
0.45
0.52
-0.07
0.02
Average returns
4.91
5.06
3.25
1.55
Standard deviation
CAPM alpha
-0.12
-0.04
-0.08
0.02
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

(0.58)

(0.14)

(0.27)

-0.15

-0.20

0.05

(0.23)

0.07

(0.75)

(0.77)

(0.15)

(0.62)

-0.04

-0.22

0.18

0.07

(0.18)

(0.79)

(0.55)

(0.62)

Table III: Calendar-Time Industry Portfolio Returns:
Economic Interest Signing
This table examines the stock returns of industries that are classified as affected by a given piece of legislation, after that
given piece of legislation passes, for the subset of bills that are passed by the Senate. We perform a calendar-time
portfolio approach as follows: for each final Senate vote on a bill that ultimately passes, we examine the stock returns of
affected firms following the passage of the bill. We “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by comparing
the votes of “interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of “uninterested” Senators on that bill. Interested Senators on
a given bill are those where an industry affected by the bill is a “Top 3” industry in that Senator’s home state (where
industries are ranked within each state by total aggregate firm sales). We then compute an Economic Interest Signing
measure as follows: we compute the ratio of positive votes of all interested Senators by dividing their total number of yes
votes on a bill by their total number of votes, and compare this to the ratio of positive votes of all uninterested Senators;
if the ratio of positive votes by interested Senators is greater than that for uninterested Senators, we call this a “positive”
bill for the industry in question, and if the ratio of positive votes for interested Senators is less than that for uninterested
Senators, we call this a “negative” bill for the industry. We then form a “Long” portfolio that buys the firms in each
industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) where the Economic Interest Signing measure is
positive, and a “Short” portfolio that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market
capitalization) where the Economic Interest Signing measure is negative. In Panel A, affected stocks do not enter the
portfolio until the month following the passage of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly. In Panel B, affected stocks
enter the portfolio in the month of the passage of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly. In Panel C, affected
stocks enter the portfolio 6 months prior to the passage of a bill, and stay in the portfolio until the month prior to the
passage of the bill. This table reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the
“Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the
intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index
(see Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a timeseries regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size
(SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a riskadjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on
a prior-year return momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, 5%, and
10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

Panel A: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Economic Interest Signing
Future Returns
Short
Long
(Pass+RelSenNeg)
(Pass+RelSenPos)
Month t+1
(Long-Short)
Portfolio
Month t+1
Month t+1 Portfolio
Portfolio Return
Return
Return
0.63
-0.14
0.76
Average returns
4.63
5.40
3.84
Standard deviation
**
CAPM alpha
0.05
-0.71
0.76**
(0.28)

Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

0.01

(2.40)

-0.83

***

(2.44)

0.84***

(0.06)

(3.07)

(2.83)

0.14

-0.78***

0.92***

(0.77)

(2.80)

(3.01)

Panel B: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Economic Interest Signing
Vote Month Returns
Long
Short
(Pass+RelSenPos) (Pass+RelSenNeg)
(Long-Short)
Month t Portfolio Month t Portfolio
Month t Portfolio
Return
Return
Return
0.33
0.33
-0.01
Average returns
4.92
4.63
3.65
Standard deviation
CAPM alpha
-0.14
0.10
-0.04
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

(0.61)

(0.37)

(0.13)

-0.26

-0.20

-0.06

(1.29)

(0.78)

(0.19)

-0.16

-0.29

0.13

(0.78)

(1.06)

(0.43)

Panel C: Industry Returns Around Passage of Legislation, Economic Interest Signing
Pre-Vote Returns
Short
Long
(Pass+RelSenNeg)
(Pass+RelSenPos)
Month t-6:t
(Long-Short)
Portfolio
Month t-6:t-1
Month t-6:t-1
Portfolio Return
Portfolio Return
Return
0.75
0.85
-0.10
Average returns
4.00
4.21
1.82
Standard deviation
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha

-0.07

0.04

-0.10

(0.66)

(0.27)

(0.84)

-0.04

-0.17

(0.28)

(1.42)

0.03

-0.22*

(0.27)

(1.74)

-0.21

**

(-2.42)

Carhart alpha

-0.18

**

(2.06)

Table IV: Cross-Sectional Regressions
This table reports Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional predictive regressions of future value-weight industry returns
on an economic interest signing measure and various industry-level characteristics, from 1989-2008. The
economic interest signing approach is described in Table III. The dependent variable in each is future onemonth returns in month t+1 (RET). The variable of interest in these regressions is Interested Vote. To
construct Interested Vote we “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by comparing the votes of
“interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of “uninterested” Senators on that bill. Interested Vote is the
difference between the two (so positive when interested Senators on the given bill vote more positively than
uninterested Senators, and negative when they vote more negatively). We include various controls on the
right-hand side of these regressions for industry-level momentum (i.e., the industry return from months t-12
to t-1), one-month past industry returns, and measures of industry-level average firm size, book-to-market,
investment (CAPEX), and ASSETS. t-statistics are shown below the estimates, and 1%, 5%, and 10%
statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

Interested Vote

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.025***

0.032***

0.036**

0.033**

0.037**

(3.03)

(2.85)

(2.45)

(2.47)

(2.30)

0.000

0.000

-0.001

0.000

(0.32)

(0.24)

(0.83)

(0.39)

-2.014

-0.839

0.298

(1.12)

(0.52)

(0.19)

0.033**

0.025

(1.98)

(1.48)

0.018***

0.015***

(3.15)

(2.66)

Industry Avg. Size
Industry Avg. Book-to-Market
1-Month Lagged Ind. Returnt-1
12-Month Lagged Returnt-12:t-2
Industry Avg. CAPEX

0.000
(0.61)

Industry Avg. ASSETS

0.000
(0.65)

Number of observations

396

299

299

287

287

Table V: Concentrated Senator Interests
This table reports calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III. The Long-Short portfolio tests are computed
exactly as in Table III except that the Economic Interest Signing measure described in Table III is refined
here as follows. Rather than looking at all interested Senators, we focus here only on the voting behavior of
Senator’s whose largest industry (by market capitalization) represents an above-median (in Panel A) level of
concentration in that state relative to all other states that have that industry during that time period.
Concentration is measured as the share of a state’s total market cap that is made up of the industry in
question. Thus we “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by comparing the votes of this
subset of “interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of all other Senators on that bill. We then compute
the revised Economic Interest Signing measure exactly as in Table III. In Panel A, the concentration
threshold we employ is above-median, and in Panel B the concentration threshold we employ is 80 percent.
This table reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the
“Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return
equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index (see Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return
equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor
(see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a
time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the
return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year return
momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5%
statistical significance are indicated with **, and *, respectively.
Economic Interest Signing for Senators with Concentrated Interests
(Long-Short)
Long
Short Month t+1
Month t+1
Portfolio
Portfolio
Month t+1 Portfolio
Return
Return
Return
Panel A: Top 1 MktCap (>50% Concentrated)
Raw returns
0.23
-0.50
0.74**
(0.50)

CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

-0.22

Carhart alpha

0.74**
(1.97)

-0.21

-0.88***

0.67*

(0.76)

(2.94)

(1.84)

-0.09

-1.06

***

(3.43)

Panel B: Top 1 MktCap (>80% Concentrated)
0.18
-0.73
-0.11
(0.38)

Fama-French alpha

(1.97)

(2.99)

(0.35)

CAPM alpha

-0.96

***

(0.79)

(0.31)

Raw returns

(1.01)

-0.10

(1.28)

-1.03

***

(2.96)

-0.94

***

0.97***
(2.63)

0.92**
(2.13)

0.91**
(2.12)

0.84**

(0.32)

(2.90)

(1.99)

0.24

-0.81**

1.05**

(0.74)

(2.28)

(2.27)

Table VI: Industry Relevance and Home State Firms Only
This table reports calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III. In Panel A we exploit variation in our
industry assignment procedure. Specifically, we focus solely on cases where the industry in question is the
“most” affected of all industries in a given bill; in these cases we only use these industries to compute our
industry-level value-weighted return. In Panel B we refine this measure even further by only including the
returns of those firms in a given industry who happen to be also located in one of the “interested” Senators
home states. This table reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes
buys the “Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted
return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on
the value-weight market index (see Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted
return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on
the value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor
(see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a
time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the
return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year return
momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5%
statistical significance are indicated with **, and *, respectively.

Variation in Industry Relevance and Firms Affected
Long
Short Month t+1
(Long-Short)
Portfolio
Month t+1 Portfolio
Month t+1
Return
Portfolio Return
Return
Panel A: Only Focus on Industries Mentioned Most Prominently in Bill
Raw returns
0.41
-0.60
1.01**
(0.69)

CAPM alpha

-0.25
(0.62)

Fama-French alpha

-0.26
(0.76)

Carhart alpha

-0.09
(0.24)

(1.08)

-1.20

***

(2.76)

-1.19

***

(3.08)

-1.38

***

(3.55)

(2.05)

0.95*
(1.94)

0.92*
(1.94)

1.30***
(2.78)

Panel B: Only Focus on Industries Mentioned Most Prominently in Bill and Compute
Industry Returns Only Based on Firms Located in Interested Senator’s Home State
Raw returns
1.23
-0.56
1.79**
(1.40)

CAPM alpha

0.19
(0.25)

Fama-French alpha

0.29
(0.45)

Carhart alpha

(0.58)

-1.78

**

(2.33)

-1.71

**

(2.29)
*

0.44

-1.40

(0.65)

(1.81)

(1.96)

1.97**
(2.11)

2.01**
(2.16)

1.84*
(1.89)

Table VII: Bill Complexity
This table reports calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III. In this table we exploit variation in the
complexity of bills. Specifically, in Panel A we focus solely on complex bills, i.e. bills that have been voted on
more times than the median bill (the median number of votes on a bill is 2). In Panel B we focus on noncomplex bills, i.e., the complement to the set of complex bills in Panel A. This table reports the average
monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the “Long” portfolio and sells the
“Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a
time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index (see
Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a
time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the
return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)).
The “Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the LongShort portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor,
the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year return momentum (MOM) factor (see
Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5% statistical significance are indicated
with **, and *, respectively.

Raw returns
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

Raw returns
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

Variation in Bill Complexity
Long
Short Month t+1
Portfolio
Month t+1 Portfolio
Return
Return
Panel A: Complex Bills Only
0.28
-0.57

(Long-Short)
Month t+1
Portfolio Return
0.85**

(0.54)

(-1.07)

(2.19)

0.18

-0.68**

0.85**

(0.63)

(-2.17)

(2.19)

0.08

-0.74**

0.82**

(0.30)

(-2.39)

(2.16)

0.28

-0.62

0.90**

(1.04)

(-1.96)

(2.28)

Panel B: Non-Complex Bills Only
0.41
0.23

0.18

(0.90)

(0.46)

-0.27

-0.41

(0.48)

0.14

(-1.28)

(-1.17)

(0.36)

-0.30

-0.51

0.21

(-1.49)

(-1.56)

(0.55)

-0.21

-0.60

0.39

(-1.01)

(-1.78)

(1.00)

Table VIII: Robustness Tests: Sub-periods and Economic Interest Thresholds
This table reports calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III. In Panel A, we break the main result from
Panel A of Table III into two sub-periods: 199001-199912, and 200001-200812. In Panel B, we broaden the
Economic Interest Signing measure described in Table III as follows. Instead of using a Top 3 industry
threshold to define whether a Senator is interested in a given bill, we employ a Top 5 and a Top 10 industry
threshold (again where industries are ranked within each state by total aggregate firm sales). The Long-Short
portfolio tests are computed exactly as in Table III once this change is made to the set of interested Senators.
This table reports the average monthly “Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the
“Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return
equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index (see Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return
equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the
value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor
(see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a
time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the
return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year return
momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5%
statistical significance are indicated with **, and *, respectively.
Panel A: Portfolio Returns Across Sub-periods
Long
Month t+1 Portfolio
Return
Early Sub-period: 199001-199912
Raw returns
1.38***
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha

Short Month t+1
Portfolio
Return

(Long-Short)
Month t+1
Portfolio
Return

0.73

0.66**

(2.58)

(1.30)

(2.03)

0.01

-0.66**

0.67**

(0.03)

(2.09)

(1.99)

*

0.61*

0.11

-0.50

(0.41)

(1.68)

(1.76)

0.31

-0.42

0.72**

(1.10)

(1.32)

(1.96)

Recent Sub-period: 200001-200812
Raw returns
-0.12

-0.99

0.86*

(0.25)

(1.51)

(1.64)

Carhart alpha

CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

*

0.01

-0.88

(0.04)

(1.75)
*

-0.06

-0.86

(0.25)

(1.93)
*

-0.03

-0.85

(0.13)

(1.91)

0.88*
(1.67)

0.80*
(1.63)

0.82*
(1.69)

Panel B: Portfolio Returns For Broader Economic Interest Classifications
Short Month t+1
(Long-Short)
Portfolio
Long
Month t+1
Portfolio Return
Return
Month t+1 Portfolio Return
Top 5 Sales Industry
Raw returns
0.76**
0.14
0.62**
(2.08)

CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha
Top 10 Sales Industry
Raw returns
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

(0.37)
*

0.16

-0.44

(0.88)

(1.72)
*

0.09

-0.47

(0.52)

(1.88)
*

0.19

-0.43

(1.08)

(1.65)

(2.27)

0.60**
(2.20)

0.56**
(2.06)

0.62**
(2.20)

0.71**

0.51

0.21

(1.99)

(1.43)

(0.80)

0.08

-0.09

0.17

(0.47)

(0.42)

(0.69)

0.00

-0.17

0.17

(0.01)

(0.80)

(0.68)

-0.04

-0.09

0.05

(0.26)

(0.41)

(0.18)

Table IX: Other Influences: Lobbying
This table reports calendar-time portfolio tests as in Table III. In addition to our Economic Signing Measure,
described in Table III, we add data on lobbying expedenditures. The lobbying data we use (obtained from
OpenSecrets.org) is available by industry and by year, since 1999. In Panel A we replicate our main result
from Table III over the sample period for which lobbying data is available: 199901-200812. In Panel B we
examine the subset of affected industries for which lobbying is most pronounced in a given year (above the
80th percentile of industries in terms of lobbying dollar expenditures This table reports the average monthly
“Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the “Long” portfolio and sells the “Short”
portfolio each month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series
regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index (see Fama and
French (1996). The “Fama-French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series
regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on
the size (SMB) factor, and the return on the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)). The
“Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the LongShort portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor,
the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year return momentum (MOM) factor (see
Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, and 5% statistical significance are indicated
with **, and *, respectively.
The Impact of Lobbying on Economic Interest Signing
(Long-Short)
Long
Short Month t+1
Month t+1
Portfolio
Portfolio
Month t+1 Portfolio
Return
Return
Return
Panel A: Economic Interest Signing over Lobbying Data Sample Period (199901-200812)
Raw returns
0.18
-0.87
1.05**
(0.37)

CAPM alpha

0.06
(0.23)

Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

-0.05

(1.45)

-1.00

**

(2.11)

-0.95

**

(2.10)

1.06**
(2.13)

0.90*

(0.17)

(2.24)

(1.94)

0.08

-0.90**

0.98**

(0.32)

(2.11)

(2.11)

Panel B: Economic Interest Signing for High Lobbying Industries Only
Raw returns
-0.46
-1.11*
0.65
CAPM alpha
Fama-French alpha
Carhart alpha

(0.77)

(1.65)

(1.46)

-0.45

-1.11**

0.65

(1.27)

(2.33)

(1.45)

-0.44

-0.89**

0.44

(1.27)

(2.32)

(1.04)

0.04

-0.54

0.58

(0.12)

(1.36)

(1.27)

Legislating Stock Prices:
Internet Appendix

In this Appendix we describe in more detail the method and data cut-offs we use to:
i.) classify bills into industries (as in Cohen and Malloy (2011)), and ii.) assign bills as
positive or negative for the given industries to which it relates.

A.1 Industry Classification, Keywords, and Cut-offs
As described in the data section, we first download the full text of all bills jointly
from the Government Printing Office (GPO) and Congress’s Thomas database. We then
parse each bill’s entire text, and use a list of matching words to classify each bill into the
industries to which it applies. Table A1 displays the words we use to classify into the
Fama-French 49 industries, for three sample industries.

We are happy to provide the

entire list upon request, for all 49 industries (but including them all in the appendix table
made this a 13 page table). Again, the Fama-French 49 industries are somewhat analogous
to the SIC 2 digit industry classification, with some improvements and aggregations of
similar SIC 2 sub-industry components. As Table A1 shows, we obviously attempt to use a
number of keywords to capture the bill’s relevance to a given industry.

However, we

balance this by not choosing too many keywords to induce false positives. In the table, we
include when a given industry (or keyword) was removed because it was capturing too
many false positives in the industry assignment process.
To give a few examples, we remove the word “soda” from the “Candy and Soda”
industry, as it kept matching with “soda ash” and “soda mountain” from a number of bills,
both having nothing to do with the desired industry.

As another example, for the

“Personal Services Industry,” we initially included the keyword “beauty shop.”
Unfortunately, nearly all of the instances of this keyword in bills refer to the “House
Beauty Shop,” referencing a (debate about) and the eventual closing of this service in one
of the House of Representative buildings, and so we remove this keyword as well.
Another important aspect of this table is that after deciding upon keyword roots, we
then go through each extension and conjugation that we see in the bills in order to
determine which extensions and conjugations reasonably refer to the given industry. So, for
instance, for the “Utilities” industry, we use the keyword root “utilit-.” While this matches
correctly “utility” and “utilities,” it incorrectly picks up “utilize” and “utilitarian,” which
also appear in bills. We thus remove all of the final two matches from the bill matched

sample to Utilities through “utilit-.” We do this for every keyword root in every industry
to ensure that the given keyword root matches to the intended industry.
The last element of the process is then choosing threshold frequencies for each
keyword appearing in a given bill relative to that keyword’s use across all bills, in order to
classify a given bill as referring to that keyword’s industry. We use two potential methods
for this, the first is the absolute count of the keyword, and the second is the ratio of that
word to the entire number of words in the bill. For instance, the word “electricity” has a
frequency cut-off of 11 times, representing the 95th percentile of that keyword’s distribution
amongst bills.

We have used cut-offs for both measures ranging from the 75th-95th

percentile, and the results in the paper are unaffected. All results reported in the paper are
for the middle of this range, 85th percentile, using the absolute number of keyword
appearances.
The outcome of this process is a match of relevant industries to each bill considered
in congress.

We believe we have a quite conservative match process, but match fairly

definitively 20% of all bills to a relevant industry (or industries).

A.2 Bill Signing Procedure
In order to “sign” each bill as either positive or negative for the assigned industries,
we examine the voting record of the Senators who have an interest in each of our assigned
industries.

We establish this by summing up the constituent firms located in each

Senator’s state (we have used sales, market equity, number of employees, and number of
firms, and they are highly correlated and yield nearly identical results in terms of
magnitude and significance). Then, for each state, we rank all industries that reside in that
state and define “important” industries for that state as those that rank in the top 3 for
that year. We assign these for each state in each congress, so again displaying the entire
table would be quite large. However, in Table A2 we include a subset of state-industry and
congress classifications (again, we are happy to provide the entire table upon request, but
including them all made this table over 17 pages). To give an example from the Table A2,
in the state of New York during the 110th Congress (2007-2008), the most important
industries in the state were Banks, Insurance, and Sales & Trading.

Once the important industries for each state are established, we then map these to
the voting records of the Senators in each state. We then classify each bill that mentions
the given industry as positive or negative for the mentioned industry using the interested
Senators’ votes. For instance, consider bill S.3044 form the 110th Congress shown in Figures
A1 and A2. Figure A1 indicates that this particular bill that was assigned only to the
Fama-French industry #30: Petroleum and Natural Gas, based on the relative frequency of
pre-specified keywords in the bill that pertain to this industry.

Figure A1 displays the

summary text at the top of the bill, which indicates that the bill clearly pertains to the oil
and gas industry.

Figure A2 then displays the executable program we created to

implement our signing procedure for the same bill depicted in Figure A1. The summary
text indicates that the goal of this bill was "to provide energy price relief and hold oil
companies and other entities accountable for their actions with regard to high energy
prices, and for other purposes," so the bill was likely to be perceived as negative for the oil
and gas industry.

The Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry qualified as an important

industry in 8 states (including TX and LA), so the total number of “interested” votes in
the bill was 16. Not surprisingly, even though this vote lined up largely along party lines,
none of the 6 Republican Senators who voted in favor of the bill were Senators who were
"tied" to this industry via constituent interests in their home state (all 8 industry-tied
Republicans voted against), and 1 of the 2 Democrats who voted against the bill was Mary
Landrieu of Louisiana, a state heavily represented by oil and gas interests (the other
Democrat who voted against was Henry Reid from Nevada, a consistent supporter of oil
and gas companies); the 6 industry-tied Democrats who voted in favor of the bill did so
largely on party and ideological grounds (variables that we control for in our tests).
Specifically, we “sign” each bill’s expected impact on a given industry by comparing
the votes of “interested” Senators on that bill to the votes of “uninterested” Senators on
that bill. Again, interested Senators on a given bill are those where an industry affected by
the bill is a “Top 3” industry in that Senator’s home state (where industries are ranked
within each state by total aggregate firm sales, or total market capitalization). We then
compute an Economic Interest Signing measure as follows: we compute the ratio of positive
votes of all interested Senators by dividing their total number of yes votes on a bill by their
total number of votes, and compare this to the ratio of positive votes of all uninterested

Senators; if the ratio of positive votes by interested Senators is greater than that for
uninterested Senators, we call this a “positive” bill for the industry in question, and if the
ratio of positive votes for interested Senators is less than that for uninterested Senators, we
call this a “negative” bill for the industry.

Our results are very similar regardless of

whether we use this ratio difference (“R-R” in Figure A2) measure, or alternative signing
measures such as the absolute ratio ("Ratio" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of industrytied Senators who vote for the bill), or the relative ratio ("R/R" in Figure A2, i.e., the
percentage of industry-tied Senators who vote for the bill divided by the percentage of all
Senators who vote for the bill). and the ratio difference ("R-R" in Figure A2, i.e., the
percentage of industry-tied Senators who vote for the bill minus the percentage of all
Senators who vote for the bill); our results are not sensitive to the particular signing
measure we employ. We have also tried within-party signing measures that are computed
identically to those above, except aggregated within each party (since many votes are along
party lines) and again the results are very similar.

Table A1: Industry Assignment Keywords and Cut-offs
This table shows the keywords used in assigning the full text of each bill in our sample to the resultant
industries covered by the bill, along with the cut-offs for the percentile in the distribution of that keyword for
the entire sample. We assign the given industry to a bill if any one of its keywords is above the 85th
percentile cut-off given in the table. We choose a subset of the 49 industries (Fama-French Industry
Classification) that we use, as the table would otherwise be prohibitively long. We are happy to provide the
entire table of keywords and cut-offs upon request.
Fama-French
Industry # /
Industry Name

1 — Agriculture

26 — Defense

48 — Trading

Count
Greater Than / Equal
To

Count
Percentile

agriculturanimal feed
corn
crop(s)
farm(s)(land)
fishing
livestock
wheat

12
7
4
14
11
8
7
8

85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

air force
Ammunition
armed force(s)
army
gun(s)(runners)(powder)
marine corps
military
missile(s)
national guard
navy
ordnance
space vehicle(s)
tanks
weapon(s)

31
15
10
13
8
30
11
23
30
19
7
3
9
15

85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

Keyword

broker dealer(s)
closed end
commodity broker(s)
financial services firm(s)
investment bank(s)
investment firm(s)
investment management
investment trust(s)
mutual fund(s)
reit(s)
broker-dealer(s)
closed-end
security broker(s)
unit trust(s)

3
85
2
85
14
85
2
85
8
85
2
85
6
85
12
85
3
85
44
85
No Keyword Count Information Available
No Keyword Count Information Available
Keyword removed : Only 2 bills with the
keyword, and all appear in definition clauses
No Keyword Count Information Available

Table A2: Industry Assignments by State
This table shows the 3 most important industries for each state at the beginning, midpoint, and endpoint of
our sample. “Importance” is measured by summing up the market equity of all publicly traded firms in each
industry residing in a state, and then ranking industries. We thus show below the three largest industries
operating in each given state over each Congress. We choose a subset of states and Congresses, as the table
would otherwise be prohibitively long. We are happy to provide the entire table of states, industries
operating in those states, and most important industries for each state and Congress upon request.

TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX

Fama-French
Industry #
30
31
32
30
32
35
30
31
32

NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY

45
46
48
45
46
48
45
46
48

Banks
Insurance
Trading
Banks
Insurance
Trading
Banks
Insurance
Trading

101
101
101
105
105
105
110
110
110

CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA

32
35
43
35
36
37
35
36
37

Telecom
Computers
Retail
Computers
Software
Electronic Equipment
Computers
Software
Electronic Equipment

101
101
101
105
105
105
110
110
110

State

Industry Name

Congress

Oil
Utilities
Telecom
Oil
Telecom
Computers
Oil
Utilities
Telecom

101
101
101
105
105
105
110
110
110

