NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONVERGENCE AND MODERNIZATION REVISITED
Robert J. Barro
Working Paper 18295
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18295
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

This paper was prepared for presentation at the Nobel Symposium on Growth and Development, Stockholm,
September 3-5, 2012. I appreciate excellent research assistance from David Hsu and comments from
Philippe Aghion, Abhijit Banerjee, Xavier Gabaix, Elhanan Helpman, Chad Jones, Peter Klenow,
Jong-Wha Lee, Andrei Shleifer, Ugo Troiano, Jose Ursúa, and Romain Wacziarg.The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Robert J. Barro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Convergence and Modernization Revisited
Robert J. Barro
NBER Working Paper No. 18295
August 2012, Revised September 2012
JEL No. E02,O4,O43,O47
ABSTRACT
In an 80-country panel since the 1960s, the convergence rate for per capita GDP is around 1.7% per
year. This “beta convergence” is conditional on an array of explanatory variables that hold constant
countries’ long-run characteristics. The introduction of country fixed effects generates a much higher–and,
I argue, misleading–convergence rate. In a much longer time frame–34 countries with GDP data starting
between 1870 and 1896–estimation with country fixed effects is more appropriate, and the estimated
convergence rate is around 2.4% per year. Combining the point estimates from the post-1960s and
post-1870 panels suggests that the conditional convergence rate is between 1.7% and 2.4% per year,
an interval that contains the “iron-law” rate of 2%. In the post-1960s panel, estimation without country
fixed effects supports the modernization hypothesis, in the form of positive effects of per capita GDP
and schooling on democracy and maintenance of law and order. The long-term panel with country
fixed effects also supports modernization, in the sense of positive effects of per capita GDP and schooling
on the Polity indicator for democracy. A measure of dispersion–the standard deviation of the log of
per capita GDP across 25 countries–is reasonably stable since 1870. This lack of “sigma convergence”
is consistent with the presence of beta convergence. For 34 countries–including China and India–observed
since 1896, the dispersion of per capita GDP declines since the late 1970s, especially when the country
data are weighted by population. This sigma convergence reflects particularly the incorporation of
China and India into the world market economy. For 29 countries since 1919, the levels and trends
in cross-country dispersion are similar for consumption and GDP.
Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 218
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu

According to the “iron law of convergence,” countries eliminate gaps in levels of real per
capita GDP at a rate around 2% per year.1 Convergence at a 2% rate implies that it takes 35
years for half of an initial gap to vanish and 115 years for 90% to disappear. Convergence-rate
parameters are important to pin down because they provide guidance on how fast countries like
China and India are likely to catch up to richer countries. The convergence rate may also reveal
how fast a poor African country could develop or how rapidly North Korea could catch up to the
South, and so on.
Empirically, the iron law takes the form of unconditional or absolute convergence in
some samples of economies; those that are reasonably homogeneous in terms of long-run or
steady-state characteristics. For example, a roughly 2% convergence rate emerged for per capita
personal income in a long-term panel of U.S. states in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992).2 This
convergence was absolute in the sense of not having to be conditioned on a set of variables that
capture differences in long-run positions. The results implied—in accordance with the data—
that the U.S. South would not get close in per capita income to the rest of the country for about a
century. Applying these results to East versus West Germany suggested that a short time frame
for convergence was not a realistic expectation.3 And, looking forward to the potential

1

I first heard this term applied to my empirical findings on economic growth by Rudi Dornbusch. However, Larry
Summers said that Rudi got the term from him. In any event, the term is reminiscent of the “iron law of wages.”
According to Wikipedia, this phrase came from Lassalle, but Marx and Engels argued that Lassalle got the idea from
Malthus’s theory of population and the terminology from Goethe.
2
Baumol (1986, Figure 2) reported unconditional convergence from 1870 to 1979 for 16 countries (all subsequently
OECD members), using data from Maddison (1982). However, De Long (1988) showed that Baumol’s results
depended on a sample-selection issue, whereby only countries that were rich toward the end of the sample (1979)
were considered. Unconditional convergence did not hold for an expanded sample of 22 countries that were
selected based on per capita income in 1870 (De Long [1988, Figure 2]). This sample-selection criticism of
Baumol’s (1986) findings was presented earlier by Romer (1986, pp. 1012-1013). Rodrik (2012) finds
unconditional convergence in labor productivity across manufacturing industries for recent decades in 118 countries.
3
Barro (2002) found that the predicted slow convergence between East and West Germany accorded with regional
data on GDP per worker through the late 1990s. However, wage rates converged faster because of the German
government’s transfer and subsidy policies.

reunification of North and South Korea, the iron law presents a pessimistic outlook on how
rapidly the large gap in per capita product could be eliminated.
The 2% convergence rate holds in contexts of conditional convergence for heterogeneous
collections of economies that differ substantially in terms of long-run properties. This
convergence is conditional in the sense of holding only with an allowance for differences in
constant or slowly varying cross-economy characteristics, such as saving rates or fertility rates or
quantity of human capital or institutional quality or colonial history or geographical features.
For example, a convergence rate around 2% appeared in a cross section of 98 countries in Barro
and Sala-i-Martin (1992, Table 3), after conditioning on an array of variables that differed by
country.4 Because of the conditioning variables, these results were more pessimistic than the
iron-law convergence rate would suggest. Poor places—for example, many sub-Saharan African
countries or North Korea or Burma or Bolivia or Venezuela—might not converge at all if key
underlying variables, such as the quality of human capital and institutions, were not improved.
The present study uses updated cross-country panels to reexamine the iron law of
convergence. One data set comprises a large number of countries with observations for many
variables since the 1960s. Another data set exploits recent advances in long-term nationalaccounts information. These data cover over a century but apply to fewer countries and
variables. In both contexts, the distinction between absolute and conditional convergence is
important. And, within the context of conditional convergence, a key technical issue is whether
the cross-country regressions include country fixed effects.

4

In earlier work, Barro (1991) reported conditional convergence for the cross section of 98 countries but did not
express the results in terms of a convergence rate.

2

Many analyses of economic growth stress effects from the quality of institutions, gauged
particularly by maintenance of the rule of law and democracy.5 A prominent feature of this
analysis is two-way causation between economic development and institutional quality.
Specifically, according to the “modernization hypothesis,” economic development spurs the
introduction and maintenance of higher quality institutions, including well-functioning
representative democracy.6 The validity of the modernization thesis is important for its own
sake—particularly for understanding how democracy evolves—as well as for assessing
institutional determinants of economic growth.
I use the two updated panel data sets to reassess the empirical status of the modernization
hypothesis. From an econometric standpoint, the analysis of modernization turns out to have
significant parallels with the study of convergence. Both types of results are sensitive to the
treatment of country fixed effects.
I. Thoughts on Country Fixed Effects
Cross-country empirical findings concerning convergence and modernization are
sensitive to the seemingly mundane issue of whether the panel regressions include country fixed
effects. The incorporation of these fixed effects into cross-country panel regressions has become
almost routine.7 However, the merits of including these fixed effects are not straightforward, as

5

Knack and Keefer (1995) and Mauro (1995) studied growth effects from rule of law and corruption. Przeworski
and Limongi (1993) and Barro (1997, Ch. 2) assessed growth effects from democracy. King and Levine (1993)
examined effects of financial institutions on economic growth. Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2004) argued that institutions should be measured by basic legal constraints on the government, rather than political
outcomes, which include official corruption and risk of expropriation.
6
Contributions to the modernization literature include Aristotle (1932), Lipset (1959), Dahl (1991), and Huntington
(1991). Marx (1913) extended the modernization idea to a predicted collapse of organized religion under capitalism.
7
This approach applied to economic growth seems to have begun with Knight, Loayza, and Villanueva (1993); Islam
(1995); and Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort (1996). Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005, 2008) advocate
the use of country fixed effects in studies of the modernization hypothesis.

3

they involve a tradeoff between two forces, highlighted by Nerlove (2000). The appendix brings
out details, using Monte Carlo methods.
To fix ideas, consider cross-country panel regressions for the growth rate of per capita
GDP. Country fixed effects are attractive as a way to allow for unobserved, persistent country
characteristics that influence long-run per capita GDP and are also correlated with observed per
capita GDP. That is, rich countries tend to have prospered because they possess persistently
favorable characteristics that lead to high steady-state per capita GDP. From this omittedvariables perspective, the exclusion of country fixed effects tends to bias upward the estimated
effect of lagged GDP on current GDP and, thereby, bias downward the estimated convergence
rate. One example of this effect is the tendency to estimate an absolute convergence rate near
zero in a panel of heterogeneous countries. However, this bias may be small if the framework
without country fixed effects includes a sufficiently rich set of explanatory variables so that little
remains of omitted variables that are conditionally correlated with per capita GDP.
The second force involves the Hurwicz (1950)-type bias in the estimated coefficient of a
lagged dependent variable. In samples that are small in the time dimension, Nickell (1981),
Arellano and Bond (1991), Kiviet (1995), and Nerlove (2000), among others, show that this
force biases downward the fixed-effects estimator (based on least squares with dummy variables)
for the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable.8 Although this bias vanishes as the sample
becomes large in the time dimension, in the usual panel context with moderate time frames, the
Hurwicz bias tends to be substantial. (As I discuss later, the effective time dimension cannot be
expanded by observing the data more frequently; for example, annually, rather than every five or
ten years.) On this ground, the estimated convergence rate tends to be overestimated (because
8

The Hurwicz bias arises because the realized error terms appear in the sample mean of the lagged dependent
variable. Moreover, this effect co-varies negatively with the terms involving departures of the dependent variable
from its sample mean.

4

the persistence in the level of the dependent variable is underestimated), thereby offsetting the
omitted-variables bias.9
When country fixed effects are included and the time dimension of the sample is
moderate—say 20 or 40 years—the panel effectively comprises multiple cases of moderate
length. Since the regression for each country features a similar Hurwicz bias, this bias tends to
apply also to the overall sample. In contrast, if country fixed effects are excluded, the
observations are effectively stacked in the time and country dimensions. That is, with 80
countries and 10 time periods (as in the subsequent analysis of data since the 1960s), the 800
observations amount to a large sample in the relevant time dimension, and one would anticipate
that the Hurwicz bias would be small. In other words, this bias may arise mostly because of the
inclusion of country fixed effects. These conjectures are confirmed by Monte Carlo studies
described in the appendix.
Inclusion of country fixed effects also affects the estimated coefficients of explanatory
variables—X variables—other than lagged dependent variables. Coefficients on country
variables that are constant (such as geographical features and colonial history) cannot be
estimated at all, and variables that have little within-country time variation cannot be estimated
with precision. In effect, the inclusion of country fixed effects throws out much of the
information in isolating the effects of X variables on growth rates.
Problems in estimating coefficients of X variables in a fixed-effects context apply to the
recent debate about the modernization hypothesis in Glaeser, la Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2004); Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2007); and Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and
Yared (2005, 2008). The failure in the Acemoglu, et al. studies to find statistically significant
9

Hauk and Wacziarg (2009) assess problems with fixed-effects regressions, focusing on effects from omitted
variables and temporary measurement error. They do not consider the Hurwicz bias.

5

effects on democracy from per capita GDP and education depends, in their main analysis, on the
inclusion of country fixed effects. This result is not surprising because, with country fixed
effects, it is challenging to estimate statistically significant coefficients on X variables that do not
have a lot of independent variation over time within countries. In contrast, without country fixed
effects, as in the Glaeser, et al. studies and Barro (1999), the typically substantial cross-sectional
variation in the X variables makes it easier to isolate statistically significant effects.
The perspective changes in the context of panel data observed for over a century. In this
setting, the econometric problems posed by the inclusion of country fixed effects should be much
less serious. In particular, the Hurwicz bias is smaller in this context, as confirmed by the Monte
Carlo studies discussed in the appendix.
II. The Framework of Conditional Convergence
This section summarizes well-known implications of the neoclassical growth model and
its extensions for empirical analyses of conditional convergence. The model features a
production function,
(1)

=

∙

,

,

where F(·) satisfies the usual neoclassical properties, including constant returns to scale in
capital, K, and labor, L. Output per worker, y≡Y/L, depends on capital per worker, k≡K/L:
(2)

y = f(k).

The economy is closed, so that saving and investment coincide. In the baseline model, there is
no government sector, but extensions allow for government purchases and taxes.
The labor force, measured as work-hours per year, is related in a fixed way to population,
which grows at rate n. The labor force is fully employed and, therefore, corresponds to labor
6

input, L, in equation (1).

Given these assumptions, the quantities y and k, measured per worker

in equation (2), can be interpreted as quantities per capita. In the baseline model, n is constant
over time within an economy but may differ across economies.
In the baseline model, the gross saving rate (which equals the ratio of gross investment to
GDP) is a constant, s (as in Solow [1956] and Swan [1956]), which may differ across economies.
The first major extension of the Solow-Swan framework was to endogenize the saving rate. In a
setting based on Ramsey (1928), Cass (1965), and Koopmans (1965), the representative
household determines the optimal saving rate at each point in time in the context of an isoelastic, time-additive utility function. The equilibrium value of s then varies over time within
economies along a transition path to the steady state. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, Ch. 2)
show that, if F(·) is Cobb-Douglas, the transitional behavior of the saving rate is monotonic—
always rising toward its steady-state value, always falling toward its steady-state value, or
always constant at its steady-state value. (This result shows that the Solow-Swan setting is a
special case of the Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model.) With rising (falling) s, the convergence rate
is slower (faster) than in the model with fixed s. With alternative utility functions, the transition
may not be monotonic; for example, the transition path for s may be hump-shaped. Across
economies, differences in preference and other parameters can shift the path of s when
considered in relation to GDP per capita, y. An economy with higher s at a given y tends to
grow faster.
Just as the Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans analysis endogenized the fixed and exogenous
saving rate of Solow-Swan, the model can be extended along the lines of Malthus (1798) to

7

endogenize the population growth rate, n.10 Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, section 9.2) allow
for choices over time of the fertility rate for a given mortality rate. In the case where childrearing costs rise linearly with k (because, as in Becker [1991], child-rearing is intensive in
parental time, which is valued in accordance with the wage rate), n falls montonically during the
transition to the steady state. This pattern reduces the convergence rate compared to the setting
in which n is fixed.11 However, the allowance for goods costs of child rearing can generate a
non-monotonic pattern in which fertility first rises and later falls as per capita GDP, y, increases.
Across economies, differences in preference and other parameters (including costs related to the
rearing of children) can shift the path of n when considered in relation to y. An economy with
lower n at a given y tends to grow faster.
In the baseline model, the productivity factor, A, can differ across economies. This factor
may rise over time due to exogenous technical progress. The usual steady-state properties
depend on technical progress taking the labor-augmenting form. In this setting, effective labor
input, , replaces L in equation (1),

is the multiple ext of L, and x≥0 is the rate of technological

progress. In this context, the results for the growth-rate transition go through in terms of
quantities per effective labor; that is, as

≡ Y/ and

≡ K/ . In the Cobb-Douglas case, labor-

augmenting technical progress is equivalent to exogenous growth in A in equation (1). In
extensions, differences in A (or in the path of A) within or across economies can reflect the
quality of institutions, including maintenance of property rights and the efficiency of the tax

10

Malthus had a model of endogenous population growth, but he tended to get the signs wrong. Specifically, he
predicted a positive effect of real per capita GDP on fertility, whereas, in the modern data, the relation tends to go in
the opposite direction. See Manuelli and Seshadri (2009).
11
In this model, a rise in the mortality rate would raise the fertility rate one-to-one, except that this response implies
a larger flow of child-rearing costs. Because these higher costs work in the same way as higher depreciation on
capital, a higher mortality rate tends to lower the growth rate of GDP at a given capital intensity.

8

system. That is, the economy’s response to weak property rights or high marginal income-tax
rates is essentially equivalent to its response to a reduction in productivity, A.
The research on endogenous growth due to endogenous technical change began with
Romer (1987, 1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and Grossman and Helpman (1991, Chs. 3
and 4).12 In these models, technological advances derive from purposeful and successful R&D
activity. In “varieties” models (Romer [1987, 1990] and Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 3]),
discoveries of new types of intermediate inputs raise productivity by (metaphorically) expanding
the number of inputs employed in production. In “quality-ladders” models (Aghion and Howitt
[1992] and Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 4]), innovations raise the quality of intermediate
inputs within sectors (or, equivalently, improve the efficiency of production processes). From
the perspective of the Solow-Swan model, the theories of technological progress effectively
endogenize the growth rate of the productivity factor, A. Endogenous growth theory can be
viewed, accordingly, as another extension of the Solow-Swan model to endogenize a key
parameter; in this case, A (that is, the time path of A), rather than s or n.
Endogenous growth theory has not played a major role in empirical studies of the
determinants of economic growth across countries. The main empirical applications of the
theory have involved effects of R&D outlays. This research builds on the (pre-endogenousgrowth) approach described by Griliches (1973), which starts by computing TFP growth rates as
Solow residuals in a growth-accounting framework.13 The TFP growth rates can then be related

12

Other research on endogenous growth—exemplified by Romer (1986), Lucas (1988), and Rebelo (1991)—built on
earlier work by Arrow (1962) and Uzawa (1965) and did not provide a theory of technical change. In these models,
growth may go on indefinitely because the returns to investment in a broad class of capital goods, which include
human capital, may not diminish as economies develop. (This idea goes back to Knight [1944]). Spillovers of
knowledge across producers and external benefits from human capital may be parts of the process because they help
to avoid the tendency for diminishing returns to capital. Models of this type are sometimes described as “AK
models,” because the growth dynamics looks like that in a simple framework with constant returns to capital.
13
This idea began with Solow (1957) and was extended to allow for changing quality of an array of inputs by
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967). See also Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, section 10.4).

9

econometrically to measures of R&D expenditures. This methodology was applied to U.S. firms
and industries by Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984) and Griliches (1988). Coe and Helpman
(1995) applied this framework to aggregate data for OECD countries and reported large positive
effects of R&D outlays on economic growth.14 However, a problem with this approach is that—
in the absence of good instruments—a positive relation between R&D spending and economic
growth can reflect reverse causation from growth opportunities to R&D, rather than effects of
R&D and technological progress on growth.
One reason that endogenous growth theory has not played a major role in cross-country
growth analysis is that the theory may apply mostly to the worldwide average growth rate. This
perspective would apply if international trade, foreign investment, and the flow of ideas lead to
rapid diffusion of technology across countries. The speed of diffusion of technology was
assessed theoretically in Nelson and Phelps (1966), who stressed the role of human capital, and
in subsequent models summarized in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, Ch. 8). Caselli and
Coleman (2001) found empirically for developing countries that imports of computers and other
high-tech equipment—viewed as a proxy for technology absorption—were spurred by increased
imports from technologically advanced countries. Technological diffusion was also higher
when the home country had higher levels of school attainment at secondary and higher levels and
better institutional quality.
A further extension of the neoclassical growth model, introduced by Mankiw, Romer,
and Weil (1992), distinguishes human from physical capital. One way that this extension affects
the dynamics of economic growth involves the greater difficulty in adjusting human capital, H,
compared to physical capital, K. In this case, the growth rate of y tends to be a higher at a given
14

More recently, Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griffith, and Howitt (2005) have used a model related to endogenousgrowth theory as the framework for an empirical study of the relation between competition and innovation across
firms.

10

y if the ratio H/K is higher. For an economy below its steady-state position, a higher H/K
(perhaps generated from a war that destroyed much more physical than human capital) means
that subsequent growth focuses on K, which is easier than H to expand rapidly.15
Suppose that L is the number of workers and h is human capital per worker, so that
quality-adjusted labor input is H=hL. The input H then replaces L in equation (1). Assume,
further, that h relates to years of schooling along Mincerian lines, so that
h = eλS,
where S is (average) years of schooling and λ is the rate of return on schooling (if the cost of
schooling is the income foregone by not employing human capital in production). If the
production function in equation (1) is Cobb-Douglas with exponents a on K and b on H, we can
derive:
(3)

log(H/K) = (1/a)·log(A) – (1/a)·log(y) + λ·(1 + b/a)·S.

Therefore, for given A, a higher S signals a higher H/K at a given y, which predicts higher
economic growth. However, for a given H/K, a higher S would signal a lower A at a given y,
which predicts lower economic growth. In the empirical analysis, I assume that, although S and
y are observable, A (corresponding to total factor productivity) cannot be measured (because K
cannot be measured accurately). In this case, the overall effect of S on economic growth, for
given y, is ambiguous. In the empirical analysis, the estimated effect on growth from the level of
S turns out to be small and typically statistically insignificantly different from zero.

15

Analogously, for an economy above its steady-state position, a higher H/K means that the reduction in H takes
place slowly, thereby making the growth rate of y higher (perhaps less negative) than it would be otherwise.

11

III. Cross-Country Growth Regressions
The preceding section implies that the growth rate of real per capita GDP, Dyit, for
country i at date t can be written as
(4)

=Φ(yit, sit, nit, Ait, …),
(-) (+) (-) (+)

where the negative sign under yit reflects convergence, conditional on the other variables. These
other influences include variables related to the saving rate, sit, the population growth rate, nit,
and the level of productivity, Ait. In the main analysis, I estimate equation (4) using per capita
growth rates of GDP averaged over 5- or 10-year periods. Sometimes the analysis includes
constant terms that are specific to countries (country fixed effects). The estimation always
includes constants for each time period (time effects)—therefore, the analysis does not attempt to
explain variations over time of world average growth rates.
One well-known problem with cross-country growth regressions is endogeneity of some
of the X variables. For example, it is unclear whether good institutions cause economic growth
or are a reaction to rising living standards—or, perhaps, that GDP and institutional quality are
responses to common influences. Previous studies have proposed instruments to deal with this
problem. Examples are gravity variables including country size and trade restrictions that
influence international trade (Lee [1993]); ethnolinguistic fractionalization (Mauro [1995]);
population density and settler mortality at the time of colonial settlement (Engerman and
Sokoloff [1997], Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson [2001, 2002]); the form of legal origins (La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998]); absolute degrees latitude and primary
language (Hall and Jones [1999]); the presence of state religion (Barro and McCleary [2003]);
and physical characteristics of islands (Feyrer and Sacerdote [2009]). One problem is that the
proposed instruments typically do not vary over time in the sample within countries and,
12

therefore, do not help when country fixed effects are included. A more basic issue, if one allows
for the plausibly multi-dimensional set of X variables that matters for economic growth, is that
there are never enough convincing instruments to allow for full identification.
The present empirical analysis uses lagged values of the X variables as instruments. For
example, in considering the growth rate from 2000 to 2005, the average of the investment ratio
from 2000 to 2005 enters into the regression equation but the investment ratio for 2000 is on the
instrument list. This use of lagged X values as instruments helps to deal with endogeneity in
some contexts (and also to alleviate problems of temporary measurement error). However, this
approach is not fully satisfactory because of the strong serial correlation in some X variables.
In the main, the estimated effects on growth rates in the form of equation (4) reflect
influences that are predictable with a 5- or 10-year lag—corresponding to the use of 5- or 10year lagged values of the X variables as instruments for the right-hand-side variables.
Contemporaneous growth-rate influences can also arise, corresponding, for example, to shifts in
the productivity factor, Ait, over the 5- or 10-year periods over which growth rates are measured.
In practice, the only variable used of this type is the contemporaneous growth rate of country i’s
terms of trade, which is taken as an exogenous influence on country i.16
Another well-known issue is the robustness of the results with respect to which X
variables are included and in what functional form. Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhoffer, and Miller
(2004) deal with this problem using a Bayesian model-averaging approach. This technique
effectively weights each possible specification (among millions of possibilities) by the fits to the
dependent variable (in their case, the growth rate of per capita GDP from 1960 to 1996). Sala-iMartin, et al. apply this method to 67 X variables that have been proposed in the empirical
16

The growth rate of the terms of trade is interacted with the openness ratio, measured as exports plus imports
relative to GDP.

13

growth literature, using data for 88 countries (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin [2004, Table 12.6]).
The conclusion is that only 5 of the variables have posterior inclusion probabilities above 0.5 and
18 have probabilities above 0.1. However, with 67 variables considered, many are conceptually
similar, so that low inclusion probabilities are not surprising.
My view is that one has to accept the idea that pinpointing precisely which X variables
matter for growth is impossible. However, what is feasible is interpreting the results in terms of
broad influences that matter for growth; for example, quality of institutions, openness to markets,
and so on. In addition, one can interpret results on conditional convergence—gauged
empirically by the estimated coefficient on the lag value of log(y)—holding fixed an array of X
variables. These results on conditional convergence tend not to be highly sensitive to exactly
which X variables are included.
IV. Empirical Results
Table 1 contains empirical results for the cross-country panel of 80 countries. Table 2
lists the countries in the sample. The dependent variable in the main specification is each
country’s growth rate of per capita GDP over 10 5-year intervals from 1960-65 to 2005-09. (The
last period is shortened because of data availability.) Note that the growth rates are expressed
per year, not per five-year period.
Column 1 of Table 1 includes as right-hand-side variables only time effects and the
5-year lag of the log of per capita GDP. The estimated coefficient on the lag is positive
(indicating divergence rather than convergence) but statistically insignificantly different from
zero. This result reproduces the typical pattern whereby absolute convergence of per capita GDP
does not apply to a heterogeneous collection of countries. From the standpoint of equation (4),
the interpretation is that the 5-year lag of the log of per capita GDP is positively correlated with
14

determinants of the steady-state position that raise the long-run level of per capita GDP. This
omitted-variables effect offsets the convergence force and leads, thereby, to an estimated
coefficient on the lagged log of per capita GDP that is close to zero. The Monte Carlo analysis
in the appendix (Table A1, line 11) reproduces this kind of result.
Column 2 adds country fixed effects, which are jointly highly statistically significant.
The estimated coefficient of the lagged log of per capita GDP is now significantly negative,
-0.0326 (s.e.=0.0048).17 This result suggests conditional convergence (conditional on individual
constants for each country) at a rate of 3.3% per year. A possible interpretation is that each
country’s fixed effect proxies for the influences of the various determinants of long-run per
capita GDP that appear in equation (4)—at least to the extent that these determinants do not vary
greatly over time within countries. Therefore, the estimated coefficient on the lagged log of per
capita GDP now picks up the predicted convergence force indicated by the negative sign in
equation (4). However, as noted before, there is also a tendency to overestimate convergence in
the presence of country fixed effects because of the Hurwicz bias in the estimated coefficient of a
lagged dependent variable. The Monte Carlo analysis (Table A1, lines 1 and 2) shows how these
overestimates can be substantial.
Column 3 includes, instead of country fixed effects, an array of time-varying X variables
for each country.18 These variables are intended to proxy for the various growth determinants,
aside from lagged per capita GDP, that enter into equation (4). Unlike in column 1, the
estimated coefficient of the lagged log of per capita GDP is significantly negative, -0.0171
17

In this and the subsequent regressions, one can think equivalently of the dependent variable as the log of the level
of per capita GDP (observed for 1965, 1970, ..., 2009), with the five-year lag of this variable (for 1960, 1965, …,
2005) included on the right-hand side. In this version of the regression from Table 1, column 2, the coefficient on
the lagged dependent variable is 0.837 (which equals 1 minus 5 times the estimated convergence coefficient of
0.0326 per year).
18
I considered some variables that were constant over time within countries—the absolute value of degrees latitude,
land-locked status, and aspects of colonial history and legal origins—but these turned out to be unimportant.

15

(s.e.=0.0022), and indicates convergence near the iron-law rate of 2 percent per year. This
convergence is conditional in the sense of holding for given values of the X variables.
The estimated coefficients of the X variables in column 3 can be viewed mostly as effects
on long-run or steady-state positions for each country. For example, with respect to institutional
quality, the results imply that a country’s long-run economic position is enhanced by better
maintenance of law and order (and the rule of law).19 Greater democracy (gauged by the level
and square of the Freedom House indicator for political rights20) tends initially to stimulate
growth but later retards growth. The break point between marginal effects being positive or
negative occurs roughly at the half-way mark between full dictatorship (value zero) and full
representative democracy (value one). Analogous effects of democracy on economic growth
were reported and interpreted in Barro (1997, Ch. 2).
Other findings are that countries’ long-run positions are enhanced by a lower mortality
rate (gauged by the reciprocal of life expectancy at birth), a lower fertility rate, greater openness
to international trade, and higher female relative to male school attainment. The schooling effect
does not relate to the overall level of human capital in the sense of total years of attainment. In
fact, the estimated effect from a general increase in attainment—where average years of female
and male schooling change by equal amounts—differs insignificantly from zero, a result that is
consistent with the conceptual analysis of human capital presented earlier. A reasonable
interpretation is that an expansion in female relative to male attainment—typically implying a
19

The law-and-order variable (previously called rule-of-law) comes from International Country Risk Guide, which is
produced by Political Risk Services. These data were first used in academic research by Knack and Keefer (1995).
The law-and-order indicator starts in 1982 or later. The panel regressions in Table 1, column 3, use each country’s
first value available for this variable for the periods that start in 1980-85 or earlier. If the sample covers only the
five periods that begin with 1985-90, the results are similar to those in column 3. For example, the coefficient on
the lagged log of per capita GDP is -0.0209 (s.e.=0.0031) and that on the law-and-order variable is 0.0179
(s.e.=0.0088). An alternative to the ICRG data is the information on perceived quality of governance assembled by
the World Bank (available at www.govindicators.org). However, these data have the serious shortcoming of being
available only since the late 1990s.
20
Analogous data from Bollen (1980) were used for 1960 and 1965.

16

decline in the gap between male and female average years of schooling—signals an
improvement more generally in political and social arrangements that support economic growth.
Several explanatory variables have estimated coefficients that differ insignificantly from
zero: the investment ratio (which would correspond to the saving rate in a closed economy), the
government-consumption ratio, and the inflation rate. I discuss more findings below related to
the investment ratio and the inflation rate. Finally, the results reveal a significantly positive
contemporaneous impact on growth from improvements in a country’s terms of trade.
As discussed before, the Hurwicz bias in the estimated coefficient of a lagged dependent
variable is likely to be small in the context of column 3, where country fixed effects are absent.
The estimated coefficient of the lagged log of per capita GDP would tend to be underestimated in
magnitude if there are still important omitted determinants of long-run per capita GDP that are
conditionally correlated with per capita GDP. However, given the substantial list of growth
determinants included, this omitted-variables bias may be small (unlike in column 1). Therefore,
it is possible that OLS without country fixed effects can deliver accurate estimates of the
convergence rate, as confirmed in the appendix by Monte Carlo analysis (Table A2, lines 9-12).
Column 4 allows for country fixed effects along with the X variables. The fixed effects
are still jointly highly statistically significant. The estimated coefficient of the lagged log of per
capita GDP, -0.0445 (s.e.=0.0051), is negative, statistically significant, and larger in magnitude
than in columns 2 or 3. Taken at face value, the indicated conditional convergence rate is 4.5%
per year. However, as discussed before, the convergence rate tends to be seriously overestimated
because of the Hurwicz bias (as confirmed by the Monte Carlo studies considered in the
appendix; see Table A2, lines 1 and 3).

17

Many of the X variables that were statistically significant in column 2 are no longer
statistically significant in column 4—because only within-country variation is now used to
identify these coefficients. As an example, although the indicator for the maintenance of law and
order was a significantly positive determinant of growth in column 3, this variable no longer has
significant explanatory power in column 4. The likely explanation is not that institutional quality
is unimportant for growth but, rather, that there is insufficient within-country variation in this
quality (as measured) to isolate a statistically significant effect. This explanation is particularly
plausible when one considers the many X variables included in the panel regression and the
likely measurement error in the indicator of institutional quality.
Table 3 contains additional panel regressions for growth rates. Column 1 parallels Table
1, column 3, but uses OLS,21 rather than instrumental variables (with lagged values of the X
variables used as instruments). The results are similar in most respects, except that, under OLS,
the estimated coefficient of the investment ratio is significantly positive, whereas that on the
inflation rate is significantly negative. These last results likely reflect the joint short-run
determination of GDP with investment and inflation, whereby the typical pattern is for the
investment ratio to be procyclical and the inflation rate to be countercyclical. Hence, the OLS
results on these estimated coefficients cannot be reliably interpreted as isolating causation from
the investment ratio or the inflation rate to GDP growth.
Table 3, column 2, uses 10-year averages for growth rates, with corresponding
adjustments in the definitions of the X variables. The results are similar to those for the 5-year
case in Table 1, column 3, except that the standard errors for the estimated coefficients are higher

21

Table 3, column 1 includes all the X variables on the instrument list but departs from OLS by allowing for
correlation of the error term over time within countries. With full OLS, the estimated coefficients are the same but
the standard errors of the estimated coefficients are somewhat smaller except for the one on the terms-of-trade
variable.

18

in the 10-year specification; that is, some information is lost by averaging over 10 years, rather
than 5. The estimated convergence rates per year are similar: -0.0163 (s.e.=0.0023) for the 10year case, versus -0.0171 (s.e.=0.0022) for the 5-year. When country fixed effects are included,
the results for 10-year periods (not shown) are also similar to those with 5-year periods (Table 1,
column 4). The same general conclusions hold with annual observations on GDP growth rates.
For the convergence rate, in a system without country fixed effects, the estimated convergence
coefficient is -0.0176 (s.e.=0.0024), similar to those in Table 1, column 3, and Table 3,
column 2.22
Overall, the results show that changing the time dimension of the sample by observing
the data more or less frequently—shifting, say, from 10-year to 5-year to 1-year periods—has
minor implications, particularly for the convergence rate. This result in the context of country
fixed effects accords with the formula for the Hurwicz bias derived for a simple case in Nickell
(1981, p. 1422).23
22

The annual system is problematic because some of the data (school attainment, changes in the terms of trade, and
the inflation rate) were constructed only over 5-year intervals. Moreover, other data—on life expectancy and the
fertility rate—are provided at an annual frequency but are not really annual variables. In any event, the annual
results (using interpolated values of the variables available at 5-year intervals) show much poorer fits than the
systems at 5-year and 10-year intervals. The R-squared value for the annual case is 0.137, and the standard error of
the regression is 0.049. (This system for 80 countries has 3478 total observations.)
23
Nickell (1981, p. 1422) provides a formula for the bias in the least-squares-with-dummy-variables estimate for the
coefficient of a lagged dependent variable when there are cross-sectional fixed effects, no X variables, the number of
cross sections is large, and the initial values of the dependent variable are treated as given. It can be shown that
what matters for the bias in his formula is the overall length of the sample, not the number of periods over which the
data are observed. Suppose that β is the convergence rate per year. The coefficient of the lagged dependent
variable, ρ in Nickell’s formula, is given by ρ=e-βτ, where τ is the period length in years. Let T be the sample length
in years (differing from Nickell’s notation). Nickell’s formula implies that the proportionate bias in the estimated β
depends (as an approximation based on βτ being much less than one) only on the product βT. The formula is, if
β>0:
−

/ ]≈

∙

#%$ %

∙

!"#$

!"#$

> 0.

Therefore, a change in the period length, τ, with T held fixed, does not affect the calculated bias, and the empirical
findings (and Monte Carlo analysis) on convergence with fixed effects included are consistent with this result.
Quantitatively, if β=0.02 per year, Nickell’s formula generates an upward bias of 0.070 when T=40 years and 0.018
when T=139 years (corresponding to the long-term sample used later). Hence, although the bias approaches zero as
T approaches infinity, the bias can be large in samples of realistic length. However, these results are only
suggestive, because the Nickell formula depends on a number of unrealistic assumptions, particularly about the X
variables. Detailed Monte Carlo results are in the appendix.

19

Table 3, column 3, goes further in the exploration of the implications of country fixed
effects by allowing for two separate sets of country dummy variables—one applying to the first
five periods (1960-65, …, 1980-85) and the other to the second five (1985-90, …, 2005-09).
The break in the set of country fixed effects from the first half to the second half of the sample is
jointly highly statistically significant, as are the fixed effects overall. Not surprisingly, the
standard errors of the estimated coefficients of all the X variables are higher than those in
Table 1, column 4. That is, the richer structure of country fixed effects makes it even more
problematic to use the within-country variation to estimate the effects of X variables. For
present purposes, the most interesting result is that the estimated coefficient on the lagged log of
per capita GDP, -0.0783 (s.e.=0.0094), becomes even larger in magnitude (compared to Table 1,
column 4), now indicating convergence at 8% per year. A reasonable interpretation is that the
extra set of country fixed effects effectively cuts the time dimension of the sample by half (from
40 plus years to 20 plus years) and, thereby, intensifies the Hurwicz bias (see n. 23 and the
appendix on Monte Carlo results). Hence, these findings provide a further warning that country
fixed effects can cause serious upward bias in estimated convergence rates.
Finally, Table 3, column 4, replaces the Freedom House measure of political rights by the
Polity measure of democracy/autocracy. The results are similar to those based on the Freedom
House indicator (Table 1, column 3), although the estimated coefficients on the Polity variable
and its square are not individually statistically significant. These variables are jointly statistically
significant (p-value=0.045), as was also true for the Freedom House variables (p-value=0.004).
My inference from the cross-country data starting in the 1960s—covering 40-plus years
for most countries—is that the most reliable estimates of convergence rates come from systems
that exclude country fixed effects but include an array of X variables to mitigate the

20

consequences of omitted variables. That is, I would emphasize the results in Table 1, column 3.
However, as I discuss later, the fixed-effects results seem more convincing in systems for the
more limited set of countries with data over a century or more.
V. Modernization
The modernization thesis applied to democracy is that economic development—gauged
particularly by per capita GDP and education—promotes democratic institutions. This idea was
emphasized by Lipset (1959), who credits the concept to Aristotle (1932).24 Glaeser, Ponzetto,
and Shleifer (2007) provide a theoretical rationale for the effect of education on democracy
through the channel of higher education motivating greater participation in political and other
social activities. The Aristotle-Lipset hypothesis can be extended beyond democracy to apply to
measures of institutional quality, including the indicator for maintenance of law and order (and
the rule of law).
Barro (1999) provided empirical confirmation of the Aristotle-Lipset hypothesis in a
cross-country panel, with stress on the Freedom House measure of political rights. Additional
supporting analysis along these lines appears in Glaeser, la Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2004) and Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2007). However, these results have been challenged
by Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005, 2008), who argue that education and per
capita GDP do not have statistically significant causal influences on democracy. As in
estimating convergence rates for economic growth, the essence of much of this recent empirical
debate about modernization turns on whether one includes country fixed effects in the empirical
analysis of data on democracy and other measures of institutional quality.
24

According to Lipset (1959, p. 75): “From Aristotle down to the present, men have argued that only in a wealthy
society in which relatively few citizens lived in real poverty could a situation exist in which the mass of the
population could intelligently participate in politics and could develop the self-restraint necessary to avoid
succumbing to the appeals of irresponsible demagogues.”

21

Table 4 contains panel regressions in which the dependent variables are indicators of
institutional quality. Columns 1 and 2 use the law-and-order measure from International
Country Risk Guide (previous described by ICRG as maintenance of the rule of law). This
dependent variable is observed for 1990, 1995, …, 2009 for 124 countries. Columns 3 and 4 use
the Freedom House measure of political rights, observed in 1975, 1980, …, 2009 for 141
countries. Columns 5 and 6 use the Polity measure of democracy/autocracy, observed in
1965, …, 2009 for 133 countries.
In Table 4, the X variables are limited to those stressed in the recent literature on
modernization—per capita GDP and measures of years of school attainment.25 The analysis
distinguishes average years of schooling by females and males and, in some cases, by primary
versus upper (secondary and higher). The regressions also include five-year lagged values of the
dependent variable. These forms are analogous to those used before for economic growth
(which included lagged levels of the log of per capita GDP on the right-hand side). The method
of estimation, using lags of the X variables as instruments, is analogous to that in Table 1.
Table 4, column 1, applies to the law-and-order indicator. The projected persistence over
five years is given by the estimated coefficient of the lagged dependent variable, 0.708
(s.e.=0.026). This estimated coefficient differs significantly from one (which would indicate no
adjustment over five years toward a target value) or zero (which would correspond to full
adjustment over five years). The estimated coefficient implies that it takes 10 years to eliminate
half an initial gap between the law-and-order indicator and its long-run target and 32 years to
eliminate 90% of an initial gap.

25

The schooling data come from the recent update of the Barro-Lee data set, as described in Barro and Lee (2012).
For the data, see “Educational Attainment Data” at www.rbarro.com/data-sets.

22

With respect to X variables, the estimated coefficient on the log of per capita GDP is
significantly positive, 0.0248 (s.e.=0.0066). The effect from overall years of schooling is also
significantly positive (p-value=0.016),26 but the results show a positive and statistically
significant coefficient for male schooling (0.0164, s.e.=0.0068) and a negative but statistically
insignificant coefficient for female schooling (-0.0093, s.e.=0.0062). The three indicators of
economic development—the log of per capita GDP and average years of female and male
schooling—are jointly highly statistically significant (p-value=0.000). Hence, the system that
excludes country fixed effects provides strong evidence of modernization with regard to effects
from GDP and schooling on institutions that maintain law and order (and the rule of law).
Table 4, column 2, shows the impact from allowing for country fixed effects, which are
jointly highly statistically significant. The results change compared with column 1 in ways
familiar from the analysis of economic growth: the estimated coefficient of the lagged
dependent variable falls substantially (to 0.332, s.e.=0.045), and the standard errors of the
estimated coefficients of the X variables rise sharply. The latter effect is strong enough so that
none of the three X variables are now individually statistically significant. Moreover, these three
variables become jointly insignificant (p-value=0.62). Hence, with country fixed effects, there is
no longer empirical support for the modernization hypothesis with respect to effects of GDP and
schooling on maintenance of law and order. It is worth stressing that, in this fixed-effects
context, there is also no statistically significant effect of the law-and-order variable on economic
growth (Table 1, column 4). In other words, with country fixed effects, the law-and-order
variable seems uninteresting overall.
Results with the Freedom House indicator of political rights (a measure of democracy) as
the dependent variable are in Table 4, columns 3 and 4. In the system without country fixed
26

This result corresponds to the sum of the coefficients on female and male school attainment.

23

effects in column 3, the persistence over five years is given by the estimated coefficient of the
lagged dependent variable, 0.796 (s.e.=0.018). Hence, the estimated persistence again differs
significantly from zero or one. In this case, it takes 15 years to eliminate 50% of an initial gap
between the democracy indicator and its long-run target and 51 years to eliminate 90% of the
gap.
The X variables again include per capita GDP and now also distinguish female and male
schooling by average years at the primary and upper levels. The five X variables are jointly
highly statistically significant in Table 4, column 3 (p-value=0.000). The effect from the log of
per capita GDP, 0.0112 (s.e.=0.0067), is positive but not quite statistically significant at the 5%
level. School years overall are significantly positive (p-value=0.034).27 Particularly important
positive predictors of political rights are average years of female primary schooling (0.0439,
s.e.=0.0138) and average years of male upper schooling (0.0344, s.e.=0.0142). Overall, this
system without country fixed effects provides strong evidence for modernization with respect to
effects of GDP and schooling on political rights; that is, for democracy.
In column 4, the incorporation of country fixed effects again reduces the estimated
persistence—the estimated coefficient of the lagged dependent variable becomes 0.456
(s.e.=0.034). Also as before, the standard errors of the estimated coefficients on the X variables
blow up, thereby leading to joint statistical insignificance for the five variables considered
(p-value=0.59). Therefore, with country fixed effects, there is no longer empirical support for
the modernization hypothesis with regard to effects of GDP and schooling on political rights. It
is also true with fixed effects that political rights do not have a statistically significant effect on
economic growth (Table 1, column 4). Thus, as with the law-and-order indicator, the inclusion
of country fixed effects makes the political-rights variable look uninteresting.
27

This result corresponds to the sum of all of the coefficients related to school attainment.

24

Results for the Polity democracy/autocracy indicator are mostly similar to those for the
Freedom House political-rights variable. Without country fixed effects in Table 4, column 5, the
coefficient of the lagged dependent variable is about the same as that in column 3. Total school
years and the overall set of X variables are highly statistically significant in column 5. With
country fixed effects included in column 6, the one difference from before (column 4) is that the
X variables are jointly statistically significant. However, much of this significance stems from
the negative impact estimated for male average years of upper schooling. Thus, we would
conclude with the Polity variable that the modernization hypothesis is strongly confirmed in the
system without fixed effects (column 5) but not in the system with fixed effects (column 6).
Acemoglu, et al., rely mainly on results with country fixed effects to argue that the
modernization hypothesis is empirically not supported in cross-country panel data. They do not
mention that, in the same context, the quality of institutions lacks explanatory power for
economic growth. In any event, my inference is that the results signal the dangers from the
inclusion of country fixed effects: this procedure seriously reduces the information contained in
the panel data (reflected in the blowing up of coefficient standard errors for the X variables) and
biases downward the estimated persistence effects, as revealed by the coefficients of lagged
dependent variables.28 I show in a later section that the results with country fixed effects look
different—and supportive of the modernization hypothesis—in systems estimated over time
frames of over a century.

28

Acemoglu, et al. (2008, p. 820) argue that this bias in the fixed-effects estimated coefficient of a lagged dependent
variable can be mitigated by observing the data at a higher frequency, such as annually: “Column 6 [of Table 3]
estimates … with OLS using annual observations. This is useful since the fixed effect OLS estimator becomes
consistent as the number of observations becomes large. With annual observations, we have a reasonably large time
dimension.” The results in n. 23 imply that this argument is incorrect. The proportionate bias in the estimated
coefficient of a lagged dependent variable depends in Nickell’s (1981) analysis on the overall length of the sample
in years (or, actually, on the product βT, where β is the convergence rate per year and T is the sample length in
years), not on the frequency of observation of the data.

25

For systems estimated with data spanning intervals of roughly 25 to 45 years—starting
between 1965 and 1985 and ending in 2009—the most reliable (though imperfect) information
on the determinants of institutional quality likely comes from systems that exclude country fixed
effects but include measures of GDP and schooling. Thus, in Table 4, I would emphasize the
findings in columns 1, 3, and 5. These results strongly support the modernization hypothesis
with regard to effects of GDP and schooling on the determination of the quality of institutions,
gauged by law and order and democracy. As with economic growth, the fixed-effects estimation
seems more appropriate in systems for the limited group of countries with data over a century or
more. These results are discussed in the next section.
VI. Long-Term Panels
Until recently, the best long-term macroeconomic panel data were the per-capita GDP
series assembled by Maddison (2003). These series constitute a monumental contribution that
has been widely used. However, the data have serious shortcomings, discussed and largely
rectified in a new data set on per capita GDP and consumer expenditure assembled by Ursúa and
me and described in Ursúa (2011).29 The construction of these data was challenging, described
by Ursúa as macroeconomic archeology, and various methods were implemented to include
periods and countries originally missing or inadequately treated in standard sources. The new
data set covers 42 countries and goes back at least to 1913 and in many cases to 1870 or earlier.
For the present long-term analysis, I use a sample of 34 countries with annual data on per
capita GDP starting between 1870 and 1896. The list of countries is in the notes to Table 5.
29

The data are available as “Barro-Ursúa Macroeconomic Data” at www.rbarro.com/data-sets. Full annual time
series back to 1913 are provided for 40 countries for real per capita GDP (with a missing observation for Greece in
1944) and 28 countries for real per capita personal consumer expenditure. The data on the website are expressed as
indexes for each country, with the value in 2006 normalized to 100. For the present study, the values were
converted to levels comparable across countries based on data on 2005 PPP-adjusted real per capita GDP from the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

26

There is a limited supply of X variables available over this long time frame. The Polity indicator
of democracy is available since at least 1901 (with some gaps) for 28 of the 34 countries in the
GDP sample. Data on total years of schooling for the population aged 15 and over are available
since 1870 for 26 of the countries in the GDP sample. These schooling data, available at 10-year
intervals up to 1950, were constructed by Morrisson and Murtin (2008), using underlying
information on school-enrollment rates and population structure from Mitchell (2003a, 2003b,
2003c). I linked these data to the previously noted Barro-Lee data, which are available since
1950.
A. Growth rates of per capita GDP
Columns 1-2 of Table 5 use as the dependent variable the growth rate of real per capita
GDP over 5-year periods from 1870-75 to 2005-09. These systems include no X variables and,
therefore, parallel the results in Table 1, columns 1 and 2. Column 1 excludes country fixed
effects and includes as a regressor only the log of the five-year lag of per capita GDP (along with
time effects). Unlike in Table 1, column 1, the estimated coefficient on the lagged log of per
capita GDP is significantly negative at the 5% level, -0.0024 (s.e.=0.0010). However, the
indicated convergence rate is only around 0.2% per year.
Table 5, column 2, adds country fixed effects. The estimated coefficient of the log of
lagged per capita GDP, -0.0241 (s.e.=0.0035), shows convergence at 2.4% per year. This value
is lower in magnitude than that found in Table 1, column 2.30
I redid the analysis from Table 5, columns 1 and 2, by adding as X variables the Polity
indicator and its square (as in Table 3, column 4) and the measure of years of schooling (as in

30

A reasonable concern is that the comparison between the long-term and short-term results depends on sample
selection with respect to which countries have long-term data. However, the post-1960s results in Table 1 do not
differ greatly if the sample comprises only the 34 countries included in the long-term sample in Table 5.

27

Table 1, column 1, but using the long-term data). With these X variables included, the sample
size falls to 26 countries. In the systems with country fixed effects, the estimated convergence
rates change little with the addition of these X variables, but there are some effects from the
diminished sample size. For example, in the 26-country sample with fixed effects and the X
variables, the estimated convergence rate is 2.9% per year, rather than the 2.4% found in Table 5,
column 2. However, in this sample, the estimated convergence rate is 3.1% when the X
variables are excluded. The key force here is the deletion from the 34-country sample of several
poor countries that did not grow rapidly for much of the sample—China, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
Russia, and Sri Lanka.
In the long samples, the lack of information on the rich array of X variables considered in
Table 1, columns 3 and 4, suggests that the omitted-variables bias would be substantial in
systems that omit country fixed effects. Thus, the estimated convergence rate of less than 1%
per year in Table 5, column 1, is likely to be a serious underestimate of the true convergence
rate. On the other hand, because of the long time series, the Hurwicz bias on the coefficient of
the log of lagged per capita GDP—in column 2—is likely to be much less serious than that in
Table 1, columns 2 and 4. (See n. 23 for a quantitative analysis of this bias in Nickell’s [1981]
model and the appendix for Monte Carlo analyses.) Therefore, the estimated convergence rate of
around 2.4% per year in Table 5, column 2, may be only a small overestimate of the true
conditional convergence rate.
We can put the long-term results from Table 5 together with the shorter-term results from
Table 1. From Table 1, the best estimate of the convergence rate probably comes in column 3
from the system without country fixed effects but with an array of X variables. The estimated
conditional convergence rate here is 1.7% per year, with a two-standard-error band of 1.3% to

28

2.2%. This result may be a small underestimate of the true convergence rate—to the extent that
the system still omits long-run growth determinants that are conditionally correlated with per
capita GDP. From Table 5, the best estimate likely comes in column 2 from the system with
country fixed effects. The estimated convergence rate here is 2.4% per year, with a twostandard-error band of 1.7% to 3.1%. This result may be a small overestimate of the true
convergence rate—to the extent that the Hurwicz bias still operates in this long-term sample.
Combined results from the two panel data sets suggest that the true conditional
convergence rate is, in terms of point estimates, bounded between 1.7% and 2.4% per year.
Interestingly, this interval contains the iron-law rate of 2% per year.
B. Polity indicator
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 return to the modernization hypothesis by considering longterm panel regressions for the Polity indicator. Column 3 excludes country fixed effects. The
estimated coefficient on the 5-year lag of the dependent variable, 0.760 (s.e.=0.027), is similar to
that in Table 4, column 5. From the standpoint of the modernization hypothesis, the important
results in Table 5, column 3, are the significantly positive coefficients of 0.0321 (s.e.=0.0158) on
the log of per capita GDP and 0.0145 (s.e.=0.0044) on years of schooling for the population aged
15 and over.31 These two variables are jointly statistically significant with a p-value of 0.000.
This finding parallels the result in Table 4, column 5, concerning the joint statistical significance
of the group of variables comprising the log of per capita GDP and four schooling variables.
Table 5, column 4, adds country fixed effects. This change reduces the estimated
coefficient on the lagged dependent variable to 0.729 (s.e.=0.030). Although this change is in

31

The regression includes the average of the log of per capita GDP over the 5-year periods; that is, the average of the
first through fifth lag. The instrument list includes the 6-year lag of the log of per capita GDP. The schooling
variable is the average of the contemporaneous and 5-year lag with the 5-year lag used as an instrument.

29

the same direction as before (Table 4, column 6), the effect is now much smaller in magnitude.
This result is expected because of the much longer time series employed in Table 5. With the
variables observed over 139 years, the Hurwicz bias in the presence of country fixed effects may
be small (see n. 23 and the Monte Carlo results in the appendix).
The standard errors of the estimated coefficients of the per capita GDP and schooling
variables go up, as before, with the introduction of country fixed effects. However, these effects
are smaller than before, and the estimated coefficient of the log of per capita GDP, 0.0732
(s.e.=0.0283), remains significantly positive in Table 5, column 4. The estimated coefficient on
the schooling variable, 0.0119 (s.e.=0.0097), is still positive but no longer statistically significant
at the 5% level. Most importantly from the perspective of the modernization hypothesis, the
estimated coefficients on the per capita GDP and schooling variables are jointly statistically
significant with a p-value of 0.013. Hence, even with the inclusion of country fixed effects, the
long-term sample supports the modernization hypothesis with regard to the overall effects of per
capita GDP and schooling on the Polity indicator for democracy.32
VII. Natural Experiments
An attractive way to avoid estimation problems related to the endogeneity of X variables
is to exploit natural experiments in which cross-economy differences are clearly exogenous and
substantial. This approach has been applied particularly to studies of the consequences of
differences in institutional quality. Two frequently mentioned cases of this kind are the postWWII separations of Germany into East and West and of Korea between North and South.

32

Acemoglu, et al. (2008, Table 7) argue that lagged per capita GDP lacks significant explanatory power for the
Polity indicator over long samples for 25 countries starting in 1875. However, their analysis relies on the
questionable Maddison data and—because of limitations in the availability of the Maddison data—considers effects
only with a lag of 25 years. (They also fail to find significant effects at 50-year lags for a larger sample of
countries.)

30

One attraction of these “natural experiments’ is that they isolate sharp differences in the
quality of institutions (West Germany being superior to East Germany and South Korea being
better than North Korea), while (as in the labor-economics literature on twins) arguably avoiding
substantial differences in most other X variables. Most importantly, the sources of the better
institutions are plausibly exogenous political events, rather than responses to economic
conditions. It is, therefore, convincing in these cases that the reason for higher GDP growth rates
post-separation in the places with better institutions is the better institutions.
Although these kinds of natural experiments are useful, a serious drawback is the
selection issue about which cases to consider. There is a tendency to focus on examples that
work; that is, where the underlying differences in institutional quality are clear and due to
exogenous political events and also where these differences are, in fact, accompanied by large
growth-rate differentials in the hypothesized direction.
Consider as an example the peaceful split of Czechoslovakia into two independent
countries in 1993. It would have been easy to argue at the time (as I recall doing myself) that the
more highly developed Czech Republic retained high-quality institutions, whereas the Slovak
Republic ended up with an institutional void. And, if the relative growth performances after
1993 had strongly favored the Czech Republic, this case would likely have joined Germany and
Korea as a clear demonstration of the importance of institutional differences in promoting
economic growth.33 Yet, in practice, real per capita GDP in the Slovak Republic grew from
1993 to 2009 at 4.7% per year, whereas that in the Czech Republic grew by 3.1% per year—so
that the ratio of Czech to Slovak per capita GDP fell from 1.48 in 1993 to 1.15 in 2009. This

33

However, unlike North and South Korea, the Czech and Slovak parts of Czechoslovakia had major differences in
ethnic and cultural backgrounds (differences that also applied for East versus West Germany). Although the ethnocultural division explained the way that Czechoslovakia was divided up, the timing of the split in 1993 and the fact
of the breakup at all can still be regarded as mainly exogenous.

31

outcome seems consistent with usual convergence behavior without having to condition on major
differences in institutional quality. However, in the usual analysis of natural experiments, the
Czech/Slovak case is not taken as contrary evidence to the hypothesis that institutional quality is
the key to economic growth. Instead, this case is typically ignored.
Similar observations apply to many other cases that could have been considered; for
example, effects on institutional quality and economic growth from breakups of the Soviet Union
and Yugoslavia into independent republics. To carry out this kind of analysis in an organized
and global manner, it is necessary to have a comprehensive sample that includes measures of
institutional quality, just as in the cross-country panel regressions of Table 1. Therefore, in the
end, the appeal to natural experiments does not avoid many of the estimation issues associated
with usual regression analyses.
VIII. Cross-Country Dispersion of Per Capita GDP and Consumption
The concept of convergence discussed thus far pertains to whether countries that are
poorer (in absolute terms or in relation to their own steady-state positions) tend to grow faster
than richer ones. In Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991), this concept is called β-convergence and is
distinguished from another form (σ-convergence) that relates to a tendency for the crosssectional dispersion of per capita GDP to decline over time. This dispersion can be measured in
proportionate terms by the cross-sectional standard deviation of the log of per capita GDP.
If all countries have the same steady-state per capita GDP, then the existence of β
convergence tends to reduce the cross-sectional dispersion over time. However, if individual
country shocks are present, these shocks tend to raise dispersion. With purely idiosyncratic
country shocks, the cross-sectional variance tends to approach a value that depends positively on
the variance of the shocks and negatively on the rate of β convergence. The cross-sectional
32

variance tends to fall over time if it starts above its steady-state value but tends, otherwise, to rise
over time (even though β convergence is present). If the sample comprises a large number of
countries that have existed with fixed underlying parameters for a long time, the cross-sectional
variance will tend at any point in time to be close to its long-run value.34
The long-term data on per capita GDP and consumption described in Ursúa (2011) can be
used to study the long-run evolution of cross-country dispersion (see n. 29). Figure 1 applies to
the longest feasible sample, 1870-2009, for which 25 countries (20 of which were subsequently
OECD members) have annual data on real per capita GDP. The countries are listed in the note to
the figure. Dispersion is measured by the standard deviation across countries of the log of real
per capita GDP. The blue line weights countries equally, and the red line weights by population
(thereby corresponding under some conditions to the dispersion of income for persons rather
than countries).
The blue line (equally weighted) in Figure 1 shows small changes over time, when
considered in relation to subsequent figures. The range is from 0.58 in 2009 to 0.71 in 1946.
The main movement away from the mean of 0.65 associates with WWII—the standard deviation
rose from 0.62 in 1938 to 0.71 in 1946. During this crisis period, shocks had a high spatial
correlation and affected groups of countries differentially, thereby violating the assumption of
purely idiosyncratic country shocks.35 Otherwise, the main finding is that the cross-sectional

34

The notion that a tendency for the poor to grow faster than the rich implies a negative trend in dispersion or
inequality is a fallacy; in fact, it is Galton’s Fallacy (Galton [1886, 1889], Quah [1993], Hart [1995]), which Galton
applied to the distribution of heights across a population. For generations of an extended family, height has positive
persistence but tends to revert to the population mean, thereby constituting a form of β convergence. Nevertheless,
the dispersion of heights across the overall population typically changes little over time.
35
Similarly, in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991, Figure 4), the large dispersion in per capita personal income across
the U.S. states in 1880 reflects the differential impact of the Civil War on the South versus the North. However,
across the U.S. states, the long-run standard deviation for the log of per capita personal income was only around 0.2,
much smaller than that across countries.

33

standard deviation of the log of per capita GDP is remarkably stable since 1870 around its mean
of 0.65.
The red line (population weighted) tells a similar story, except that this measure of
dispersion is more sensitive to the major crises during the world wars and the 1990s in Russia (a
relatively poor country with a large population). In 2009, the population-weighted standard
deviation of 0.60 is close to the equally-weighted value of 0.58.
Figure 2 extends to a larger sample by using the 34 countries with GDP data starting at
least by 1896. This sample is less subject than the 25-country group used before to the sampleselection problem of tending to include countries that were rich toward the end of the sample.
The note to the figure lists the countries. Most importantly, this extension adds the world’s two
largest countries by population, China and India.
The dispersion measured by the blue line (equally weighted) in Figure 2 is higher than
that in Figure 1 because the expansion of the sample brings in several countries with per capita
GDP well below the mean. Compared to Figure 1, the blue graph in Figure 2 shows more
substantial changes over time, with the standard deviation starting at 0.87 in 1896 and rising
during the Great Depression and WWII to 1.04 in 1946. That is, the years from the early 1930s
through the mid 1940s exhibit a “great divergence,” which persists through the mid 1970s. From
there on, the standard deviation falls from 1.07 in 1974 to 0.79 in 2009. The decline in this last
phase reflects particularly the strong growth in developing countries, including China, India, and
Indonesia.36 We can anticipate that, in the long run, the standard deviation in this 34-country
sample will fall toward the average value of 0.65 found in Figure 1—because the added

36

Thus, the sample-selection criterion in Figure 1 (25 countries having GDP data back to 1870) actually understates
σ convergence compared to that in Figure 2 (34 countries having GDP data back to 1896). The results in Baumol
(1986, Figure 1) were the reverse—with the restriction of the sample to 16 countries with data from Maddison
(1982) back to 1870 tending to overstate σ convergence.

34

developing countries seem to be joining the richer group selected in Figure 1 (by the criterion of
having GDP data back to 1870).
The red line (population weighted) in Figure 2 starts with higher dispersion than the blue
line (equally weighted) because the largest countries by population, China and India, begin far
below the world mean for per capita GDP. The trend in the population-weighted series is similar
to that for the equally-weighted series in exhibiting a great divergence from the early 1930s
through the 1940s and persisting up to the mid 1970s. Thereafter, the dispersion falls sharply,
going from 1.58 in 1974 to 0.85 in 2009. This recent trend, highlighted in terms of the world
distribution of income by Sala-i-Martin (2006), reflects particularly the strong growth in China
since the late 1970s and in India since the mid 1980s.
To study the dispersion in consumption, the sample has to begin later to include a
substantial number of countries. Figures 3 and 4 cover 29 countries observed for per capita
personal consumer expenditure, C, since 1919. Note that this sample, listed in the note to
Figure 3, includes India but not China (because C data for China start only in 1952).
Figure 3 shows the equal-weight dispersion in GDP and C for the 29 countries. The
levels and patterns in the two series do not differ greatly, although C dispersion is lower than
GDP dispersion in most years. In 2009, the two values are similar—0.69 for GDP and 0.68
for C. Both series show modest declines since the mid 1970s—GDP dispersion falls from 0.85
in 1973 to 0.69 in 2009, while C dispersion falls from 0.79 in 1973 to 0.68 in 2009.
Figure 4 has the population-weighted measures. The exclusion of China is important
when comparing with the population-weighted series for GDP in Figure 2. The GDP and C
series in Figure 4 again show similar levels and trends. The C series is lower in most years but

35

higher since 1994. The two series show declines since 1979 but not as much as in Figure 2
because of the exclusion of China in Figure 4.
IX. Summary Observations
For a large panel of countries since the 1960s, the estimated conditional convergence rate
for per capita GDP is around 1.7% per year in systems with a rich array of explanatory variables
but no country fixed effects. The results feature statistically significant influences on economic
growth from institutional quality, measured by maintenance of law and order and democracy.
Analogous settings support the modernization hypothesis, in the sense of significantly positive
impacts of per capita GDP and schooling on the indicators for maintenance of law and order and
democracy.
The inclusion of country fixed effects produces much higher convergence rates,
eliminates statistically significant effects of the institutional measures on economic growth, and
removes the statistical support for modernization. I argue that these problematic findings reflect
econometric issues associated with the inclusion of country fixed effects in panels with moderate
time dimension.
In a panel for a limited number of countries observed since 1870, the estimated
conditional convergence rate in the presence of country fixed effects is about 2.4% per year.
This setting supports the modernization hypothesis in the sense of statistically significant,
positive effects from per capita GDP on democracy. These “reasonable” results with country
fixed effects likely arise because the econometric problems posed by country fixed effects may
not be serious in samples with long time frames.
A combination of the results from short and long panels implies that the conditional
convergence rate is in the neighborhood of the “iron-law” rate of 2% per year. The similar
36

findings from these two very different empirical settings suggest that a conditional convergence
rate of around 2% may be a robust empirical regularity. The two settings considered jointly also
provide strong support for the modernization hypothesis.

37

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001). “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
91, December, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2002). “Reversal of Fortune:
Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, November, 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2005). “From
Education to Democracy?” American Economic Review Proceedings, 95, May, 44-49.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2008). “Income and
Democracy,” American Economic Review, 98, September, 808-842.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt (2005).
Competition and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120, May, 701-728.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt (1992). “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 60, March, 323-351.
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond (1991). “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of
Economic Studies, 58, April, 277-297.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962). “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” Review of
Economic Studies, 29, June, 155-173.
Aristotle (1932). Politics, translated by H. Rackham, Cambridge MA, Harvard University
Press.
Barro, Robert J. (1991). “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 106, May, 407-443.
Barro, Robert J. (1997). Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study,
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. (1999). “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy, 107,
November, part 2, S158-S183.
Barro, Robert J. (2002). “Eastern Germany—A Lesson in Welfare Dependency,” in R.J. Barro,
Nothing Is Sacred, Cambridge MA, MIT Press.

38

Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2012). “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
World, 1950-2010,” unpublished, Harvard University, April, forthcoming in Journal of
Development Economics.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary (2003). “Religion and Economic Growth,” American
Sociological Review, 68, October, 760-781.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1991). “Convergence across States and Regions,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 107-182.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992). “Convergence,” Journal of Political
Economy, 100, April, 223-251.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004). Economic Growth, 2nd ed., Cambridge MA,
MIT Press.
Baumol, William J. (1986). “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: What the LongRun Data Show,” American Economic Review, 76, December, 1072-1085.
Becker, Gary S. (1991). “The Demand for Children,” chapter 5 in A Treatise on the Family,
Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press.
Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond (1998). “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 87, November, 115-143.
Bollen, Kenneth A. (1980). “Issues in the Comparative Measurement of Political Democracy,”
American Sociological Review, 45, June, 370-390.
Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur John Coleman (2001). “Technology Diffusion: The Case of
Computers,” American Economic Review, 91, May, 328-335.
Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort (1996). “Reopening the
Convergence Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 1, September, 363-389.
Cass, David (1965). “Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 32, July, 233-240.
Coe, David T. and Elhanan Helpman (1995). “International R&D Spillovers,” European
Economic Review, 39, May, 59-887.
Dahl, Robert A. (1991). Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition, New Haven CT, Yale
University Press.
De Long, J. Bradford (1988). “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment,”
American Economic Review, 78, December, 1138-1154.
39

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (1997). “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies: A View from Economic
Historians of the United States,” in Stephen Haber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind,
Stanford CA, Stanford University Press.
Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote (2009). “Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as
Natural Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91, May, 245-262.
Galton, Francis (1886). “Regression towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 15, 246-263.
Galton, Francis (1889). Natural Inheritance, London, Macmillan.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004).
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, September, 271-303.
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer (2007). “Why Does
Democracy Need Education?” Journal of Economic Growth, 12, June, 77-99.
Griliches, Zvi (1973). “Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting,” in Bruce R. Williams,
ed., Science and Technology in Economic Growth, New York, Macmillan.
Griliches, Zvi (1988). “Productivity Puzzles and R&D: Another Explanation,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2, Fall, 9-21.
Griliches, Zvi and Frank Lichtenberg (1984). “R&D and Productivity Growth at the Industry
Level: Is There Still a Relationship?” in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents, and
Productivity, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1991). Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999). “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, February, 83-116.
Hart, Peter E. (1995). “Galtonian Regression across Countries and the Convergence of
Productivity,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 57, August, 287-293.
Hauk, William R. and Romain Wacziarg (2009). “A Monte Carlo Study of Growth
Regressions,” Journal of Economic Growth, 14, June, 103-147.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1991). The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century,
Norman Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press.
Hurwicz, Leonid (1950). “Least-Squares Bias in Time Series,” in Tjalling C. Koopmans, ed.,
Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, Wiley, New York.
40

Islam, Nazrul (1995). “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110, November, 1127-1170.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches (1967). “The Explanation of Productivity Change,”
Review of Economic Studies, 34, July, 249-280.
Kiviet, Jan F. (1995). “On Bias, Inconsistency, and Efficiency of Various Estimators in
Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 68, July, 53-78.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer (1995). ‘‘Institutions and Economic Performance: CrossCountry Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,’’Economics and Politics, 7,
November, 207–227.
Knight, Frank H. (1944). “Diminishing Returns from Investment,” Journal of Political
Economy, 52, March, 26-47.
Knight, Malcolm, Norman Loayza, and Delano Villanueva (1993). “Testing the Neoclassical
Theory of Economic Growth,” IMF Staff Papers, 40, September, 512-541.
Koopmans, Tjalling C. (1965). “On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth,” in The
Econometric Approach to Development Planning, Amsterdam, North-Holland.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1998).
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, December, 1113-1155.
Lee, Jong-Wha (1993). “International Trade, Distortions, and Long-Run Economic Growth,”
IMF Staff Papers, 40, June, 299-328.
Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959). ‘‘Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
Development and Political Legitimacy,’’ American Political Science Review, 53, March,
69–105.
Lucas, Robert E. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, July, 3-42.
Maddison, Angus (1982). Phases of Capitalist Development, New York, Oxford University
Press.
Maddison, Angus (2003). The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris, OECD, available at
www.ggdc.net/maddison.
Malthus, Thomas R. (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Population, London, W. Pickering
(1986).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil (1992). “A Contribution to the Empirics
of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, May, 407-437.
41

Manuelli, Rodolfo and Ananth Seshadri (2009). “Explaining International Fertility Differences,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, May, 771-807.
Marx, Karl (1913). A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Chicago, Kerr.
Mauro, Paolo (1995). ‘‘Corruption and Growth,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, August,
681–712.
Mitchell, Brian R. (2003a). International Historical Statistics: The Americas 1750-1993, New
York, M. Stockton Press.
Mitchell, Brian R. (2003a). International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750-1993, New
York, M. Stockton Press.
Mitchell, Brian R. (2003a). International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia, and Oceania 17501993, New York, M. Stockton Press.
Morrisson, Christian and Fabrice Murtin (2008). “The Century of Education,” Paris School of
Economics, working paper no. 2008-22.
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps (1966). “Investment in Humans, Technological
Diffusion, and Economic Growth, American Economic Review, 56, May, 69-75.
Nerlove, Marc (2000). “Growth Rate Convergence: Fact or Artifact?” in Jaya Krishnakumar
and Elvezio Ronchetti, eds., Panel Data Econometrics: Future Directions, Amsterdam,
North-Holland, 3-34.
Nickell, Stephen (1981). “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 49,
November, 1417-1426.
Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1993). “Political Regimes and Economic Growth,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7, Summer, 51-69.
Quah, Danny (1993). “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 95, December, 427-443.
Ramsey, Frank (1928). “A Mathematical Theory of Saving,” Economic Journal, 38, December,
543-559.
Rebelo, Sergio (1991). “Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99, June, 500-521.
Rodrik, Dani (2012). “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing,” unpublished, Harvard
University, July.
Romer, Paul M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 94, October, 1002-1037.
42

Romer, Paul M. (1987). “Growth Based on Increasing Returns due to Specialization,” American
Economic Review Proceedings, 77, May, 56-62.
Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy,
98, October, part II, S71-S102.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2006). “The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and …
Convergence, Period,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, May, 351-397.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer, and Ronald Miller (2004). “Determinants of LongTerm Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,”
American Economic Review, 94, September, 813-835.
Solow, Robert M. (1956). “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 70, February, 65-94.
Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review
of Economics & Statistics, 39, August, 312-320.
Swan, Trevor W. (1956). “Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation,” Economic Record, 32,
November, 334-361.
Ursúa, José F. 2011. “Macroeconomic Archaeology: Unearthing Risk, Disasters, and Trends,”
unpublished, Harvard University, April.
Uzawa (1965). “Optimal Technical Change in an Aggregative Model of Economic Growth,”
International Economic Review, 6, January, 18-31.

43

Table 1 Growth-Rate Regressions for Cross-Country Panel
Five-year periods: 1960-65, …, 2005-09
(all equations include time effects)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
No Fixed
Fixed effects
No Fixed
Fixed effects
Effects
Effects
0.0019
-0.0326**
-0.0171**
-0.0447**
Log(lagged per capita GDP)
(0.0012)
(0.0048)
(0.0022)
(0.0051)
---2.59**
-1.15
1/(life expectancy at birth)
(0.65)
(1.22)
---0.0340**
-0.0351**
Log(fertility rate)
(0.0046)
(0.0083)
--0.0165**
0.0045
Law & order (rule of law)
(0.0059)
(0.0103)
--0.021
0.014
Investment ratio
(0.013)
(0.026)
--0.0035*
0.0062
Female school years
(0.0014)
(0.0037)
---0.0036*
-0.0107**
Male school years
(0.0015)
(0.0035)
---0.021
-0.083
Government consumption
(0.025)
(0.059)
ratio
--0.0066*
0.0129
Openness ratio
(0.0027)
(0.0082)
--0.103**
0.092**
Terms-of-trade change
(0.027)
(0.029)
--0.054**
0.021
Democracy indicator
(0.019)
(0.027)
---0.055**
-0.027
Democracy squared
(0.017)
(0.024)
---0.0138
-0.0315*
Inflation rate
(0.0087)
(0.0156)
0.095
0.381
0.349
0.511
R-squared
0.0274
0.0239
0.0236
0.0216
s.e. of regression
80; 783
80; 783
80; 760
80; 760
No. countries; observations
*Significant at 5% level.
**Significant at 1% level.

44

Notes to Table 1
The dependent variable is the annual growth rate of real per capita GDP for the ten
periods: 1960-65, 1965-70, …, 2005-09. The last period ends in 2009 because of data
availability. Lagged per capita GDP is for 1960, 1965, …, 2005. Values for 1959, 1964, …,
2004 are used as instruments. Other regressors are averages over periods, with lagged values
used as instruments. The error terms are allowed to be correlated over time within countries.
Standard errors of coefficient estimates are in parentheses. The sample criterion was to include
countries only if they have data starting by the 1965-70 period. The democracy indicator is the
political-rights variable from Freedom House. Joint p-values for the two democracy variables
are 0.004 in column 3 and 0.26 in column 4. The fixed effects in columns 2 and 4 are dummies
for 79 of the countries shown in Table 2.
Definitions and sources:
PPP-adjusted real per capita GDP is from Penn World Tables
(www.pwt.econ.upenn.edu), version 7.0, in units of 2005 international dollars. Also from this
source are the ratios to GDP of investment (private plus public) and government consumption
and the openness ratio (exports plus imports relative to GDP). These ratio variables use currentprice information.
Life expectancy at birth and total fertility rate are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI).
The law-and-order indicator (converted from seven categories to a 0-1 scale, with 1
representing highest maintenance of law and order) is from Political Risk Services, International
Country Risk Guide.
Average years of school attainment for females and males and at various levels of
schooling are from Barro and Lee data set. Source: “Educational Attainment Data,” available at
www.rbarro.com/data-sets.
The terms-of-trade change (growth rates over five years of export prices relative to
import prices) is from International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, and WDI.
This variable is interacted with the openness ratio.
The political-rights variable (converted from seven categories to a 0-1 scale, with 1
representing highest rights) is from Freedom House (www.freedomhouse.org). Data on an
analogous concept for 1960 and 1965 are from Bollen (1980).
The inflation rate (averaged over 5-year intervals) is calculated from retail-price indexes
from International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, and WDI.

45

Table 2
Sample of 80 Countries Used in Regressions in Table 1
Country
Starting period
Country
Starting period
Argentina
1960-65
Jordan
1965-70
Australia
1960-65
Japan
1960-65
Austria
1960-65
Kenya
1965-70
Belgium
1960-65
South Korea
1965-70
Bangladesh
1965-70
Sri Lanka
1960-65
Bolivia
1965-70
Luxembourg
1965-70
Brazil
1965-70
Morocco
1960-65
Botswana
1965-70
Mexico
1960-65
Canada
1960-65
Mali
1965-70
Switzerland
1960-65
Malawi
1965-70
Chile
1960-65
Malaysia
1960-65
China
1965-70
Niger
1965-70
Cote d’Ivoire
1965-70
Nicaragua
1965-70
Cameroon
1965-70
Netherlands
1960-65
Congo, Republic
1965-70
Norway
1960-65
Colombia
1960-65
New Zealand
1960-65
Costa Rica
1960-65
Pakistan
1965-70
Cyprus
1960-65
Panama
1965-70
Denmark
1960-65
Peru
1965-70
Dominican Republic
1960-65
Philippines
1960-65
Algeria
1965-70
Papua New Guinea
1965-70
Ecuador
1960-65
Portugal
1960-65
Egypt
1960-65
Paraguay
1960-65
Spain
1960-65
Senegal
1965-70
Finland
1960-65
Singapore
1965-70
France
1960-65
Sierra Leone
1965-70
Gabon
1965-70
El Salvador
1960-65
United Kingdom
1960-65
Sweden
1960-65
Ghana
1965-70
Togo
1965-70
Gambia
1965-70
Thailand
1960-65
Greece
1960-65
Trinidad
1960-65
Guatemala
1960-65
Tunisia
1965-70
Honduras
1960-65
Turkey
1965-70
Haiti
1965-70
Taiwan
1965-70
Indonesia
1965-70
Uganda
1965-70
India
1960-65
Uruguay
1965-70
Ireland
1960-65
United States
1960-65
Iceland
1960-65
Venezuela
1965-70
Italy
1960-65
South Africa
1960-65
Jamaica
1960-65
Zambia
1965-70

46

Table 3 Additional Growth-Rate Regressions for Cross-Country Panel
(all equations include time effects)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Two sets of
Polity
OLS
Ten-year
fixed effects
variable
periods
-0.0173**
-0.0163**
-0.0783**
-0.0164**
Log(lagged per capita GDP)
(0.0022)
(0.0023)
(0.0094)
(0.0023)
-2.72**
-2.65**
-2.80
-2.75**
1/(life expectancy at birth)
(0.61)
(0.76)
(1.77)
(0.66)
-0.0307**
-0.0317**
-0.0328*
-0.0326**
Log(fertility rate)
(0.0046)
(0.0050)
(0.0137)
(0.0048)
0.0159**
0.0161*
0.0217
0.0124*
Law & order (rule of law)
(0.0056)
(0.0066)
(0.0161)
(0.0059)
0.041**
0.011
0.010
0.010
Investment ratio
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.039)
(0.014)
0.0035*
0.0030*
0.0092
0.0026
Female school years
(0.0014)
(0.0014)
(0.0058)
(0.0015)
-0.0037*
-0.0033
-0.0111*
-0.0030
Male school years
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0054)
(0.0015)
-0.026
-0.024
-0.114
-0.036
Government consumption
(0.023)
(0.028)
(0.090)
(0.026)
ratio
0.0061*
0.0057
0.0263*
0.0061*
Openness ratio
(0.0025)
(0.0032)
(0.0107)
(0.0029)
0.101**
0.100*
0.094**
0.120**
Terms-of-trade change
(0.027)
(0.041)
(0.030)
(0.028)
0.039*
0.031
0.051
0.031
Democracy indicator
(0.016)
(0.024)
(0.033)
(0.021)
-0.039**
-0.035
-0.056
-0.036
Democracy squared
(0.014)
(0.022)
(0.031)
(0.019)
-0.0198**
-0.0157
-0.0091
-0.0108
Inflation rate
(0.0040)
(0.0138)
(0.0250)
(0.0091)
0.351
0.472
0.628
0.327
R-squared
0.0236
0.0174
0.0201
0.0231
s.e. of regression
80; 774
80; 359
80; 760
78; 691
No. countries; observations
*Significant at 5% level.
**Significant at 1% level.

47

Notes to Table 3
See the notes to Table 1.
Column 1 corresponds to column 3 of Table 1 but all regressors are on the instrument list
(corresponding to OLS, except for allowing the error terms to be correlated over time within
countries). The p-value for the two electoral-rights variables jointly is 0.027. Results from OLS
have the same estimated coefficients, but the standard errors of these coefficients are somewhat
lower (except for the terms-of-trade variable). For example, for the log of lagged GDP, the
standard error declines from 0.0022 to 0.0018.
The other columns estimate by instrumental variables, as in Table 1. Column 2
corresponds to column 3 of Table 1, except that the dependent variable is the growth rate of per
capita GDP for the five “10-year” periods 1960-70, …, 2000-09. The regressors are defined
analogously for the 10-year periods.
Column 3 corresponds to column 4 of Table 1 but has one set of fixed effects for the five
5-year growth-rate observations from 1960-65 to 1980-85 and another set for the five
observations from 1985-90 to 2005-09.
Column 4 is the same as column 3 of Table 1, except that the democracy indicator (the
Freedom House measure of political rights) is replaced by the Polity measure of democracy less
autocracy. The joint p-value for the two Polity variables is 0.045.
Sources: The Polity indicator is for democracy less autocracy (converted from a -10 to
+10 scale to a 0-1 scale, with 1 representing highest democracy), from Polity IV
(www.systemicpeace.org). Other sources are given in the notes to Table 1.

48

Table 4 Regressions for Indicators of Law & Order and Democracy
(five-year periods; all equations include time effects)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Law & Order:
Political Rights
1985-90, …, 2005-09,
(Freedom House):
1970-75, …, 2005-09,
Fixed effects
Fixed effects
0.708**
0.332**
0.796**
0.456**
Lagged dependent variable
(0.026)
(0.045)
(0.018)
(0.034)
0.0248**
-0.0353
0.0112
-0.0262
Log(per capita GDP)
(0.0066)
(0.0395)
(0.0067)
(0.0349)
-0.0093
0.0316
--Female school years
(0.0062)
(0.0299)
0.0164*
-0.0195
--Male school years
(0.0068)
(0.0283)
--0.0439**
0.0028
Female primary school
(0.0138)
(0.0394)
years
---0.0279
-0.0202
Male primary school
(0.0146)
(0.0423)
years
---0.0367*
-0.0201
Female upper school
(0.0153)
(0.0442)
years
--0.0344*
-0.0075
Male upper school
(0.0142)
(0.0434)
years
0.016
0.49
0.034
0.14
p-value for total school
years
0.000
0.62
0.000
0.59
p-value for GDP, female
schooling, male schooling
0.764
0.842
0.775
0.830
R-squared
0.119
0.110
0.176
0.165
s.e. of regression
123; 574
123; 574
140; 996
140; 996
No. countries; observations
*Significant at 5% level.
**Significant at 1% level.

49

Table 4, continued
(5)
(6)
Democracy/Autocracy
(Polity):
1960-65, …, 2005-09
Fixed effects
0.805**
0.546**
Lagged dependent variable
(0.016)
(0.032)
-0.0022
0.034
Log(per capita GDP)
(0.0061)
(0.033)
--Female school years
--Male school years
0.0384**
0.0104
Female primary school
(0.0123)
(0.0323)
years
-0.0171
0.0462
Male primary school
(0.0128)
(0.0358)
years
-0.0224
0.0267
Female upper school
(0.0137)
(0.0371)
years
0.0218
-0.0621
Male upper school
(0.0130)
(0.0369)
years
0.000
0.41
p-value for total school
years
0.000
0.005
p-value for GDP, female
schooling, male schooling
0.805
0.841
R-squared
0.166
0.161
s.e. of regression
132; 1019
132; 1019
No. countries; observations
*Significant at 5% level.
**Significant at 1% level.

50

Notes to Table 4
See the notes to Tables 1 and 3.
The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the indicator for law and order from
International Country Risk Guide, observed at the five dates: 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2009.
In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the Freedom House measure of political rights,
observed at the eight dates: 1975, …, 2009. In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the
Polity measure of democracy less autocracy, observed at the ten dates: 1965, …, 2009. The
lagged dependent variable applies to 1985, …, 2005 in columns 1 and 2; 1970, …, 2005 in
columns 3 and 4; and 1960, …, 2005 in columns 5 and 6. These lagged dependent variables are
on the instrument lists. As in Table 1, the other regressors are averages over periods, with lagged
values used as instruments. The error terms are allowed to be correlated over time within
countries. Standard errors of coefficient estimates are in parentheses. Country fixed effects are
included in columns 2, 4, and 6.

51

Table 5 Regressions for Long-Term Panel
Five-year periods: 1870-75, …, 2005-09
(all equations include time effects)
Regressions for Growth Rate of per capita GDP
(1)
No Fixed
Effects
-0.0024*
Log(lagged per capita GDP)
(0.0010)
0.209
R-squared
0.0277
s.e. of regression
34; 924
No. countries; observations
Regressions for Polity Indicator
(3)
No Fixed
Effects
0.760**
Lagged Polity
(0.027)
0.0321*
Log(per capita GDP)
(0.0158)
0.0145**
School years
(0.0044)
0.000
p-value for GDP and school years
0.808
R-squared
0.145
s.e. of regression
26; 646
No. countries; observations
*Significant at 5% level.
**Significant at 1% level.

52

(2)
Fixed
Effects
-0.0241**
(0.0035)
0.258
0.0274
34; 924
(4)
Fixed
Effects
0.729**
(0.030)
0.0732**
(0.0283)
0.0119
(0.0097)
0.013
0.814
0.146
26; 646

Notes to Table 5
The sample criterion in the upper part was to include countries only if they have GDP
data starting by 1896. This criterion selected 34 countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal,
Russia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States,
Uruguay, and Venezuela. For the lower part, countries also had Polity data starting at least by
1901 and schooling data starting by 1870. The 8 countries lost from the GDP sample were
China, Egypt, Finland, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Russia, and Sri Lanka. Standard errors of
coefficient estimates are in parentheses.
Columns 1-2: The dependent variable is the annual growth rate of real per capita GDP
for the 34 countries for 28 periods: 1870-75, 1875-80, …, 2005-09. Lagged per capita GDP is
for 1870, 1875, …, 2005. Values for 1869, 1874, …, 2004 are used as instruments. The error
terms are allowed to be correlated over time within countries. The fixed effects in column 2 are
dummies for 33 of the countries.
Columns 3-4: The dependent variable is the Polity measure of democracy less the
measure of autocracy, observed for the 26 countries at 28 dates: 1875, 1880, …, 2009. The
lagged dependent variable applies to 1870, 1875, …, 2005. These lagged dependent variables
are on the instrument lists. The log(per capita GDP) variables are averages over the periods,
with lagged values used as instruments. The schooling variable (included on the instrument list)
is a 5-year lag, with values before 1950 interpolated from 10-year values. The error terms are
allowed to be correlated over time within countries. The fixed effects in column 4 are dummies
for 25 of the countries.
Sources: GDP and consumption (personal consumer expenditure) are from “BarroUrsúa Macroeconomic Data,” available at www.rbarro.com/data-sets. The source of the Polity
indicator is given in the notes to Table 3. Schooling data since 1950 are years of attainment for
the overall population aged 15 and above from the Barro-Lee data described in the notes to
Table 1. Schooling data before 1950 are for the overall population aged 15 and above from
Morrison and Murtin (2008). These data were adjusted in accordance with the proportionate
difference in the two sources for 1950.

53

Figure 1
Cross-Country Dispersion of the Log of per capita GDP
25 countries, 1870-2009

1.8

standard deviation

1.6
1.4
Equal weights
Weighted by population

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
1875

1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

Note: The 25 countries included are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, and
Uruguay. The graphs show the cross-sectional standard deviation of the log of real per capita
GDP. The blue series has equal weights; the red series weights each country by population. The
source of data (which also includes data on population) is given in the notes to Table 5.

54

Figure 2
Cross-Country Dispersion of the Log of per capita GDP
34 countries, 1896-2009
1.8

standard deviation

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

Equal weights
Weighted by population

0.6
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

Note: The 34 countries included are Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, and Venezuela. The graphs
show the cross-sectional standard deviation of the log of real per capita GDP. The blue series
has equal weights; the red series weights each country by population. The source of data (which
also includes data on population) is given in the notes to Table 5.

55

Figure 3
Cross-Country Dispersion of Logs of per capita
GDP and Consumption
29 countries, 1919-2009, equal weights

1.8

standard deviation

1.6
GDP (equal weights)
Consumption (equal weights)

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6
1925

1950

1975

2000

Note: The 29 countries included are Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan,
Turkey, United Kingdom, and United States. The graphs show the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the log of real per capita GDP (blue graph) and the log of real per capita personal
consumer expenditure (red graph), where countries have equal weights. The source of data
(which also includes data on population) is given in the notes to Table 5.

56

Figure 4
Cross-Country Dispersion of Logs of per capita
GDP and Consumption
29 countries, 1919-2009, weighted by population

1.8

standard deviation

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

GDP (population weighted)
Consumption (population weighted)

0.8

0.6
1925

1950

1975

2000

Note: The note to Figure 3 shows the sample of countries. The graphs show the cross-sectional
standard deviation of the log of real per capita GDP (blue graph) and the log of real per capita
personal consumer expenditure (red graph), where countries are weighted by population. The
source of data (which also includes data on population) is given in the notes to Table 5.

57

Appendix
Monte Carlo Analysis of Dynamic Estimation with and without Fixed Effects
The dynamic model with fixed effects and no time-varying X variable follows Hurwicz
(1950), Nickell (1981), Arellano and Bond (1991), and Nerlove (2000):
(A1)

yit = ηi + γ·yi, t-1 + εit,

where i = 1, …, N represents “countries;” t = 1, …, T represents periods; yit is per capita GDP or
some other country-time variable; 0<γ<1; and εit ̴ N(0, &' ) is an i.i.d. shock. I think of the fixed
effect, ηi, as being drawn once for each country at the beginning of time, where ηi ̴ N(0, &( ) is
an i.i.d. disturbance. (The normality assumption should not be important here.) As stressed by
Nerlove (2000), the initial sample value yi0 cannot be viewed as independent of ηi, because yi0
comes from the cumulation of equation (A1) from the indefinite past; hence, yi0 depends on ηi
(

+%

and past realizations of the εit. Specifically, we have yi0 ̴ N(! )*, ! ,*). Therefore, a country that
gets a high draw for ηi tends also to have a high yi0.
The model with the addition of a time-varying, exogenous X variable is:
(A2)

yit = ηi + γ·yi, t-1 + α·Xit + εit,

(A3)

Xit = ρ·Xi,t-1 + uit,

where ηi, γ, and εit are defined as before, α is a constant, 0<ρ<1 governs the persistence of the X
variable, and uit ̴ N(0, &- ) is an i.i.d. shock. The initial sample value of the X variable is given
+%

accordingly by Xi0 ̴ N(0, ! ./). The initial sample value of y reflects its dependence on ηi and
past shocks to εit and uit from equations (A2) and (A3), and this dependence implies a
relationship with Xi0 (which depends on past shocks to uit). Specifically, we can write
58

(A4)

yi0 = φ·Xi0 + wi0,

where we can derive
(A5)

φ = α/[(1+ρ)(1-γρ)]

and wi0 ̴ N(0, σ1 ), independently of Xi0, where
(A6)

+%

&2 = ! ,* +

4% +.%

! */

%

5!

/

/ !"/

%

+

*%

! * !"*

6.

Equations (A4) and (A5) imply that, if α>0, a country that gets a high draw for Xi0 tends also to
have a high yi0.
If periods are of length τ (years), the persistence coefficient, γ, relates to the convergence
rate, β>0, from γ = e-βτ. I assume that βτ is much less than 1, so that γ ≈ 1-βτ and, hence,
β ≈ (1-γ)/τ. For annual periods (τ=1 year), the convergence rate per year is β ≈ 1-γ.
A. Model with Fixed Effects
Consider first the model in equation (A1) with a country fixed effect and no X variable.
The standard deviation of the time-series shock, σε, can be normalized to 1, so that ση represents
the dispersion of the country (cross-sectional) shock, relative to the time-series shock. In Nickell
(1981), the analysis applied as the number of cross sections, N, tended to infinity. In my Monte
Carlo analysis, N (number of countries) = 20 seems large enough to approximate this asymptotic
setting. I use N=100 below.
I contrast the results using OLS without country fixed effects with those using country
fixed effects (OLS with dummy variables). As discussed in the text, the estimated coefficients γ
and β from the two methods involve a tradeoff between two types of biases. I begin with a
heuristic description of the results.
59

For OLS without country fixed effects, the Hurwicz bias is unimportant—even if the time
dimension, T, is small—but an omitted-variables bias applies. The omitted variables are the
country fixed effects, ηi, which are positively correlated with the yit. This effect biases up the
estimated γ and, therefore, biases down the estimated β. This omitted-variables channel is more
important the larger ση. For small enough ση, the omitted-variables effect is minor, and OLS
without country fixed effects produces nearly unbiased estimates.
For OLS with country fixed effects, there are no omitted variables,37 but the Hurwicz bias
may be large. This effect biases down the estimated γ and, therefore, biases up the estimated β.
The size of the Hurwicz bias depends on the length of the time series, T. If T is small—even 20
or 50 years—the bias is substantial. However, for large enough T, the bias becomes small, so
that OLS with country fixed effects produces nearly unbiased estimates. However, even a
sample of 140 years (the largest time frame considered in the text) is not sufficient to make the
bias negligible. Unlike the case without country fixed effects, the size of ση is unimportant for
the bias—because the estimation takes account of the variations in the ηi.
The upper part of Table A1 applies to OLS estimation with country fixed effects. Two
values of the convergence rate, β = 1-γ, are considered, 0.02 and 0.10 per year. The emphasis in
this part of the table is on the effect of the time dimension, T, on the mean of the estimated 7 ,
shown in column 5. The bias is always upward, reflecting the Hurwicz channel. For example, if
β=0.02 per year, the mean of 7 when T=20 (line 1) is 0.151; that is, the upward bias is dramatic.
The mean of 7 falls to 0.070 when T=50 (line 2) and 0.036 when T=140 (line 5). Hence,
although the bias is much reduced compared to that applying to short time series, even T=140
years is insufficient to make the bias negligible. Changing the standard deviation ση of the fixed
37

If the equation for yit includes X variables—not all of which are included in the empirical specification—there
would still be an omitted-variables problem.

60

effect does not impact the results (lines 4 and 9 of the table) because the fixed effects are
estimated; that is, there is no omitted-variables problem here.
The results for E( 7 ) from Nickell’s formula, shown in column 4 of Table A1, are similar
to the Monte Carlo results for the mean of 7 in column 5. Some differences arise because
Nickell’s formula applies as the number of cross sections, N, approaches infinity. More
importantly, Nickell treated the initial sample values, yi0, as given, rather than allowing for a
relation with the fixed effect, ηi. This issue is more important in the estimation without country
fixed effects (not considered by Nickell [1981]).
The lower part of Table A1 applies to OLS estimation without country fixed effects. The
focus in this part of the table is on the impact of the standard deviation, ση, for the fixed effects.
The bias in the estimate 7 is always downward, reflecting the omitted-variables channel. For
example, when β=0.02, T=100, and ση=1 (line 11), the mean of 7 in column 5 is 0.0003. Hence,
the bias is sharply downward in this case. However, the mean of 7 rises to 0.011 when ση=0.1
(line 12) and 0.020 when ση=0.01 (line 14). Thus, because the Hurwicz bias is unimportant, the
estimate 7 is virtually unbiased for a ση that is small enough to make the omitted-variables bias
unimportant.
The time dimension, T, has a nonzero but moderate effect on the results without country
fixed effects (lines 13 and 17 of Table A1). For example, reducing T from 100 to 20 (lines 12
and 13) actually lowers the bias: the mean of the estimate 7 goes from 0.0111 to 0.0126 (but the
standard error of the estimate roughly doubles). I lack intuition for the reduced bias, but
analytical results analogous to Nickell’s formula could probably be generated for the setting
without country fixed effects.

61

Another approach is to consider estimation other than OLS, with or without country fixed
effects. For example, Arellano and Bond (1991) use a GMM procedure, using lags of the
dependent variable as instruments in a first-differenced setting. However, Blundell and Bond
(1998, pp. 115, 116, 120) note that this procedure suffers from a weak-instruments problem and
has large finite-sample bias. The problems are particularly serious when the coefficient on the
lagged dependent variable is close to unity (as in the typical context for growth convergence) and
when the relative variance of the fixed effect is large.
It would also be possible to adjust the OLS estimates to correct for bias. For estimation
with country fixed effects, the adjustment would be based on the time-series dimension, T.
However, the adjustments are sensitive to the behavior of X variables when these are included in
the model (below).
B. Model with Fixed Effects and an X Variable
Table A2 has the results for the model in equations (A2)-(A6), which adds an exogenous
X variable. The conditions σε=1 (for the time-series shock) and σu=1 (for the shock to the X
variable) are normalizations. The other assumptions are β (convergence rate) = 0.02, ση=0.1 (for
the fixed effect), ρ (persistence coefficient for the X process) = 0.98, and N (number of
countries) =100. Results are shown for α (coefficient of the X variable) equal to 0.05 or 0.25 and
T (time-series length) equal to 100 or 20.
Results from OLS without country fixed effects, shown in the lower part of Table A2, are
straightforward. If the X variable is included in the regression (lines 9-12), so that omittedvariables effects are minor, the OLS estimates of the convergence rate, β (and also for α, the
coefficient of the X variable) have small biases. These results follow because the Hurwicz bias
is again unimportant when fixed effects are excluded. Moreover, these findings apply for the
62

different values considered for α and T. However, if the X variable is excluded from the
regression (lines 13-16), the estimate 7 is seriously biased downward because of the omittedvariable effect described before. The bottom line is that satisfactory implementation of OLS
without fixed effects depends on the inclusion of the X variable.
The results for OLS with fixed effects are shown in the upper part of Table A2. The
conclusions with respect to 7 depend on the time-series length, T, and the coefficient α on the X
variable. For example, if T=100, the mean of 7 is 0.032 (line 1) when α=0.05, and the mean is
0.021 (line 2) when α=0.25. Hence, the bias is small with a 100-year sample when a lot of the
variation in the y variable reflects the observed X variable. However, if T=20, the mean of 7 is
0.103 (line 3) when α=0.05, and the mean is 0.029 (line 4) when α=0.25. That is, the Hurwicz
channel can lead to a strong upward bias when T=20.
When the X variable is excluded, the mean of 7 is 0.023 (line 5) when α=0.05 and
T=100. That is, the bias can be small with a long time series if α is not too large. However, the
mean of 7 is 0.007 (line 6) when α=0.25. That is, the bias is substantially downward because of
the important omitted-variables effect with this higher value of α. When T=20, the bias is
upward for each value of α because of the Hurwicz effect. The mean of 7 is 0.106 (line 7) when
α=0.05 and 0.033 (line 8) when α=0.25.
The results suggest circumstances when the regressions generate estimates of the
convergence rate, β, without large bias. The first is for OLS with country fixed effects when the
sample is large in the time domain. For example, when β=0.02, the fixed-effects model yields a
mean of 7 of 0.036 when T=140 (Table A1, line 5). For the model that adds an exogenous X
variable, the mean of 7 is 0.021 when T=100 and α=0.25 (Table A2, line 2). Even with the X
variable excluded, the mean of 7 is 0.023 when T=100 and α=0.05 (line 5). The second case is
63

for OLS without country fixed effects in the X-model when the (exogenous) X variable is
included in the regressions. When β=0.02, this framework yields a mean for 7 between 0.016
and 0.020 (Table A2, lines 9-12). OLS without country fixed effects also does well in the fixedeffects model when the variation in the fixed effects is small (Table A1, row 14).
The results can be used to get reasonable bounds on the convergence rate, β, as carried
out in the text. The upper bound came from the estimate with country fixed effects without X
variables, based on the long-term data back to 1870. Because T is large, the upper bound may be
reasonably tight (as in Table A1, line 5, or Table A2, line 5). The lower bound came from the
estimate without country fixed effects using the shorter-term data since the 1960s with a rich
array of X variables (as in Table A2, lines 9-12).

64

(1)
β

Table A1
Monte Carlo Results for Estimated Convergence Rates
Model with Fixed Effects
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
OLS with fixed effects
T
ση
8 9
:;<= 9
(Nickell formula)
(Monte Carlo)
20
1
0.165
0.151 (0.014)
50
1
0.076
0.070 (0.006)
100
1
0.046
0.043 (0.004)
100
0.1
0.046
0.043 (0.004)
140
1
0.038
0.036 (0.003)

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10

20
50
100
100
140

1
1
1
0.1
1

(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

100
100
20
100

1
0.1
0.1
0.01

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10

100
100
20
100

1
0.1
0.1
0.01

0.231
0.147
0.122
0.122
0.115
OLS without fixed effects
---------

0.206 (0.014)
0.140 (0.008)
0.120 (0.005)
0.120 (0.004)
0.113 (0.004)
0.00026 (0.00015)
0.0111 (0.0015)
0.0126 (0.0029)
0.0200 (0.0021)
0.0053 (0.0009)
0.0858 (0.0045)
0.0884 (0.0092)
0.1006 (0.0036)

Notes: β=1-γ is the convergence rate in equation (A1), T is the length of the time series, and ση
is the standard deviation of the country fixed effect. The Monte Carlo results in column 5 show
the mean and standard deviation of the estimate 7 from 100 iterations of the model in
equation (A1). The upper part refers to OLS estimation with country fixed effects (country
dummies). The lower part refers to OLS estimation without country fixed effects. All results
shown use σε=1 (for the time-series shock), N (number of countries) =100, and an observation
period of τ=1 year. Results with 50 iterations or N=20 are similar. Results with τ=5 are also
similar (see n. 29). For example, with fixed effects, the mean of 7 when β=0.10, T=100, ση=1,
and τ=5 is 0.125 (0.006). Without fixed effects, the mean of 7 for this case is 0.0047 (0.0008).
Column 4 shows the expected value of 7 from the formula in Nickell (1981, p. 1422); see n. 23.
This formula applies to OLS estimation with country fixed effects.

65

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Table A2
Monte Carlo Results for Estimated Convergence Rates
Model with Fixed Effects and X Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(8)
β
α
T
incl.
?
:;<=
>
:;<= 9
X?
(Monte Carlo)
(Monte Carlo)
OLS with fixed effects
0.02
0.05
100
y
0.0315 (0.0025)
0.0534 (0.0034)
0.02
0.25
100
y
0.0208 (0.0005)
0.2516 (0.0032)
0.02
0.05
20
y
0.1029 (0.0120)
0.0450 (0.0144)
0.02
0.25
20
y
0.0288 (0.0034)
0.2465 (0.0135)

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.05
0.25
0.05
0.25

(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.05
0.25
0.05
0.25

100
n
0.0234 (0.0025)
100
n
0.0069 (0.0024)
20
n
0.1056 (0.0131)
20
n
0.0326 (0.0054)
OLS without fixed effects
100
y
0.0156 (0.0013)
100
y
0.0196 (0.0004)
20
y
0.0166 (0.0024)
20
y
0.0198 (0.0024)

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.05
0.25
0.05
0.25

100
100
20
20

n
n
n
n

0.0041 (0.0010)
0.0004 (0.0009)
0.0041 (0.0024)
-0.0024 (0.0023)

----0.0446 (0.0026)
0.2472 (0.0031)
0.0470 (0.0040)
0.2489 (0.0049)
-----

Notes: For the model in equations (A2)-(A6), β=1-γ is the convergence rate, α is the coefficient
on the X variable, ρ is the persistence coefficient for the X variable, and T is the length of the
time series. The Monte Carlo results in columns 5 and 6 show the mean and standard deviation
of the estimates 7 and @ from 100 iterations of the model. The upper part refers to OLS
estimation with country fixed effects (country dummies). The lower part refers to OLS
estimation without country fixed effects. All results normalize to have σε=1 (for the time-series
shock) and σu=1 (for the X shock). Other assumptions are ση=0.1 (for the fixed effect), ρ
(coefficient for the persistence of the X process) = 0.98, N (number of countries) = 100, and an
observation period of τ=1 year. Column 4 indicates whether the regressions include the X
variable.

66

