                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 REMOVING FINANCIAL BARRIERS TO ORGAN AND BONE MARROW DONATION:
        THE EFFECT OF LEAVE AND TAX LEGISLATION IN THE U.S.

                                           Nicola Lacetera
                                            Mario Macis
                                            Sarah S. Stith

                                        Working Paper 18299
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18299


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We thank seminar participants at the University of Michigan and at the 8th Annual International
Industrial Organization Conference, as well as Tom Buchmueller, Ricard Gil, Brian Krauth, Steve
Leider, and Bob Slonim for their feedback. Christina Davis provided valuable editorial services. This
work was supported in part by Health Resources and Services Administration contract 231-00-0115.
The content is the responsibility of the authors alone and does not necessarily reflect the views or
policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations does not imply endorsement
by the U.S. Government. (http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/citing.asp).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Sarah S. Stith. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Removing Financial Barriers to Organ and Bone Marrow Donation: The Effect of Leave
and Tax Legislation in the U.S.
Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Sarah S. Stith
NBER Working Paper No. 18299
August 2012, Revised December 2013
JEL No. D64,H41,I12,J18,K32

                                                ABSTRACT

In an attempt to alleviate the shortfall in organs and bone marrow available for transplants, many U.S.
states passed legislation providing leave to organ and bone marrow donors and/or tax benefits for live
and deceased organ and bone marrow donations and to employers of donors. We exploit cross-state
variation in the timing and passage of such legislation to analyze its impact on organ donations by
living and deceased persons, on measures of the quality of the organs transplanted, and on the number
of bone marrow donations. We find that these provisions did not have a significant impact on the quantity
of organs donated. The leave legislation, however, did have a positive impact on bone marrow donations.
We also find some evidence of a positive impact on the quality of organ transplants, measured by post-transplant
survival rates. Our results suggest that these types of legislation work for moderately invasive procedures
such as bone marrow donation, but may be too low for organ donation, which is riskier and more burdensome
to the donor.


Nicola Lacetera                                        Sarah S. Stith
University of Toronto                                  University of Michigan
105 St. George Street                                  Ross School of Business
Toronto, ON M5S 2E9                                    701 Tappan Street
Canada                                                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                               ssstith@umich.edu
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca

Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Dr.
Baltimore, MD 21202
mmacis@jhu.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18299
1. Introduction
In virtually every country, the demand for organs and bone marrow far exceeds supply, leaving many
patients to spend years and even die waiting for donated organs or bone marrow. In the U.S., for instance,
the median wait-time until death or transplantation was 276 days for a liver and 547 days for a kidney in
2005, and only slightly over 60% of individuals waitlisted ever received an organ. Approximately 300
individuals die each year because they cannot find a matching bone marrow donor.1 In addition to the
implications for transplant candidates, a kidney transplant also saves at least $90,000 over the life of the
individual relative to on-going dialysis treatment (Matas and Schnitzler, 2003). This supply shortage and
the associated costs, loss in quality of life and even life itself drive the ongoing debate as to whether
donors should receive some form of compensation in order to increase organ and bone marrow donation.
    Concerns about exploitation of the poor and sick, adverse selection, motivational crowding out, and a
general aversion or “repugnance” toward the commercialization of body parts have influenced the debate
heavily (Frey, 1993; Roth, 2007; Titmuss, 1971). Some scholars and policymakers have manifested an
aversion to any form of explicit reward for organ donors whereas others have advocated direct monetary
payments. Becker and Elias (2007), for instance, estimate that amounts of $15,000 and $38,000 would
enable markets for kidneys and livers, respectively, to clear.2 Others see direct cash payments as
potentially deleterious or socially unacceptable, but are open to considering some form of “in-kind”
rewards to help reduce the supply shortage of human organs and tissue (Frey, 1993; Lacetera and Macis,
2010, 2012; Leider and Roth, 2010; Rodrigue et al., 2009; Roth et al., 2004). Singapore and Israel have
instituted priority rules for organ donors to reward those with signed donor cards and their families
(Biyar, 2011; Duenwald and Shipley, 2011).3 Israel also allows some direct payments to donor families to
“memoralize” post-cadaveric donation, as well as more direct forms of compensation such as an
exemption from health insurance premiums for living donors (Levush, 2010; Satel, 2010). Several
European countries make organ donation an opt-out rather than an opt-in decision; according to some
observers, this has led to significantly higher organ donation rates (Abadie and Gay, 2006).
    In this paper, we present a comprehensive study of the impact of legislative efforts in the U.S. to
mitigate the organ and bone marrow supply shortage by removing disincentives to donation without

1
  These statistics are taken from the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) for organs and from
Bergstrom et al. (2009) for bone marrow.
2
  The only country without an organ supply shortage is Iran, where the sale of kidneys has been legal since 1988.
The Iranian government pays $1,200 and provides health insurance for one year to cover surgery-related conditions.
In addition, the vendor receives between about $2,300 and $4,500 either from the recipient or one of several
designated charitable organizations (Hippen, 2008). “Gray” market prices for kidneys posted by websites offering to
coordinate procurement and transplantation internationally (a.k.a. “transplant tourism”) range from $14,000 to
$85,000 (Shimazono, 2007).
3
  New U.S. policies do provide priority for prior living donors on the transplant waitlist, effective 05/24/2012.
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/PoliciesandBylaws2/policies/pdfs/policy_172.pdf.


                                                        1
offering direct compensation, primarily through work leave legislation and tax credits and deductions.
Specifically, between 1989 and 2009, a number of U.S. states passed legislation that grants paid or unpaid
leave to state employees (and in some cases private employees), tax deductions to individuals who donate
their organs or bone marrow, and tax credits to employers for promoting donation.
    We quantify the effects of these types of legislation on both organ and bone marrow donations. For
organ donations, we focus on the two most commonly donated organs, livers and kidneys, which account
for over 80% of all organs donated and almost 100% of all donations from live donors. In addition, the
gap between supply and demand is much larger for kidneys and livers relative to hearts, lungs, pancreas,
and intestines.4 We also assess whether the impact of the legislation varies by gender and donor-recipient
relationship. Even though the tax and leave legislation apply primarily to living donors, we assess
whether cadaveric donations are affected as well. We do so for two main reasons: first, if donations from
living and deceased donors follow a common time trend, the donations by deceased donors might be used
as a “control” group. Second, these types of donations might actually be substitutes (Fernandez, Howard,
and Stohr, 2012); if so, legislation targeting one type of donors might have effects on the other type as
well. We also study whether these laws affect the distribution of organ quality, as measured by the state-
level post-transplant graft survival rate. For bone marrow donations, we explore potential differential
effects by donation method: aspiration or apheresis.5
    A priori, if the incentives implied by the legislation were to have a positive impact on donation, we
should expect these laws to influence bone marrow donors more than organ donors. Bone marrow
donation has a much lower risk of complications and death than does organ donation, and is much less
burdensome to the donor in terms of recovery time, pain, and suffering. Also, bone marrow regenerates
and can be donated multiple times, whereas kidneys never re-grow. In the case of livers, which also
regenerate, no cases of multiple donations are documented in the literature or the data and any prior
hepatobiliary surgery complicates future transplant surgery should the donor ever need a liver transplant
(Maddey and Van Thiel, 1988). In other words, bone marrow donation is less costly for a donor;
therefore, at the margin, moderate incentives should tip the trade-off toward deciding to donate in the case
of bone marrow more than they do for organs. For similar reasons, we differentiate between livers and
kidneys within organ donation and, within bone marrow, aspiration and apheresis. The risk of
complications or death and the recovery period are greatest for liver donation and lowest for apheresis
donations (Confer et al., 2003; Karanes et al. 2003; Muzaale et al., 2011; Segev et al., 2010).

4
  The Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/latestData/advancedData.asp.
Accessed 07/04/2012.
5
  In apheresis, a prospective donor undergoes five days of drug injections to stimulate the production of specialized
blood cells, which are then filtered out of the donor’s blood over the course of several hours, much as in plasma
donation. The alternative method of aspiration requires removal of actual bone marrow from the hip of the donor, a
more painful and risky procedure than apheresis.


                                                         2
    Our empirical strategy exploits the fact that different states have introduced legislation at different
points in time, which provides us with several “natural experiments.” We take advantage of the
longitudinal nature of our dataset to lessen potentially important selection, endogeneity, and omitted
variable problems. In our regression models, we include state fixed effects as well as state-specific time
trends to ensure that we are controlling for omitted time-invariant factors and for selection into adopting
the legislation based on the level and growth rate of the outcome variables (Ashenfelter and Card, 1985;
Heckman and Hotz, 1989). To probe the validity of our identification strategy, we assess whether pre-
existing trends in the demand for organs predict the adoption of legislation.
   Our results indicate that the legislation had no overall effect on the number of organ donations. This
result is robust across a variety of specifications and sub-samples, and holds also when we allow the
legislation to affect outcomes with one- or two-year lags. In contrast, and consistent with our prior, we do
find a positive effect of leave legislation on bone marrow donation. Specifically, we find a positive effect
of leave legislation for state employees on bone marrow donations, provided that a sufficient share of a
state’s labor force is state-employed (i.e., when the size of the population actually affected by the law is
larger). Our estimated coefficient implies that leave legislation for state employees has a positive effect on
bone marrow donations if state employees represent at least 5% of the labor force, which is the case for
about 45% of our sample of state-years.
   We have also considered the effects of the legislation on organ quality, as proxied by six-month and
three-year post-transplant graft survival rates, to test if the legislation might be causing shifts in the
underlying quality distribution of organs used for transplantation even in the absence of changes in the
overall number of transplants. This could happen if the legislation has opposed effects on different types
of living donors. For example, the laws might lead to increased donation among the less intrinsically
motivated donors and decreased donation among the more intrinsically motivated. The latter types of
donors may be of higher “quality” (Titmuss, 1971); therefore, the incentives implied by the legislation
may lead to a shift in the overall quality of organs donated. We find an overall positive effect for three-
year-survival from leave for state employees although the estimated coefficients are only marginally
statistically significant. We also find a positive effect of leave for private employees on six-month
survival rates of recipients of organs from male donors and positive effects of individual tax credits on
six-month survival rates of recipients of organs from female donors. These results suggest that the laws
may affect the distribution of organs donated or the distribution of organs used even in the absence of an
overall effect on the quantity of organs.
   Our study contributes to a small but growing literature in economics on organ and bone marrow
donation. Two recent papers have looked at the effects of a variety of traffic safety laws on cadaveric
organ donation, such as motorcycle helmet laws, primary seat belt enforcement laws, and speed limits



                                                      3
(Dickert-Conlin, Elder, and Moore, 2012; Fernandez, Howard and Stohr, 2012). Kessler and Roth (2012)
studied the effect of priority rules in a laboratory experiment. A number of studies (e.g., Roth et al., 2004,
2005a, 2005b) have analyzed the use of kidney exchanges, which cross-match incompatible donor and
recipient pairs to create compatible donor-recipient pairs. Bagozzi et al. (2001) documented differences in
bone marrow donation across different cultures, and Bergstrom, Garratt and Sheehan-Connor (2009 and
2012) analyzed the optimal size and racial composition of bone marrow registries. Although the effects of
non-cash legislated incentives on many types of pro-social behavior, including health-related activities
(e.g., blood donation), have now been studied extensively, the literature has just begun to study the effects
of such legislation on the much more “costly” pro-social behavior involved in organ and bone marrow
donation.
    The overall scarcity of organ and bone marrow donors and the difficulty in matching between donors
and recipients make natural experiments such as the ones exploited in this paper particularly important for
determining how well such legislation performs in solving the severe organ and bone marrow shortage
problem existing in the U.S. A few similar but more limited studies exist. Venkataramani et al. (2012)
examined the effect of tax deductions for individuals on living organ donation. Bilgel (2011) and
Wellington and Sayre (2011) studied tax deductions for individuals and leave legislation for state
employees, but consider only organs and not bone marrow (Bilgel) and only kidneys (Wellington and
Sayre). In addition to the types of legislation and donation considered by these papers, we analyze the
effects of two similar types of legislation granting leave to private employees and tax credits to employers
for donation-promoting activities. Boulware et al. (2008) included all four types of legislation, but only
consider kidney donations, and do not control for state-specific time-invariant factors, factors that vary
over time but are common to all states, or pre-existing trends in state-level donation rates. We also
explore whether these laws affected the quality of organs donated. Perhaps most importantly, our paper is
the first to we examine the effects of these policies also on bone marrow donations, for which theoretical
considerations lead us to anticipate stronger effects. In fact, like in our study, these other papers document
no effect of the laws examined on organ donation. The positive effect we find on bone marrow donation,
in addition to its relevance for policy and health consideration, supports an “incentive size” explanation
for the zero result on organs, namely that the incentives may be too low for more "costly" donations but
may work for less invasive procedures such as bone marrow donation. This is consistent with the positive
effect found by Lacetera and Macis (2012) of paid leave on an even less invasive procedure, blood
donation.6


6
 Through utilizing the UNOS data request process rather than relying on OPTN’s online data tool, we were able to
obtain transplant-level data, which we aggregated at the state level. With the exception of Boulware et al. (2008) the
prior studies cited above use data aggregated at the donation service area level, not the state level. Although


                                                          4
    In Section 2 we offer background information on the history of organ and bone marrow donation and
the associated legislation. In Section 3 we describe the data, and in Section 4 we present and discuss our
empirical strategy. We report the results in Section 5, and in Section 6 we discuss some implications of
our results and conclude.




2. Organ and bone marrow donation and associated legislation

2.1 Background7
In 1954, the first successful living donor kidney transplant was performed, followed by the first
successful cadaveric donor kidney transplant in 1962. The first successful cadaveric liver transplant
occurred in 1967 between identical twins. Bone marrow was first successfully transplanted in 1973. A
living donor liver was not successfully transplanted until 1989.
    Long-term dialysis treatment became available in 1960, greatly extending the life expectancy of
individuals with renal failure and with that, the demand for kidney transplants. The Food and Drug
Administration’s approval of the immunosuppressant cyclosporine in 1983 transformed organ
transplantation from a high-risk experimental procedure with almost certain organ rejection to a common
treatment for organ failure. In the late 1990s, laparoscopic surgery greatly reduced the pain and recovery
time for live kidney donors.8
   As science and technological progress developed ever more effective transplantation methods,
policymakers sought, in a variety of ways, to facilitate the use of these new methods and influence the
exchange of organs. Medicare has paid for dialysis since 1972, kidney transplants since 1978, and liver
transplants since 1990.9 As for bone marrow, Medicare began coverage in 1978 and expanded it in 1985
and in 2010. Federal law increased the supply of deceased donor organs by expanding the definition of
“death” to include “brain death” in 1981. In 1984, the National Organ Transplant Act banned the sale of
organs and bone marrow, and the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) was


donation service areas usually align with state boundaries, 32 of the 58 donation service areas in the U.S. include
counties from more than one state.
7
  We focus here on the two human organs and one type of tissue included in this study: kidneys, livers, and bone
marrow. Lungs, hearts, and intestines can be donated by living donors, but this occurs extremely rarely, so we drop
these from our sample. (Deceased donors are required for heart transplants except for the case of domino transplants
[i.e., a heart-lung recipient donates his or her heart to another recipient].)
8
  http://www.organtransplants.org/understanding/history/index.html
9
  Medicare approved liver transplantation for a limited number of conditions in 1990. This coverage was expanded
to all end-stage liver disease patients except those with Hepatitis B or liver cancer. In 1996, Hepatitis B became
covered, and in 2001 Medicare began covering hepatocellular carcinoma, but other forms of cancer remain
uncovered.


                                                         5
established to promote organ donation, facilitate the allocation of organs, and serve as a central repository
of organ-donation-related data. OPTN’s bone marrow counterpart, the National Marrow Donation
Program (NMDP) was established two years later in 1986. In 1994, a federal law was passed to provide
leave of absence for bone marrow (5 days) and organ (30 days) donation by federal employees. Federal
law also started requiring hospitals to notify organ procurement organizations of all eligible deaths in
1998, so that all might have the opportunity to donate.
     Although organs from deceased donors are still the main source for transplants, this supply is
inherently limited by the death rate, the type of deaths, and the decomposition process. Only a small
percentage of deaths yield viable organs and, although improvements in storage and transportation of
organs have occurred, kidneys are only viable for up to 24 hours and livers for up to 12 hours without a
living blood supply. Despite over two million deaths in the U.S. in 2009, eligible deaths documented by
UNOS totaled only 9,827.10 These deaths yielded organs used in 11,285 kidney transplants and 6,098
liver transplants, supplemented with 6,387 live kidney donations and 219 live liver donations. Meanwhile,
33,663 people joined the kidney waitlist and 10,706 joined the liver waitlist in 2009. Bone marrow
donations must come from living donors exclusively, but individual donors can donate more than once,
making the bone marrow supply less inherently limited than the supply of donor organs.
     Donating an organ or bone marrow exacts financial costs and at least some risk of pain and immediate
and future health risks. Even though payers of organ and bone marrow transplants also pay the costs of
recovery, both types of donors face costs in terms of time away from work, travel, and lodging. Prohibited
by law from paying direct compensation to donors, states have attempted to address the organ shortfall by
offsetting the incidental costs associated with donation and protecting employees from employer
retaliation for leave taken to donate. The health risk remains: for kidney donors 3.1 deaths per 10,000
donors and as high as 17 per 10,000 for liver donors (Muzaale et al., 2011; Segev et al., 2010). In
addition, donors may experience non-fatal complications including pain, infection, and hemorrhaging.11


2.2 Leave and tax legislation
States have attempted to address the organ and bone marrow shortfalls through a variety of methods that
diminish the financial barriers to donation: leave for state employees, leave for private employees, tax
credits for employers, and tax deductions for individuals. In general, laws granting leave offer up to 30
days for organ donation and up to one week for bone marrow donation. Tax deductions for individuals
cover non-medical donation-related expenses up to a maximum of $10,000. Tax credits for employers


10
   This may be a lower bound since UNOS does not track information on all deaths. Gortmaker et al. (1996)
estimated an eligible donor pool of 13,700 per year based on a study of sixty-nine acute care hospitals in the U.S.
11
   www.transplantliving.org/livingdonation/outcomes/risks.aspx., accessed 03/26/12.


                                                        6
cover donation-promoting activities, including the provision of paid leave to donors. Tables 1A (organs)
and 1B (bone marrow) list the dates of passage for each type of legislation by state. (Legal references are
listed in the appendix by state.) In 1989, Colorado passed the first relevant legislation providing state
employees leave for the donation of an organ or bone marrow. Since then, most states have implemented
legislation removing financial disincentives to donation through leave or tax legislation. For organ
donation, thirty-one states offer leave for state employees, seven states offer leave for private employees,
sixteen states give tax deductions to individuals and three states provide tax credits to employers. For
bone marrow donations, thirty-three states offer leave for state employees, eleven states offer leave for
private employees, fifteen states give tax incentives to individuals and four states give employers tax
credits for donation-promoting activities.12



3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1 Organs
Patient-level data on kidney and liver transplants come from the Organ Procurement and Transplantation
Network (OPTN).13 From a total of 358,378 individual-level transplants, we obtained 1,071 state-year
level observations with 51 observations per year from 1988, when OPTN began collecting data, through
2008.14 Note that our data counts are transplants: we only count the organs actually used for
transplantation, not organs recovered or donors consenting. However, because our main focus is on living
donors, the number of organs recovered and the number of organs transplanted is the same.
     Figures 2A and 2B describe how the volume and composition of organ donations have changed over
time. Kidneys are the most common organ transplanted, followed by livers. Together these account for
most of the organs transplanted in the U.S. and over 99% of all living donor organs. Kidney, liver and
bone marrow donations generally increased until the late 2000s. This pattern, however, is much stronger
for kidneys vis-à-vis livers and bone marrow. An overall upward trend in donations of both cadaveric and
living donors exists until the late 2000s. Cadaveric donations far exceed those from living donors and
underscore how infrequently compatible living donors come forward, although every human is born with
two kidneys and a liver that can lose up to 70% of its size and still re-grow.
12
   Further details on the specifics of the laws are available at:
http://sitemaker.umich.edu/sarah.stith/files/lms_organdonation_onlineappendix.pdf .
13
   “The data reported here have been supplied by the United Network for Organ Sharing as the contractor for the
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. The interpretation and reporting of these data are the
responsibility of the authors and in no way should be seen as an official policy of or interpretation by the OPTN or
the U.S. Government.” (http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/shareddownloadables/data_use_agreement.pdf)
14
   Total observations in the regressions considering livers only are lower because some state-years had no living
donor transplants. For the regressions that analyzed organ quality changes, non-reporting of covariates leads to a
reduction in observations. In the quality regressions using six-month and three-year survival rates as the outcome
variable, the panel is shortened to give all recipients sufficient follow-up time.


                                                         7
     The highly detailed organ data include many variables associated with the medical procedure and
demographics of both the transplant recipient and the donor. Table 2 reports summary statistics. On
average, cadaveric donations dominate living donations with kidneys being the more common organ
donated relative to livers. Males donate more organs overall, but this is due to more males donating
cadaveric organs, while females dominate living donation. A variety of explanations could exist – men
are more likely to die in accidents and tend to die earlier. Women may have more flexible work lives and
might simply be more altruistic or more cautious about opting in to cadaveric organ donation. For livers,
almost 94% of transplant recipients receive a cadaveric donor organ, while for kidneys about 30% receive
a living donor organ. These differences suggest that we should break down our main analyses by both
gender and organ. Table 3 shows the distribution of transplants by type of donor-recipient relationship.
Most live donors are biologically related to the transplant recipient. This likely arises in part due to donor-
recipient capability issues, which mean family members are more likely to match the recipient’s blood
type and other match factors than a random person from the general population. Approximately 18% of
living donors are not spouses and are biologically unrelated.



3.2 Bone marrow
Bone marrow donation data were obtained from the National Marrow Donor Program (NMDP). We have
a total of 14,463 transplants. The total number of donations omits approximately 30% of bone marrow
donations by members of the military and for registrants for whom no state of residence was recorded. 15
Table 4 contains descriptive statistics for bone marrow donations. The table reveals that both males and
females donate at equal rates. Apheresis is a less common type of donation, largely due to its later uptake.
Our data document no apheresis donations prior to 1999. By 2009, 0.7 apheresis donations occurred along
with 0.3 aspiration donations, per one million population.



3.3 Legislation
The legislative data are compiled from donor program websites (www.optn.org and www.ncls.org), state
government websites, and searches of state laws via Nexis®. We categorize the leave incentives into
leave for employees of the state government (hereinafter “state employees”) and leave for private sector
employees (hereinafter “private employees”). Taxes fall into two categories: individual tax deductions of



15
  Although our organ data contain all organs transplanted, our bone marrow data are limited by the fact that only
36,800 of the total 54,140 requests for donations recorded include state-identifying information. Most omitted
requests involve international and Department of Defense donors. Our outcome variables include only those 14,463
requests for donation that result in actual donation of bone marrow.


                                                       8
up to $10,000 or employer tax credits for donation-related expenses including promotional activities and
paid leave for donation.16


4. Empirical strategy
Our empirical strategy exploits the fact that different states introduced legislation in different years; we
use variation both across and within states over time to identify the effect of the legislation on a series of
outcomes of interest. Specifically, we estimate a reduced-form model that takes the following form:

                Ykt = LEAVEkt’leave + TAXkt’tax + Xkt’ + k + t + γkt + kt.               (1)

In Equation (1), Ykt is the outcome variable in state k in year t, and we consider three main outcome
variables: the number of organ donors standardized by one million population, the number of bone
marrow donations per one million population, and post-organ transplant survival rates. LEAVEkt and
TAXkt are indicators for whether state k had leave legislation or tax legislation in place, respectively, in
year t. More specifically, we include indicators for whether a state has leave provisions for state
employees, leave provisions for private employees, tax deductions for individuals, and/or tax credits for
employers. The vector of controls Xkt includes state-level income per capita and the unemployment rate,
which could affect the availability and accessibility of transplant surgery. In the organ quality regressions,
we also include donor, match, and patient characteristics to control for the differences in the types of
donors, matches, and patients across states. Year fixed effects (t) account for aggregate factors that
might affect the outcome variables, including nation-wide policy changes as well as secular trends in
attitudes toward organ and marrow donation. k are state fixed effects, γkt are state-specific time trends,
and kt is an error term. The main coefficients of interest, leave and tax, measure the within-state effect of
passing a given type of legislation on the number of donations per million population, controlling for
factors affecting all states in a given year, and state-specific fixed effects and time trends. In all
regressions, standard errors are clustered at the state level to account for serial correlation in the state law
indicators (Bertrand et al., 2004).17
     Not all states have introduced such laws and different states have introduced the legislation at
different times. This raises the question of whether the adopting states differ from the non-adopting states
in fundamental ways that are correlated with our outcomes of interest. For instance, states with
systematically higher levels of organ donations per capita might be more likely to introduce the


16
  Virginia does not set a maximum and Idaho allows for a tax credit of up to $5,000.
17
   In addition to the specifications described above, we used logs and other nonlinear variations and/or
normalizations of the outcome variables. We also increased the frequency of the observations to months and quarters
and manipulated the length of the balanced panel. None of these other approaches significantly altered our results.


                                                        9
legislation, perhaps due to greater familiarity with donation in the population or the transplant
community’s outreach efforts. In that case, a positive coefficient on the tax indicators might simply reflect
this underlying heterogeneity rather than an effect of the law. The opposite is also possible; in other
words, states with lower levels of organ or bone marrow donations per capita may be more likely to adopt
the legislation in response to a shortage of organs. That case would bias our coefficient estimates
downward. The inclusion of state fixed effects mitigates the bias that would occur if states adopted
legislation based on the level of the outcome variable. Further, we include state-specific time trends to
account for the possibility that states with systematically lower or higher growth rates of the outcome
variable might be more likely to adopt the legislation.
     To probe our identification strategy, we checked whether the passage of the legislation in a given
state-year correlated with the lagged (one year) cumulative number of waitlist candidates per one million
population; the lagged number of waitlist candidates year per one million population; the lagged number
of waitlist candidates who died or were too sick for transplant, per one million population; and the lagged
cumulative number of individuals who ever left the waitlist dead or too sick for a transplant. We use these
variables to proxy for lagged values of cumulative demand, current demand, cumulative excess demand,
and current excess demand. Table 5 reports summary statistics for these variables. On average, seventy
individuals per one million population were awaiting an organ in a given state-year and four individuals
per one million population die on the waitlist or are deemed too sick for transplantation each year.18 We
regress a dummy variable equal to one if a law was passed in the current year on lagged values (from the
prior year) of the waitlist variables in Table 5. As shown in Table 6, the estimated coefficients are
generally small and not statistically significant (with only two exceptions where the coefficients are small
and marginally significant), indicating that prior values of these variables did not generally have any
discernible effect on whether a state passed a law.19 These results, together with our inclusion of year and
state effects and state-level time trends in the regressions, make us confident about the validity of our
identification strategy.


5. Results
5.1 Organ donations: Main results
We first estimate model (1) using total organ transplants per one million population as the dependent
variable in columns [1] through [5] of Table 7A, and living and cadaveric donor transplants separately in
columns [6] and [7]. Although the tax and leave legislation generally target living donors, we consider

18
   The waitlist figure is larger for kidneys due primarily to better waitlist survival rates allowed for by dialysis. No
similar life-extending pre-transplant therapy exists for end-stage liver disease.
19
   Specifications where we used two- or three-year lags deliver similar results.


                                                          10
donations from both living and deceased donors for two main reasons. First, one could postulate that
donations from living and deceased donors follow a common time trend, and precisely because the
legislation targets living donations, the donations by deceased donors might be seen as a benchmark, or
“control” group. The second reason to study the effects on both living and deceased donations is that
these types of donations might actually be substitutes, in which case donations from deceased donors
could not be used as a control because under this hypothesis they would be affected by the legislation. For
example, the waitlist only applies to potential recipients of cadaveric organs. If more living organs are
donated, these individuals will drop from the waitlist, which might enable the donor-recipient matching
process to be more selective as to which cadaveric organs are used in transplantation.20 Additionally, the
employer tax credits could (in some states) apply to expenses incurred in promoting cadaveric donation as
well as living donation. For these reasons, it is informative to study the effect of the legislation on both
types of donations separately.
     The results shown in column [1], which do not include state or year effects, indicate a positive
correlation between the number of transplants and the existence of leave for state employees and leave for
private sector employees; however, the coefficient estimates dramatically drop in magnitude and cease to
be statistically significant when we introduce year and state fixed effects. In column [5] we add state-
specific linear time trends, and again all of our coefficients of interest are estimated to be small and not
statistically significant. These results underscore the importance of accounting for state-level
heterogeneity and aggregate time effects, with the latter having the largest impact on our coefficient
estimates of interest. Specifically, it would appear that the positive estimated coefficients on the
legislation indicators in column [1] were reflecting a general trend of increasing donations over time.
     Breaking down the analysis by live and cadaveric donations in columns [6] and [7] does not change
the main results. We also consider the possibility that effects may differ for men and women due in part to
men’s greater attachment to the workforce, the target of the tax and, especially, the leave legislation, and
report the results in Table 7B. Again, we find no significant effects. Lastly, we differentiate between
kidneys and livers in Table 7C. Here, too, we obtain estimated coefficients that are both small and
statistically insignificant. The single exception, in the absence of more defined patterns in the data,
should, more plausibly, be attributed to random chance.



20
   Organs vary in quality, so without an increase in the number of transplants, an increase in the number of living
donors should lead to a smaller group of individuals accessing the same pool of cadaveric donor organs, thus
allowing only the highest quality organs to be selected. Donor factors correlated with survival outcomes after liver
transplantation include donors over 40 years old, donation after cardiac death rather than brain death, partial rather
than whole liver grafts, African-American race, less height, and cerebrovascular causes of death (Feng et al., 2006).
For kidneys, donor characteristics associated with poorer transplant outcomes include age, cerebrovascular causes of
death, renal insufficiency (serum creatinine over 1.5 mg/dL) and a history of hypertension (Port et al., 2002).


                                                         11
5.1.1 Organ donations: Additional analyses
We perform a number of further analyses to probe the (null) results described above.
Balanced Panel. First, our panel extends from 1/1/1988 to 12/31/2008. However, most of the legislation
occurred around and after the year 2000. To reduce the influence of the long lags, in most cases, before
the passage of legislation, we estimate model (1) using a panel including five years before passage of any
tax or leave legislation and five years after the passage of that first legislation, omitting the year of
introduction of the legislation.21 Focusing on the period of time in which we can most confidently
attribute differences in the number of live and cadaveric donors between states with and without
legislation to the legislation, we still find no effect from the passage of these laws.22
Related vs. Unrelated Donors. Second, as described in Table 3, the vast majority of organ donations
occur between biologically related individuals or between spouses. One could imagine that although leave
and tax incentives might not play a major role in the decision of potential donors who are biologically
related to the recipient, they might have a stronger impact on non-related potential donors. In Table 8, we
run our main regressions on the number of donors who are biologically related, and on the number of
donors who are not biologically related (both including and excluding spouses). Our results indicate
insignificant effects of leave for state employees and tax deductions for individuals. Tax credits for
employers seem to have a negative effect on biologically related donors and a (marginally statistically
significant) positive effect on donations from non-biologically related donors, but the point estimates are
very small in magnitude. We also detect a negative effect of leave for private employees on donations by
non-biologically related donors, but again the estimated effect is negligible in magnitude. The most
prevalent laws (i.e. leave for state employees and tax deductions for individuals) do not seem to affect
biologically related and non-biologically related donors differently. Therefore, we find only weak
evidence for the hypothesis that non-biologically related donors are more sensitive to the financial
disincentives to donation.
State employees as a share of the labor force. Third, we note that leave for state employees should only
affect the incentives of state employees. We, therefore, re-run our main regressions controlling for the
number of state employees, both total and full-time, normalized by the total labor force at the state-year
level (to parallel the construction of the left-hand side variable), and interact this variable with the law
indicator. These results are reported in Table 9. Even though the estimated interaction effects are not
statistically significant, their positive sign and considerable magnitude suggest that perhaps the laws have
some positive effect increasing with the size of the population affected by the law.

21
  These results are available upon request.
22
   The estimated coefficients on tax credits for employers (Appendix Table A1.4) are negative and statistically
significant. We report these results for completeness, but note that they should be interpreted with great caution
given the very small sample size of the balanced panel (only 30 observations).


                                                       12
5.2 Bone marrow donations: Main results
As described in Section 2.2, many states have passed legislation for bone marrow donors that is separate
from that for organ donors, but the legislation is similar in spirit. The main difference is that leave
allowances tend to be shorter for bone marrow donors. Because the bone marrow donation procedure is
less costly to the donor relative to organ donation (in terms of risk of complications, pain and suffering,
recovery time, and the possibility of future donation), such incremental measures as these laws might
have a greater impact, at the margin, for bone marrow donors than they do for organ donors.23 In addition,
two methods of donation exist—apheresis and aspiration, with the former being a much less invasive
procedure.
       The results are presented in Tables 10A through 10C. Once again, in our most stringent specification
(including year and state fixed effects and state time trends) we find no evidence that leave or tax
legislation had any impact on the number of bone marrow donations (normalized by one million
population). Given the evidence reported in Figures 2B and discussed in Section 4, including time trends
is particularly relevant here.
       If we break down donations by gender (Table 10B), we again find no effect from such laws. In Table
10C, we split our regressions between donations by apheresis versus donations by aspiration. Apheresis
as a form of donation first appears in our data in 1999, so we run our regressions using just the
observations for those individuals donating after 1999. Although apheresis is significantly less
burdensome for the donor, some authors still consider bone marrow donation via aspiration preferable
(Seitz et al., 2012.) Yet, because the financial and physical barriers to apheresis are lower than for
aspiration, one might expect an increase in this type of donation, in particular from donors on the margin
between donating and not donating. On the other hand, the introduction of leave and tax deductions for
donation may allow donors to choose the more burdensome option of aspiration, which would not have
been feasible without the leave laws and tax deductions to cover incidental expenses associated with
donation. Only leave for private employees appears to have a marginally significant effect on the method
of donation; it reduces donation by aspiration. This negative coefficient may be somewhat
counterbalanced by the positive (but insignificant) coefficient for apheresis donations. It appears that
although these laws have no effect on overall donations, they may have some effect on how individuals
chose to donate. The other laws also yield opposite signed coefficients, although in favor of more “costly”
aspiration. Again the estimates are not statistically significant.




23
     We performed similar analyses using year-to-year changes in donations, finding very similar results.


                                                           13
5.2.1 Bone marrow donations: Additional analyses
Balanced Panel. As with organs, we also consider the possibility that the main effect of these laws will
occur shortly after their passage. Again, we take observations from five years before and five years after
the passage of a law, omitting the year of passage, to determine if a more immediate, and perhaps less
long-term, effect exists.24 Again, we find no effect from these types of legislation on the number of bone
marrow donations.
State employees as a share of the labor force. We also re-run our analysis controlling for the number of
state employees, both total and full time, normalized by the state labor force to parallel the way we
constructed the left-hand side variable. The results are reported in Table 11. Unlike with organs, this
analysis does indicate a positive and significant effect from leave for state employees on bone marrow
donations. In fact, although the main effect of leave for state employees is negative and usually
insignificant, we find that the interaction between the rate of employment by the state and the existence of
leave for state employees is positive and significant. The coefficient estimates of about -1.5 on leave for
state employees and of 37.2 on the interaction term imply that leave for state employees has a positive
effect if state employees represent at least 4.1 percent of the labor force, which is true for almost 48
percent of state-year observations in the data. Using just full-time employees (which account for 72% of
state employees) yields similar results: the effect of leave legislation on bone marrow donations is
positive if full-time state employees are at least 1.8 percent of the state labor force, which holds for 98%
of state-year observations in our sample.



5.3 Effect on the quality of organs
Although we found no effect of these types of legislation on the quantity of organ donation, we explore
the possibility that these laws could have shifted the quality composition of organs used for transplant.
One way this could happen is if the legislation has opposed effects on different types of living donors. For
example, the laws might have led to increased donations among less intrinsically motivated donors and
decreased them among the more intrinsically motivated and the latter are donors of higher “quality,” on
average (Titmuss, 1971).25 Another possibility is that the laws are affecting living and deceased donations
differently. Fernandez et al. (2012) measure a substitution effect between live and cadaveric donors. A
shift in the distribution of donors between living and cadaveric could also lead to a shift in the quality
distribution if those two donor sources lead to systematically different survival outcomes. Both medical


24
  These results are available upon request.
25
  Note that the opposite could also happen, with the more intrinsically motivated donors being lower-quality donors
(Healy, 2006). If these donors have lower motivation to give in the presence of incentives, the quality of the
resulting pool of organs will actually increase.


                                                        14
and social factors could lead to differences in the outcomes yielded by these two donor sources. Although
living donors do tend to be older and, therefore, less likely to yield high-quality organs, the timing of
donation can be optimized with living donors. The timing is important since the organ rapidly deteriorates
without a blood supply and because this ensures that the recipient and donor are in the best health possible
at the time of transplantation rather than allowing the timing of the transplant to be entirely determined by
the time of death of the donor. Regarding social factors, living donation may proxy for a better social
support network, which could improve longer term survival.26
     We consider, as a measure of the quality of the organ transplanted, the total number of grafts
functioning for at least six months (or for three years in some regressions) as a share of the total number
of transplants. In all of our regressions, we include a range of match, donor, and recipient characteristics
that could affect survival as specified in Table 12.27 Because survival data on bone marrow transplants are
not available, we must limit the following analysis to just organ donations. Re-running the main
regressions for this time period does not change the null effect of these types of legislation on the donor
supply. Table 13 shows descriptive statistics for the quality outcome variables. Obviously, longer time
periods are associated with higher death rates. Also, it appears that survival for recipients of living
donations is higher than for recipients of cadaveric donors.
     The regression results (from a linear probability model) are shown in Tables 14A through 14D.
Overall, we find no effect of these laws on the quality of the organs donated as measured by the six-
month state-level survival rate. When we consider the three-year survival period, however, we find some
marginally significant evidence of a positive effect from leave for state employees. Since the pattern of
coefficients is similar for six-months and three-years, and because significant factors external to
transplantation can affect longer term survival, we focus predominantly on the six-month survival rates as
the more accurate measure of quality.
     We do find statistically significant differences among some subpopulations, which may indicate a
shift in the distribution of organs used, even if overall we find no quality impact. In Table 14B we look at
survival rates of recipients of female and male organs separately, further distinguishing between live and
cadaveric organs. Leave for private employees increases the survival rate for recipients of live male


26
   In a study of 289 transplant centers, the lack of a support person available to the transplant recipient was viewed
as an absolute contraindication to transplantation by 6.5% and 2.6% of kidney and liver transplant centers,
respectively. The relative contraindication percentages are 67.4% and 33.5% for kidneys and livers, respectively
(Levenson and Olbrisch, 1993)., Although we are unaware of any studies directly testing the effect of social
networks on post-transplant survival among liver and kidney recipients, authors have documented its importance in
heart transplantation (Bohachick et al., 2002) and long-term dialysis outcomes (Thong et al., 2007). A review of 122
studies across medical fields suggests that social support is important for patient adherence to medical treatment
(DiMatteo, 2004).
27
   The controls used mirror those used by the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients to calculate transplant-
center-level expected survival rates and include age, gender, race, and underlying diagnosis.


                                                         15
organs by 5.5 percentage points (for comparison, the average six-month survival rate is 86 percent),
whereas tax deductions for individuals increases the live female donor survival rate by almost 7
percentage points (compared to an average of 92 percent). The latter effect seems to be offset by a
negative, marginally significant effect on recipients of live male organs.
    Finally, we look at kidneys (Table 14C) and livers (Table 14D) separately. We find little or no effects
for kidneys or livers when analyzed separately for six-month survival. For three-year survival rates, we
find some marginally significant positive effects from leave for state employees and individual tax
deductions for liver transplant recipients, which parallel in sign the coefficients for six-month survival.
Leave for state employees leads to a 3.1 percentage point increase, and tax deductions for individuals
leads to a 7.3 percentage point increase in the three-year survival rate of liver transplant recipients. The
average survival rate among this population is 56 percent.
    Overall, there is some evidence of a positive effect of leave for state employees on three-year survival
rates, although the estimates are only marginally significant. Slightly stronger evidence of some positive
effects on quality of leave for private employees and individual tax deductions also exists. Thus, the
legislation might be inducing quality improvements in survival rates by changing the composition of the
donor pool even though it does not increase overall organ donations.


6. Discussion and Conclusions
Policymakers and scholars have long debated how to overcome the shortage of organs and bone marrow
in the U.S. In this and in other systems based exclusively on altruistic donors, the supply is insufficient to
cover the need, and legal rules and social norms prevent direct compensation. We analyzed a third option,
tax and leave laws, which allow donors of organs or bone marrow to be, at least financially, not
significantly worse off than before donating. Donating an organ is a costly decision for the living donor,
and one that may hinge on financial (and work-related) considerations. Because of these costs, the
efficacy of these laws is certainly not guaranteed. Donating bone marrow is also not likely a decision that
is made lightly, but it is less burdensome. On this basis, if incentives have a positive impact on donation,
we anticipated that the incentives examined would have a stronger effect on bone marrow than on organs.
    Our results are consistent with this interpretation; we documented no impact of the legislation on the
number of organ donations, and a positive impact on bone marrow donations. We also found some
marginally significant evidence of a positive effect of the legislation on organ quality. This suggests that
only focusing on changes in quantity may overlook shifts in the underlying quality distribution of organs
used for transplantation.
   A few explanations could exist for the lack of an effect of the legislation on the quantity of organs.
First, it is possible that not enough people are aware of the existence of the legislation. UNOS, for


                                                     16
example, does not mention these types of legislation in its summary of information for prospective living
organ donors.28 (The NMDP does, however, mention the existence of laws providing leave to donors,
which also could help explain the stronger effect of these types of legislation on bone marrow
donations.29) Second, the results could be confounded by the existence of grant programs, which already
may be providing the same cost reimbursement as the tax laws. Employer-specific paid leave programs
could further be diminishing the effect of leave laws.30 Third, a composition effect might be occurring,
whereby some subsets of the population are positively motivated by these additional incentives to donate
(on top of their intrinsic motives) whereas others are “crowded out” (because their self or social image
may be tainted [Benabou and Tirole, 2006] or because they consider the presence of material incentives
repugnant [Roth, 2007]). Fourth, the incentives put in place by these types of legislation might not be
strong enough to induce an individual, who is not otherwise sufficiently altruistically motivated, to endure
the pain, suffering, scarring, time away from work and leisure, and undocumented long-term donor health
effects implied by an organ donation. Some evidence also exists that donors occasionally have difficulty
obtaining life and health insurance post-donation (Rudow et al., 2006; Spital and Jacobs, 2002).31
Untangling these explanations is of importance for policymakers interested in increasing and enhancing
the supply of organs for transplantation.
     The positive effect of the legislation on bone marrow donations leads us to favor the fourth
explanation: although tax breaks and leave provisions may be sufficient to induce, at the margin,
individuals to undergo a moderately invasive procedure such as a bone marrow donation, they may be too
low for the more "costly" organ donations. Similarly, there may be enough individuals at the margin
between being willing to donate bone marrow or not, such that the incentives analyzed here tip their
decision, but this may not be the case for organs. In other words, and following the terminology of
Gneezy and Rustichini (2000), the incentives described here may be “large enough” for bone marrow
donations, but not for organ donations. The findings from Lacetera and Macis (2012) and Lacetera, Macis
and Slonim (2011, 2012) of a positive effect of leave legislation and $5-$15 gift cards on an even less
invasive procedure, blood donation, further corroborate our interpretation.


28
   http://www.unos.org/docs/Living_Donation.pdf
29
   http://marrow.org/Registry_Members/Donation/Now_that_you_are_a_match_%28PDF%29.aspx
30
    For the particularly financially constrained, organizations such as The National Living Donor Assistance Center
(www.livingdonorassistance.org) provide grants to cover the costs of donation, which may leave the legislation with
little room to have an impact. In addition, the American Society of Transplantation publishes an incomplete list of
the names of private companies, including large organizations such as major state universities (Iowa, Minnesota,
Ohio, and Wisconsin) offering paid leave to donate to their employees. Such initiatives could be obscuring the
effects of legislation mandating unpaid leave.
31
   Perhaps suggestive of the issues with insuring organ donors, The Living Organ Donor Protection Act, which
would have ensured donors could not be denied coverage or charged surcharges by health insurers, died in
Committee. http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/111/hr1558


                                                        17
     If this interpretation is correct, then we would expect larger incentives to have positive effects on bone
marrow donations, and potentially also on organ donations. More systematic analyses from contexts
where such stronger incentives are provided would be needed to reach firmer conclusions, however. The
recent decision on December 1, 2011 by the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals that bone marrow
apheresis can be compensated will provide researchers with an opportunity to further our understanding
of which policies are effective in reducing the organ and bone marrow demand-supply imbalance.32



References
Abadie, Alberto, and Sebastien Gay. 2006. The Impact of Presumed Consent Legislation on Cadaveric Organ
    Donation: A Cross-Country study. Journal of Health Economics 25:599-620.
Ashenfelter, Orley. and David Card. 1985. Using the Longitudinal Structure of earnings to Estimate the Effect of
    Training Programs. Review of Economics and Statistics 67: 648-60.
Bagozzi, Richard P., Kam-Hon Lee, and M. Frances Van Loo. 2001. Decisions to Donate Bone Marrow: The Role
    of Attitudes and Subjective Norms across Cultures. Psychology and Health 16:29-56.
Becker, Gary S., and Julio Jorge Elias. 2007. Introducing Incentives in the Market for Live and Cadaveric Organ
    Donations. The Journal of Economics Perspectives 21:3-24.
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2006. Incentives and Prosocial Behavior. American Economic Review 96:1652-
    1678.
Bergstrom, Ted, Rod Garrett, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2009. One Chance in a Million: Altruism and the Bone
    Marrow Registry. American Economic Review 99:1309-1334.
Bergstrom, Ted, Rod Garrett, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2012. Stem Cell Matching for Patients of Mixed Race.
    The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. Forthcoming.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
    Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:249-75.
Bilgel, Firat. 2011. The Law and Economics of Organ Procurement, Chapter 5: The Impact of Reimbursement
    Legislation on Living Donation: Evidence from the U.S., Thesis.
Biyar, Raphael. 2011. Guidelines of the Organ Transplant Steering Committee. Official Gazette, Miscellaneous
    Notices, February 20.
Bohachick, Patricia, Melissa V. Taylor, Susan Sereika, Sara Reeder, and Bonnie B. Anton. 2002. Social Support,
    Personal Control and Psychosocial Recovery Following Heart Transplantation. Clinical Nursing Research
    11:34-51.
Boulware, L. E., Troll M. U., Plantinga, L. C., and Powe, N. R. 2008. The Association of State and National
    Legislation with Living Kidney Donation Rates in the United States: A National Study, American Journal of
    Transplantation 8:1451-1470.
Confer, D.L., S.F. Leitman, E.B. Papadopoulos, T.H. Price, D.F. Stroncek, P. Robinett, B. Braem, and S. Gandham.
    2003. Serious Complications Following Unrelated Donor Marrow Collection: Experiences of the National
    Marrow Donor Program®. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation 10:13-14.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, Todd Elder and Brian Moore. 2012. Donorcycles: Motorcycle Helmet Laws and the Supply
    of Organ Donors Working Paper. Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
DiMatteo, M. Robin. 2004. Social Support and Patient Adherence to Medical Treatment: A Meta-Analysis. Health
    Psychology 23:207-218.
Duenwald, Mary, and David Shipley. 2011. Better Incentives for Organ Donors Can Thwart Black Market: View.
    www.businessweek.com, November 2.
Feng, S., N.P. Goodrich, J.L. Bragg-Gresham, D.M. Dykstra, J.D. Punch, M.A. DebRoy, S.M. Greenstein, and R.M.
    Merion. 2006. American Journal of Transplantation 6:783-790.

32
  The apheresis technique did not exist at the time of the National Organ Transplant Act in 1984 (Korbling and
Freireich, 2011). This highlights the importance of legislative evolution to match scientific innovation.



                                                       18
Fernandez, Jose M., David Howard, and Lisa Stohr. 2012. The Effect of Cadaveric Kidney Donations on Living
    Kidney Donations: An Instrumental Variables Approach. Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
Frey, Bruno S. 1993. Motivation as a Limit to Pricing. Journal of Economic Psychology 14:635-664.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    August:791-810.
Gortmaker, S.L., C.L. Beasley, L.E. Brigham, H.G. Franz, R.N. Garrison, B.A. Lucas, R.H. Patterson, A.M. Sobol,
    N.A. Grenvik, and M.J. Evanisko. 1996. Organ Donor Potential and Performance: Size and Nature of the
    Organ Donor Shortfall. Critical Care Medicine 24:432-439.
Healy, K., 2006: Last Best Gifts. Altruism and the Market for Human Blood and Organs, University Of Chicago
    Press.
Heckman, James J. and V. J. Hotz. 1989. Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods for Estimating
    the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training. Journal of the American Statistical
    Association 84, 862-874.
Hippen, Benjamin E. 2008. Organ Sales and Moral Travails: Lessons from the Living Kidney Vendor Program in
    Iran. Policy Analysis 614:1-17.
Kessler, Judd, and Alvin Roth. 2012. Organ Allocation Policy and the Decision to Donate. American Economic
    Review, forthcoming.
Korbling, Martin, and Emil J. Freireich. 2011. Twenty-Five Years of Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation.
    Blood Journal 117:6411-6416.
Karanes, Chatchada, Dennis Confer, Tim Walker, Andrea Askren, and Claire Keller. 2003. Unrelated Donor Stem
    Cell Transplantation: The Role of the National Marrow Donor Program. Oncology 17:1-12.
Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. 2010. Do All Material Incentives for Pro-Social Activities Backfire? The
    Response to Cash and Non-Cash Incentives for Blood Donations. Journal of Economic Psychology 31:738-748.
Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. 2012. Time for Blood: The Effect of Paid Leave Legislation on Altruistic
    Behavior. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, forthcoming.
Lacetera Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2012. Will there be Blood? Incentives and Displacement Effects
    in Pro-Social Behavior. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4: 186-223.
Lacetera Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2011. Rewarding Altruism? A Natural Field Experiment. NBER
    Working Paper 17636.
Leider, Stephen, and Alvin Roth. 2010. Kidneys for Sale: Who disapproves, and Why? American Journal of
    Transplantation 10:1221-1227.
Levenson, J.L., and M.E. Olbrisch. 1993. Psychosocial Evaluation of Organ Transplant Candidates: A Comparative
    Survey of Process, Criteria, and Outcomes in Heart, Liver and Kidney Transplantation. Psychosomatics 34:314-
    323.
Levush, Ruth. 2010. Israel: Encouragement of Organ Donation. Global Legal Monitor, accessed 12/14/2011,
    www.loc.gov/lawweb/servlet/lloc_news?disp3_I205401781
Maddrey, Willis C., and David H. Van Thiel. 1988. Liver Transplantation: An Overview. Hepatology 8:948-959.
Matas, Arthur J., and Mark Schnitzler. 2003. Payment for Living Donor (Vendor) Kidneys: A Cost-Effectiveness
    Analysis. American Journal of Transplantation 4:216-221.
Muzaale, Abimereki D., Nabil N. Dagher, Robert A. Montgomery, Sarah E. Taranto, Maureen A. Mcbride, and
    Dorry L. Segev. 2011. Estimates of Early Death, Acute Liver Failure, and Long-Term Mortality among Live
    Liver Donors. Gastroenterology 142:273-280.
Port, Friedrich K., Jennifer L. Bragg-Gresham, Robert A. Metzger, Dawn M. Dykstra, Brenda W. Gillespie, Eric. W.
    Young, Francis L. Delmonico, James J. Wynn, Robert M. Merion, Robert A. Wolfe, and Philip J. Held. 2002.
    Donor Characteristics Associated with Reduced Graft Survival: An Approach to Expanding the Pool of Kidney
    Donors. Transplantation 74:1281-1286.
Rodrigue, J.R., K. Crist, J.P. Roberts, R.B. Freeman Jr., R.M. Merion, and A.I. Reed. 2009. Stimulus for Organ
    Donation: A Survey of the American Society of Transplant Surgeons Membership. American Journal of
    Transplantation 9:2172-2176.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sonmez, and M. Utku Unver. 2004. Kidney Exchange. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
    19:457-488.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sonmez, and M. Utku Unver. 2005a. A Kidney Exchange Clearinghouse in New England.
    American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 95:376-380.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sonmez, and M. Utku Unver. 2005b. Pairwise Kidney Exchange. Journal of Economic
    Theory 125:151-188.
Roth, Alvin E. 2007. Repugnance as a Constraint on Markets. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 21:37-58.



                                                      19
Rudow, Dianne LaPointe, Marian O’Rourke, Claudia Musat, Cathy A. Garvey, Deidre Gish-Panjada, Charles
     Alexander. 2006. Living Donor Insurability and Its Impact on Donor Healthcare. World Transplant Congress.
     Abstract #1192, Concurrent Session 99: Ethics and Quality of Life.
Satel, Sally. 2010. Israel’s Remarkable New Steps to Solve Its Organ Shortage. Slate Magazine, January 27.
     http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2010/01/kidney_mitzvah.html
Segev, Dorry L., Abimereki D. Muzaale, Brian S. Caffo, Shruti H. Mehta, Andrew L. Singer, Sarah E. Taranto,
     Maureen A. McBride, and Robert A. Montgomery. 2010. Perioperative Mortality and Long-term Survival
     Following Live Kidney Donation. The Journal of the American Medical Association 307:1337-1447.
Seitz, Rainer, Anneliese Hliger, and Margarethe Heiden. 2012. Bone Marrow, Peripheral Blood, or Umblical Cord
     Blood: Does the Source of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells Matter? Journal of Blood Disorders and
     Transfusion, Special Issue 1.
Shimazono, Yosuke. 2007. The State of the International Organ Trade: A Provisional Picture Based on Integration
     of Available Information. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 85:955-962.
Spital, Aaron, and Cheryl Jacobs. 2002. Life Insurance for Kidney Donors: Another Update. Transplantation
     74:972-973.
Thong, Melissa S., Adrian A. Kaptein, Raymond T. Krediet, Elisabeth W. Boeschoten, and Friedo W. Dekker. 2007.
     Social Support Predicts Survival in Dialysis Patients. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 22:845-850.
Titmuss, Richard. 1971. The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social Policy. New York: Pantheon Books.
Venkataramani, A.S., E.G. Martin, A. Vijayan, and J.R. Wellen. 2012. The Impact of Tax Policies on Living Organ
     Donations in the United States. American Journal of Transplantation.
Wellington, Alison J., and Edward A. Sayre. 2011. An Evaluation of Financial Incentive Policies for Organ
     Donations in the United States. Contemporary Economic Policy 29:1-13.

Web references:
National Conference of State Legislatures (www.ncsl.org)
National Marrow Donor Program (www.nmdp.org)
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/)
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (www.organdonor.gov/donation/typesofdonation.htm)
www.organtransplants.org/understanding/history/index.html
United States Renal Data System (www.usrds.org)




                                                      20
                                       Figure 1: Donations by year

                                1A: Total donations by type of donation

 30,000

 25,000

 20,000

 15,000

 10,000

  5,000

      0



              Total donations          Kidney        Liver donations         Bone marrow donations

Notes: OPTN data through 12/31/2008; NMDP data through 12/31/2008.


                                 1B: Total donations by type of donor

 30,000

 25,000

 20,000

 15,000

 10,000

  5,000

      0



                        Total donations         Live donations         Cadaveric donations
Notes: OPTN data through 12/31/2008.




                                                    21
                               Table 1A: State laws for organ donors

                            Leave for state     Leave for private   Tax deduction for      Tax credit for
State                         employees            employees          individuals*          employers
Alaska                           2008
Arkansas                         2003                 2005                2005                 2005
California                       2002
Colorado                         1989
Connecticut                      2007                 2004
Delaware                         2001
Georgia                          2002                                     2004
Hawaii                           2005
Idaho                            2006                                     2006
Illinois                         2002                 2005
Indiana                          2002
Iowa                             2003                                     2005
Kansas                           2001
Louisiana                                                                 2005
Maine                            2002                 2002
Maryland                         2000
Massachusetts                    2005
Minnesota                        2006                                     2005
Mississippi                      2004                 2004                2006
Missouri                         2001
New Mexico                       2007                                     2005
New York                         2001                                     2006
North Carolina
North Dakota                     2005                                     2005
Ohio                             2001                                     2007
Oklahoma                         2002                                     2008
Oregon                                                                                         1991
Pennsylvania                                          2006                                     2006
Rhode Island                                                              2009
South Carolina                   2002                 2006
Texas                            2003
Utah                             2002                                     2005
Virginia                         2001                                     2007
Washington                       2002
West Virginia                    2005
Wisconsin                            2000                                   2004
*Idaho has an individual tax credit rather than tax deduction.
The following states have none of the above laws: AL, AZ, FL, KY, MI, MT, NE, NV, NH, NJ, SD, TN, VT, WY.




                                                    22
                          Table 1B: State laws for bone marrow donors

                             Leave for state    Leave for private   Tax deduction for      Tax credit for
State                          employees           employees          individuals*          employers
Alaska                            2008
Arkansas                          2003                   2005             2005                 2005
California                        2002
Colorado                          1989
Connecticut                       2004                   2004
Delaware                          2001
Georgia                           2002                                    2004
Hawaii                            2005
Idaho                             2006                                    2006
Illinois                          2002                   2005
Indiana                           2002
Iowa                              2003                                    2005
Kansas                            2001
Louisiana                         1992                   1992                                  1992
Maryland                          2000
Massachusetts                     2005
Minnesota                         1990                   2004             2005
Mississippi                       2004                   2004             2006
Missouri                          2001
Nebraska                          1992                   1992
New Mexico                        2007                                    2005
New York                          2001                   2007             2006
North Dakota                      2005                                    2005
Ohio                              2001                                    2007
Oklahoma                          2002                                    2008
Oregon                            1991                   2002                                  1991
Pennsylvania                                             2006                                  2006
Rhode Island                                                              2009
South Carolina                    2002                   2002
Texas                             2003
Utah                              2002                                    2005
Virginia                          2001                                    1997
Washington                        2002
West Virginia                     2005
Wisconsin                              2000                                 2004
*Idaho has an individual tax credit rather than tax deduction.
The following states have none of these laws: AL, AZ, FL, KY, ME, MI, MT, NV, NH, NJ, NC, SD, TN, VT, WY.




                                                    23
                Table 2: Descriptive statistics – Organ transplants per 1M population

                                     State-year                 Standard
Variable                            observations   Mean         deviation          Minimum      Maximum
Total                                  1071        66.8           19.7               0.0         157.5
Live                                   1071        16.8            8.4               0.0          59.2
Cadaveric                              1071        50.0           15.3               0.0         126.3
Male                                   1071        37.6           11.9               0.0          88.1
Female                                 1071        29.2           10.2               0.0          76.9
Livers                                 1069        16.1            6.2               0.9          48.5
Kidneys                                1071        46.7           12.5              13.0          99.4
Live - male                            1071         7.1            3.9               0.0          32.7
Dead - male                            1071        30.5           10.4               0.0          78.1
Live - female                          1071         9.7            5.1               0.0          36.1
Dead - female                          1071        19.5            7.3               0.0          55.1
Live - Livers                          1069         0.6            0.9               0.0          6.9
Dead - Livers                          1069        15.5            6.0               0.9          46.7
Live - Kidneys                         1071        16.2            8.0               0.0          59.2
Dead - Kidneys                   1071               30.5           8.4              10.9          70.1
Notes: Data are from OPTN and cover the period from 1/1/1988 through 12/31/2008.


                  Table 3: Descriptive statistics – Live donor-recipient relationships

Variable                                                            All               Kidneys      Livers
Total donations                                                   77,760              74,363       3,397
Biological, blood-related parent                                    16%                15%          25%
Biological, blood-related child                                     17%                17%          25%
Biological, blood-related identical twin                            0%                     0%       0%
Biological, blood-related sibling                                   31%                32%          15%
Biological, blood-related half-sibling                              1%                     1%       1%
Biological, blood-related other relative                            7%                     7%       10%
Non-biological, spouse                                              10%                11%          6%
Non-biological, life partner                                        0%                     0%       0%
Non-biological, unrelated: paired exchange                          1%                     1%       0%
Non-biological, unrelated: anonymous donation                       1%                     1%       1%
Non-biological, living/deceased donor exchange                      0%                     0%       0%
Non-biological, unrelated: domino                                   0%                     0%       2%
Non-biological, other directed donation                             15%                15%          16%
Notes: Data are from OPTN and cover the period from 1/1/1988 through 12/31/2008.




                                                     24
                              Table 4: Descriptive statistics – Bone marrow

Variable                        Observations         Mean          Standard Deviation         Minimum      Maximum
                                     Bone marrow transplants per 1m population
Total                               1173             3.7                  3.3                   0.0          21.3
Female                              1173             1.6                  1.7                   0.0          13.7
Male                                1173             2.1                  2.0                   0.0          15.2
                                     % of donation requests resulting in donation
Total                               1173             61%                 27%                    0%          100%
Female                              1173             48%                 32%                    0%          100%
Male                                1173             51%                 31%                    0%          100%
                                    Apheresis versus aspiration per 1m population
Apheresis                           1049             2.4                  3.4                   0.0          22.7
Aspiration                          1049             3.8                  3.0                   0.0          33.0
                                % of donations requests resulting in X type of donation
Apheresis                           1049             28%                 32%                    0%          100%
Aspiration                         1049          72%                 32%                0%            100%
Notes: The data for this table come from the NMDP and cover the period from 1/1/1987 through 12/31/2009.



                                  Table 5: Descriptive statistics – Waitlist

                                                                                    Standard
Variable                                              Observations       Mean       deviation    Minimum    Maximum
Cumulative waitlist per 1m population                       1020         480            352           4       1711
Cumulative waitlist per 1m population minus
cumulative removals from waitlist per 1m
population                                                  1020          64            53            0       308

Cumulative candidates dying on waitlist or
deteriorating until too sick for transplant per 1m
population                                                  1020          35            36            0       170

Yearly number of candidates dying on waitlist or
deteriorating until too sick for transplant per 1m
population                                            1016          5          4                      0        21
Notes: Data are from OPTN and cover the period from 1/1/1988 through 12/31/2008.




                                                            25
                                 Table 6: Probability of legislation passing
                                        (Outcome = probability of law passing)

                                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)
                                                                                                Tax
                                                             Leave for       Leave for      deductions      Tax credits
                                                              private          state            for            for
                                                             employees       employees      individuals     employers

Cumulative waitlist per 1m population                            -0.0149       0.0106         -0.00769         -0.0113
                                                                (0.0242)      (0.0102)        (0.0154)        (0.0109)
Observations                                                      1,020        1,020            1,020           1,020
R-squared                                                         0.120        0.125            0.147           0.149

Cumulative waitlist per 1m population minus
cumulative removals from waitlist per 1m population
since October 1987                                               0.0741        -0.0518        0.0882*        0.000502
                                                                (0.0961)      (0.0396)        (0.0525)       (0.0329)
Observations                                                     1,020          1,020          1,020           1,020
R-squared                                                        0.120          0.125          0.148           0.148

Cumulative candidates dying on waitlist or
deteriorating until too sick for transplant per 1m
population                                                       -0.170       0.0438*          -0.0311         -0.0152
                                                                (0.123)       (0.0238)        (0.0724)        (0.0340)
Observations                                                     1,020         1,020            1,020           1,020
R-squared                                                        0.121         0.125            0.147           0.148
Yearly number of candidates dying on waitlist or
deteriorating until too sick for transplant per 1m
population                                                       -0.226        0.0362          0.253           -0.0990
                                                                (0.289)        (0.131)        (0.161)         (0.0956)
Observations                                                     1,016          1,016          1,016            1,016
R-squared                                                        0.120          0.124          0.148            0.149

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state time trends. State-level clustered standard errors
in parentheses.
*** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                           26
                                      Table 7A: Organs -- Main results
                              (Outcome = organ transplants per one million population)

                                      (1)          (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)      (7)
Type of donations                     All         All                All             All               All       Cadaveric      Live
Leave for state employees         11.46***       -1.041        6.003***             -0.236           -1.204        -1.566       0.362
                                   (3.731)      (2.848)         (2.178)             (1.762)          (2.293)       (2.061)     (1.008)
Leave for private employees         10.91*       2.665          11.15*              6.466            4.428          5.357      -0.927
                                   (5.782)      (5.610)         (5.702)             (4.608)          (6.333)       (6.327)     (1.303)
Tax credits for employers           5.502        -3.641         -7.104              -4.188           -2.418        -1.655      -0.763
                                   (4.861)      (4.442)         (6.848)             (5.106)          (6.823)       (7.497)     (1.172)
Tax deductions for individuals      8.139        1.153          -0.578              0.240            -1.419        -0.0303     -1.387
                                   (4.998)      (3.670)         (4.006)             (2.419)          (3.761)       (3.452)     (1.292)
Year fixed effects                                 X                                  X                X                X        X
State fixed effects                                                  X                X                X                X        X
State-year fixed effects                                                                               X                X        X
Observations                        1,071        1,071              1,071           1,071            1,071          1,071       1,071
R-squared                           0.160        0.458              0.562           0.693            0.734          0.624       0.830

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1



                                   Table 7B: Organs -- Results by gender
                              (Outcome = organ transplants per one million population)

                                       (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)           (6)
                                                 Cadaveric -               Live -                             Cadaveric -     Live -
Type of donation                      Male         Male                    Male              Female            Female         Female
Leave for state employees            -1.479         -1.874                 0.395              0.275             0.308         -0.0331
                                     (1.425)        (1.302)              (0.460)             (1.228)            (1.210)       (0.652)
Leave for private employees          4.260          5.214                  -0.952             0.167             0.143         0.0252
                                     (3.961)        (3.950)              (0.839)             (3.322)            (3.161)       (0.839)
Tax credits for employers            -1.666         -2.475                 0.809              -0.752            0.820         -1.572
                                     (3.197)        (3.886)              (1.166)             (4.152)            (3.955)       (1.068)
Tax deductions for individuals      -0.0578         0.244                  -0.301             -1.361            -0.274        -1.086
                                     (2.395)        (2.291)              (0.663)             (1.738)            (1.615)       (0.756)
Observations                         1,071          1,071                  1,071              1,071             1,071         1,071
R-squared                            0.615          0.552                  0.725              0.673             0.481         0.766

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state time trends. State-level clustered standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                               27
                    Table 7C: Organs -- Results for livers and kidneys separately
                              (Outcome = organ transplants per one million population)

                                          (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                       Live -          Cadaveric                     Live -           Cadaveric
Type of donation                        Liver          liver            - liver        Kidney        kidney            - kidney
Leave for state employees               -0.342        0.0362             -0.378         -0.979       0.295             -1.276
                                       (0.730)        (0.165)            (0.736)       (1.633)       (1.051)           (1.280)
Leave for private employees             1.780        -0.479**            2.259          2.124        -0.509             2.635
                                       (2.530)        (0.230)            (2.515)       (3.620)       (1.319)           (3.538)
Tax credits for employers               -0.403         0.804             -1.207         -2.213       -1.527            -0.687
                                       (3.035)        (0.545)            (3.421)       (3.487)       (1.255)           (4.049)
Tax deductions for individuals         -0.0744         0.315             -0.389         -0.494       -1.692             1.200
                                       (1.217)        (0.298)            (1.184)       (2.307)       (1.370)           (1.956)
Observations                            1,069          1,069             1,069          1,071        1,071              1,071
R-squared                               0.735          0.575             0.722          0.704        0.814              0.523

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state time trends. State-level clustered standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1



                      Table 8: Organs -- Results by donor-recipient relationship
                              (Outcome = organ transplants per one million population)

                                                                 (1)                       (2)                        (3)
                                                                                                               Not biologically
                                                                                     Not biologically
                                                          Biologically                                          related donors
                                                                                      related donors
                                                         related donors                                           (excluding
                                                                                   (including spouses)
                                                                                                                   spouses)
Leave for state employees                                     0.000365                  0.00414                    0.0142
                                                              (0.0137)                  (0.0156)                  (0.0163)
Leave for private employees                                     0.0117                 -0.0281**                  -0.0263*
                                                              (0.0142)                  (0.0106)                  (0.0141)
Tax credits for employers                                     -0.0453**                 0.0266*                    0.0233
                                                              (0.0214)                  (0.0134)                  (0.0223)
Tax deductions for individuals                                0.00499                   -0.0122                   -0.00161
                                                              (0.0147)                  (0.0124)                  (0.0111)
Observations                                                    1,070                    1,070                      1,070
R-squared                                                       0.978                    0.621                      0.468

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state time trends. State-level clustered standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                           28
    Table 9: Organs – Results controlling for and interacting with state employment rate
                                (Outcome = organ transplants per one million population)

                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
Type of donor                                 All          All         Live         Live       Cadaveric      Cadaveric


Leave for state employees                   -6.211       -8.371       1.469        1.019         -7.682         -9.392
                                            (6.432)      (6.309)     (3.328)      (2.909)       (5.622)         (5.825)


Leave for private employees                  1.377       1.810        -0.686       -0.586        2.063          2.396
                                            (8.737)      (8.840)     (1.833)      (1.869)       (8.018)         (8.132)


Tax credits for employers                    2.444       2.011        -0.341       -0.467        2.785          2.478
                                            (14.05)      (13.87)     (1.852)      (1.876)       (13.91)         (13.73)


Tax deductions for individuals              -1.012       -0.982       -1.552       -1.581        0.540          0.599
                                            (4.103)      (4.211)     (1.435)      (1.462)       (3.786)         (3.856)


State employees/labor force                  -54.42                   53.92                      -108.3
                                            (241.6)                  (125.2)                    (207.5)



Leave for state employees*
(state employees/labor force)                98.75                    -19.28                     118.1
                                            (174.2)                  (82.43)                    (148.8)
Full-time state employees/labor force                    311.1                     115.7                        195.5
                                                         (327.4)                  (182.6)                       (360.5)
Leave for state employees *
(full-time state employees/labor force)                  205.1                     -13.37                       218.5
                                                         (232.5)                  (97.99)                       (210.4)


Observations                                  784         784          784          784           784            784
R-squared                                    0.716       0.717        0.812        0.812         0.654          0.655

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state time trends. State-level clustered standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                           29
                          Table 10A: Bone marrow – Main results (donations)
                            (Outcome = bone marrow donations per one million population)

                                           (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)
Leave for state employees              1.611***            -0.585       2.370***          -0.922*             0.0788
                                        (0.345)           (0.626)        (0.284)          (0.470)             (0.397)
Leave for private employees             -0.676*          -1.252**         0.321            -0.749              0.165
                                        (0.392)           (0.611)        (0.320)          (0.509)             (0.523)
Tax credits for employers                -1.288            -0.538        0.0487            -0.115              0.869
                                        (0.800)           (0.951)        (0.884)          (0.650)             (0.825)
Tax deductions for individuals           0.222            -1.233*         0.166          -1.066**              -0.313
                                        (0.377)           (0.630)        (0.378)          (0.431)             (0.441)
Year fixed effects                                            X                               X                   X
State fixed effects                                                           X               X                   X
State-level time trends                                                                                           X
Observations                             1,173            1,173           1,173            1,173               1,173
R-squared                                0.038            0.380           0.356            0.650               0.780

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per
capita. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                            Table 10B: Bone Marrow -- Donations by gender
                            (Outcome = bone marrow donations per one million population)

                                                                       (1)                              (2)


Type of outcome                                                Donations - female               Donations - male
Leave for state employees                                             0.126                          -0.0474
                                                                     (0.248)                         (0.193)
Leave for private employees                                           0.201                          -0.0358
                                                                     (0.268)                         (0.302)
Tax credits for employers                                            -0.210                           -0.103
                                                                     (0.277)                         (0.247)
Tax deductions for individuals                                        0.116                           0.752
                                                                     (0.390)                         (0.460)
Observations                                                          1,173                           1,173
R-squared                                                             0.615                           0.715

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level
time trends. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                          30
                            Table 10C: Bone marrow -- Donations by method
                            (Outcome = bone marrow donations per one million population)

                                                                       (1)                              (2)
                                                               Apheresis donations            Aspiration donations
Leave for state employees                                            -0.202                           0.253
                                                                     (0.471)                         (0.363)
Leave for private employees                                           0.634                          -0.651*
                                                                     (0.403)                         (0.379)
Tax credits for employers                                            -0.652                           0.562
                                                                     (0.830)                         (0.648)
Tax deductions for individuals                                        0.879                           0.387
                                                                     (0.659)                         (0.568)
Observations                                                           507                             507
R-squared                                                             0.844                           0.788

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level
time trends. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                          31
  Table 11: Bone marrow – Results controlling for and interacting with state employment
                                          rate
                            (Outcome = bone marrow donations per one million population)

                                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
Type of donor                                All         All        Female      Female         Male           Male


Leave for state employees                 -1.521*      -1.382*      -0.929       -0.855       -0.592         -0.527
                                           (0.813)     (0.749)      (0.709)     (0.637)       (0.374)        (0.358)


Leave for private employees                0.120       0.0329        0.130       0.0741      -0.00958        -0.0412
                                           (0.512)     (0.501)      (0.269)     (0.271)       (0.300)        (0.299)


Tax credits for employers                  0.866        0.898        0.129       0.148         0.737         0.750*
                                           (0.840)     (0.808)      (0.413)     (0.393)       (0.454)        (0.443)


Tax deductions for individuals             -0.235       -0.197      -0.224       -0.197       -0.0118      -0.000537
                                           (0.413)     (0.399)      (0.263)     (0.250)       (0.233)        (0.231)


State employees/labor force                 -32.27                   -16.34                    -15.93
                                           (33.52)                  (22.77)                   (39.20)



Leave for state employees*
(state employees/labor force)             37.16**                    23.99                    13.17*
                                           (17.66)                  (17.12)                   (6.772)
Full-time state employees/labor force                  -77.54*                   -45.52                      -32.01
                                                       (39.96)                  (38.55)                      (45.19)
Leave for state employees *
(full-time state employees/labor force)                47.37**                   31.04                       16.32*
                                                       (22.47)                  (21.53)                      (9.331)


Observations                               1,122        1,122        1,122       1,122         1,122          1,122
R-squared                                  0.789        0.789        0.626       0.626         0.727          0.727

Note: Includes the full unbalanced panel. State-level controls include unemployment rate and income per capita. All
regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level time trends. State-level clustered standard errors in
parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1




                                                          32
           Table 12: Descriptive statistics – donor, match, and patient characteristics
                                                                         Standard
Variable                                         Observations   Mean     Deviation     Minimum      Maximum
% incompatible recipient-donor blood types          1071         14%        12%           0%           68%
% pediatric patients (<18 years)                    1071          8%         3%           0%           30%
% multi-organ recipients                            1071          2%         2%           0%           15%
% with diabetes diagnosis                           1071         16%         5%           0%           38%
% with non-cholestatic liver disease                1067         55%        12%           0%          100%
Cold ischemia time                                  1071          13         3             6            26
Recipient age                                       1071          44         4            32            55
Days on waitlist                                    1071         395        132           55           907

Note: These percentages and averages are calculated for the whole sample. Subsample rates are used in subsample
analyses.


                     Table 13: Descriptive statistics – quality outcome variables
                                                                           Standard
Variable                                         Observations    Mean      Deviation    Minimum      Maximum
% survive six months - all donor types              1071         86%          7%          36%          100%
% survive three years - all donor types             1071         62%          24%          0%          100%
% survive six months - live donors                  1068         93%          8%           0%          100%
% survive six months - cadaveric donors             1071         84%          7%          41%          100%
% survive six months - female donors                1071         86%          8%          33%          100%
% survive six months - male donors                  1071         86%          8%          17%          100%
% survive six months - live female donors           1062         92%          9%           0%          100%
% survive six months - cadaveric female donors      1069         83%          11%          0%          100%
% survive six months - live male donors             1056         93%          10%          0%          100%
% survive six months - cadaveric male donors        1070         85%          8%           0%          100%
% survive six months - kidney donors                1071         89%          7%          40%          100%
% survive three years - kidney donors               1071         65%          25%          0%          100%
% survive six months - live kidney donors           1068         93%          8%           0%          100%
% survive six months - cadaveric kidney donors      1071         87%          7%          43%          100%
% survive six months - liver donors                 1067         78%          12%          0%          100%
% survive three years - liver donors                1067         56%          24%          0%          100%
% survive six months - live liver donors             579         80%          30%          0%          100%
% survive six months - cadaveric liver donors       1067         78%          12%          0%          100%




                                                      33
                                 Table 14: Tax and leave effects on quality

                                                  14A: All organs
                                         (Outcome = state-level survival rate)

                                                    (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Survival time                                  Six months         Three years          Six months         Six months
Type of donor                                      All                 All                Live            Cadaveric
Leave for state employees                         0.198             1.509*                0.444             -0.0627
                                                 (0.506)            (0.761)              (0.794)            (0.614)
Leave for private employees                      -0.0366             -1.042               0.402              0.323
                                                 (0.838)            (1.187)              (1.387)            (1.474)
Tax credits for employers                         0.220              2.182                1.127              0.262
                                                 (0.690)            (1.733)              (1.012)            (0.874)
Tax deductions for individuals                    0.827              1.561                2.985              0.579
                                                 (0.953)            (1.025)              (2.536)            (1.395)
Observations                                      1,067               965                  579               1,067
R-squared                                         0.723              0.887                0.556              0.676

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All survival rates are multiplied by 100 so the coefficients can be
read as percentage changes. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level time trends. Case mix
controls: recipient age, recipient gender, diagnosis = noncholestatic v. other (livers), diagnosis=diabetes v. other
(kidneys), live donor, and pediatric recipient. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p <
.05, * p < .1



                                               14B: Organs by gender
                                   (Outcome = state-level six-month survival rate)


                                         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
                                                                   Live -     Live -      Cadaveric -      Cadaveric -
Type of donor                          Female         Male        female       male         female            male
Leave for state employees              1.172*        -0.629       -0.148       0.648         1.407           -1.031
                                       (0.599)      (0.807)      (1.411)     (0.843)       (0.973)          (0.869)
Leave for private employees             -0.648       0.983        -1.106     5.516**        -0.487            1.062
                                       (1.138)      (1.220)      (2.656)     (2.118)       (1.863)          (1.862)
Tax credits for employers               0.649       0.0985         1.109      -0.136         1.012          -0.0194
                                       (1.019)      (0.802)      (2.030)     (1.243)       (1.199)          (0.920)
Tax deductions for individuals          -1.067       1.495       6.924**     -4.020*        -1.847            2.045
                                       (1.129)      (1.534)      (3.112)     (2.154)       (2.218)          (2.384)
Observations                            1,055        1,064          449         442          1,055            1,064
R-squared                               0.563        0.583         0.579       0.613         0.465            0.540

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All survival rates are multiplied by 100 so the coefficients can be
read as percentage changes. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level time trends. Case mix
controls: recipient age, recipient gender, diagnosis = noncholestatic vs. other (livers), diagnosis=diabetes v. other
(kidneys), live donor, and pediatric recipient. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p <
.05, * p < .1




                                                            34
                                             14C: Quality - Kidneys
                                         (Outcome = state-level survival rate)


                                                       (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
Survival time                                     Six months        Three years        Six months         Six months
Type of donor                                          All               All               Live           Cadaveric
Leave for state employees                            -0.121             0.726             0.872              -0.516
                                                    (0.478)           (0.786)            (0.955)            (0.657)
Leave for private employees                         -0.0557            -0.780             0.847              -0.590
                                                    (0.950)           (1.647)            (1.214)            (1.371)
Tax credits for employers                            -0.417             2.247             -0.366             -0.615
                                                    (0.625)           (1.875)            (1.006)            (1.109)
Tax deductions for individuals                       -0.429            -0.918             -0.140             -0.631
                                                    (0.943)           (1.543)            (1.496)            (1.073)
Observations                                         1,071               969              1,021              1,071
R-squared                                            0.663              0.855             0.356              0.592

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All survival rates are multiplied by 100 so the coefficients can be
read as percentage changes. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level time trends. Case mix
controls: recipient age, recipient gender, diagnosis = noncholestatic v. other (livers), diagnosis=diabetes v. other
(kidneys), live donor, and pediatric recipient. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p <
.05, * p < .1



                                               14D: Quality - livers
                                         (Outcome = state-level survival rate)

                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)
Survival time                                Six months          Three years          Six months          Six months
Type of donor                                    All                  All                 Live            Cadaveric
Leave for state employees                       1.502              3.089*                -1.339              1.382
                                               (1.266)             (1.689)              (4.603)             (1.294)
Leave for private employees                     0.895               -1.320               -8.292              1.758
                                               (2.223)             (3.928)              (13.57)             (2.411)
Tax credits for employers                       1.910               0.236                -4.518              2.005
                                               (1.426)             (3.106)              (10.44)             (1.401)
Tax deductions for individuals                  3.092              7.318*                1.747               1.639
                                               (3.556)             (3.981)              (21.92)             (3.992)
Observations                                    1,067                963                  490                1,067
R-squared                                       0.534               0.652                0.428               0.527

Note: The data include the full unbalanced panel. All survival rates are multiplied by 100 so the coefficients can be
read as percentage changes. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-level time trends. Case mix
controls: recipient age, recipient gender, diagnosis = noncholestatic v. other (livers), diagnosis=diabetes v. other
(kidneys), live donor, and pediatric recipient. State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < .01, ** p <
.05, * p < .1




                                                           35
                           Appendix Table 1: Legal references

State           References
Alaska          HB 252
Arkansas        A.C.A. § 11-3-205; HB 2779; A.C.A. §21-4-215; HB 1393
California       Cal Ed Code §89519.5; Cal Lab Code §1510
Colorado        CRS 24-50-104; HB 1250
Connecticut     SB 1447; Conn Gen Stat § 17b-288; SB 327
Delaware        14 Del. C § 1318B; 29 Del. C. § 5122;
Georgia         OCGA § 47-7-27; OCGA § 45-20-31
Hawaii          HRS §78-23.6
Idaho           Idaho Code §59-1608; Idaho Code §63-3029K; Idaho Code §67-5343
Illinois        HB0324
Indiana         2002 Ind. PL 94
Iowa            Iowa Code §422.7; Iowa Code §70A.39
Kansas          Exec Order No. 2001-02
Louisiana       La RS 47:297; La RS 47:287.758; 1992 HB 428
Maine           26 MRSA §843
Maryland        Md State Personnel and Pensions Code Ann §9-1106
Massachusetts   ALM GL ch 62, §3; 2005 Acts Chapter 99 §1.33E
Minnesota       Minn Stat §181.945; Minn Stat §181.9456; S.F. No. 2840
Mississippi     Miss. S.B. 2981; Miss Code Ann §27-7-18; Miss Code Ann §25-3-103
Missouri        HB 679 (2001)
Nebraska        RRS Neb §71-4820; 1992 Neb LB 1099
New Mexico      NM Stat Ann §24-28-3; NM Stat Ann §7-2-36
New York        NY CLS Labor §202-b; NY CLS Tax §612
North Dakota    SB 2298, Ch 476; ND Cent Code §57-38-30.3
Ohio            ORC Ann 5747.01; ORC 124.139
Oklahoma        68 Okl St §2358; 74 Okl St §840-2.20B
Oregon          ORS §659A.312; ORS §315.604
Pennsylvania    35 PS §6120.2; 35 PS §6120.3
Rhode Island    2009 RI SB 76
South
Carolina        S.C. Code §8-11-65; S.C. R. 61; 2005 SC R 373; 1992 S.C. R. 642
Texas           Tex Govt Code §661.916
                Utah Code Ann §59-10-1015; Utah Code Ann 1953 §67-19-14.5; 2002 Ut. SB
Utah            125
Virginia        Va Code Ann §2.2-2821.1; Va Code Ann §58.1-322
Washington      Exec Order 02-01
West Virginia   W.Va Code §29-6-28
Wisconsin       2003 AB 477; Wis Stat §71.05; Wis. Stat §230.35




                                           36
