NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GREAT LEVERAGING
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 18290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18290
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the BIS Annual Conference, Lucerne, 21–22 June 2012.
For helpful comments I am grateful to conference participants, and especially to my discussants, Barry
Eichengreen and Y. Venugopal Reddy. This paper draws on recent work with collaborators, whom
I thank; but the views expressed are those of the author alone, and the responsibility for interpretation,
and any and all errors, is mine. Alan Taylor served as a Senior Advisor at Morgan Stanley in 2010–11,
and has received compensation for presenting research findings at private and public sector meetings.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Great Leveraging
Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18290
August 2012, Revised October 2012
JEL No. E3,E5,E6,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
What can history tell us about the relationship between the banking system, financial crises, the global
economy, and economic performance? Evidence shows that in the advanced economies we live in
a world that is more financialized than ever before as measured by importance of credit in the economy.
I term this long--run evolution “The Great Leveraging” and present a tenpoint examination of its main
contours and implications.
Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
alan.m.taylor@virginia.edu

	  
An	  intellectual	  as	  much	  as	  an	  economic	  crash,	  the	  global	  financial	  crisis	  has	  thrown	  
macroeconomic	   theory	   and	   policymaking	   into	   wreckage-­‐sorting	   mode	   yet	   again.	  
What	   will	   be	   picked	   up	   and	   what	   discarded	   during	   this	   time	   around	   remains	   an	  
unsettled	   question.	   Whilst	   a	   useful	   result	   can	   be	   hoped	   for,	   theory	   alone	   can	   only	  
take	  us	  so	  far.	  This	  paper	  starts	  from	  the	  premise	  that	  economic	  history	  is	  the	  only	  
laboratory	   we	   have	   at	   our	   disposal	   for	   the	   study	   of	   many	   serious	   macroeconomic	  
questions.	  In	  economics,	  as	  in	  any	  other	  scientific	  pursuit,	  empirical	  evidence	  is	  the	  
ultimate	  arbiter	  of	  whether	  any	  particular	  model	  bears	  a	  useful	  relation	  to	  reality.	  
	  
The	  Great	  Leveraging:	  five	  facts	  and	  five	  lessons	  for	  policymakers	  	  
My	   concern	   is	   what	   history	   can	   tell	   us	   about	   the	   relationship	   between	   the	   evolution	  
of	   the	   private	   credit	   system,	   the	   occurrences	   of	   financial	   crises,	   linkages	   to	   the	  
global	   economy,	   and	   macroeconomic	   performance.	   All	   of	   these	   are	   key	   issues	   at	   the	  
center	   of	   the	   current	   macroeconomic	   and	   financial	   economic	   crisis	   and	   remain	   an	  
ongoing	  focus	  of	  researchers	  and	  policymakers.	  
This	  paper’s	  title,	  The	  Great	  Leveraging,	  comes	  from	  a	  simple	  observation	  —	  we	  live	  
in	  a	  world	  that	  is	  more	  financialized	  than	  ever	  before.	  It	  is	  simple,	  at	  least,	  when	  you	  
take	   the	   trouble	   to	   look	   at	   the	   long-­‐run	   data:	   over	   a	   couple	   of	   decades,	   and	  
compared	   to	   more	   than	   a	   century	   of	   modern	   finance	   capitalism,	   the	   so-­‐called	  
“advanced”	   countries	   shifted	   recently	   to	   an	   economic	   framework	   with	   a	   banking	  
system	  (judged	  by	  aggregate	  bank	  balance	  sheets	  or	  simply	  by	  private	  bank	  loans)	  
that	   is	   larger,	   relative	   to	   GDP,	   than	   anything	   we	   have	   ever	   seen	   in	   the	   past	  
(Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  2012).	  
On	  that	  dimension,	  at	  least,	  this	  time	  is	  different.	  One	  implication	  is	  that	  we	  are,	  in	  
some	  sense,	  having	  an	  out-­‐of-­‐sample	  experience.	  For	  an	  economist	  or	  a	  policymaker	  
this	  may	   be	   as	   disorienting	   as	   an	   out-­‐of-­‐body	  experience	  is	  for	  a	  normal	  person.	  But	  
in	   taking	   a	   look	   at	   the	   same	   questions	   over	   the	   very	   long	   run,	   I	   will	   argue	   that,	   in	  

	  

1	  

	  

	  
many	   important	   respects,	   the	   causes	   and	   consequences	   of	   today’s	   crisis	   are	   by	   no	  
means	   unusual	   relative	   to	   prior	   experience,	   although	   they	   represent	   a	   very	   extreme	  
version	   of	   phenomena	   we	   have	   seen	   many	   times	   before.	   This,	   I	   hope,	   offers	   some	  
modest	  reassurance	  —	  which	  is	  to	  say	  that,	  although	  we	  have	  an	  extreme	  draw,	  we	  
are	   not	   operating	   in	   a	   strange	   economic	   world,	   but	   rather	   in	   an	   environment	   that	  
should	   be	   quite	   recognizable,	   and	   which	   is,	   indeed,	   all	   too	   familiar	   to	   the	  
macroeconomic	  historian.	  
A	   wide	   range	   of	   work	   in	   a	   long	   tradition	   has	   deeply	   shaped	   what	   historians	   know	  
today	   and	   fundamentally	   shapes	   the	   perspective	   I	   present	   below.	   Macroeconomic	  
history	   is	   a	   work	   in	   progress,	   and	   a	   rather	   countercyclical	   one	   at	   that,	   but	   it	   is	  
reassuring	  to	  note	  a	  new	  surge	  of	  interest	  in	  issues	  of	  macroeconomic	  and	  financial	  
history.	  There	  are	  many	  others	  working	  in	  this	  field,	  more	  each	  year,	  and	  judging	  by	  
current	  events,	  the	  need	  for	  us	  all	  to	  produce	  insightful	  research	  is	  not	  receding.	  
All	   that	  said,	   it	  is	  not	  at	  all	  clear	  that	  the	  historical	  record,	  and	  its	  implications	  for	  
the	  present	  critical	  moment	  are	  fully	  and	  widely	  appreciated,	  so	  it	  is	  worth	  putting	  
forward	  a	  summary	  of	  several	  essential	  issues	  that	  bear	  consideration	  not	  only	  by	  
researchers,	   but,	   perhaps	   more	   importantly,	   by	   the	   policymakers	   currently	   at	   the	  
helm.	  To	  respect	  constraints	  of	  space,	  I	  organize	  my	  discussion	  of	  these	  issues	  into	  
ten	  key	  points:	  Five	  Facts	  and	  Five	  Lessons	  for	  Policymakers.	  
	  
Fact	  1.	  Crises:	  almost	  forgotten,	  now	  they’re	  back	  	  
The	  first	  fact	  is	  that	  in	  the	  last	  60	  years,	  until	  2008,	  we	  had	  all	  but	  forgotten	  about	  
financial	  crises	  in	  the	  “advanced”	  countries.	  And	  this	  was,	  arguably,	  for	  good	  reasons	  
—	   as	   for	   two	   or	   three	   generations,	   going	   back	   to	   the	   Great	   Depression,	   very	   few	  
such	   crises	   had	   occurred,	   and	   absolutely	   none	   at	   all	   occurred	   from	   World	   War	   2	  
until	  the	  1970s.	  This	  we	  knew	  from	  the	  work	  of	  Bordo	  at	  al.	  (2001)	  and	  more	  recent	  

	  

2	  

	  

	  
extensions	   and	   refinements	   to	   the	   historical	   data	   by	   Reinhart	   and	   Rogoff	   (2009)	  
only	  serve	  to	  reinforce	  this	  message	  (Figure	  1).	  
The	  Frequency	  of	  Banking	  Crises	  

Percentage of economies in a financial crisis
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70

Figure	  1	  

1800

1850

1900

High-income economies

1950

2000

Middle- & low-income economies
	  

Notes	  and	  source:	  The	  chart	  shows	  the	  percentage	  of	  economies	  in	  each	  subgroup	  that	  were	  in	  a	  financial	  
crisis	  in	  the	  each	  year	  in	  the	  period	  1800	  to	  2008.	  Data	  from	  Qian,	  Reinhart,	  and	  Rogoff	  (2010).	  

	  
Thus	  even	  as	  emerging	  markets	  began	  to	  experience	  financial	  crises	  at	  an	  elevated	  
frequency	  in	  the	  1970s,	  1980s	  and	  especially	  1990s,	  the	  risks	  in	  advanced	  countries	  
appeared	   much	   smaller.	   There	   were	   some	   advanced-­‐country	   crises:	   a	   few	   of	   them	  
were	   “systemic”	   and	   quite	   painful	   macroeconomically,	   as	   in	   Scandinavia	   and	  
especially	   Japan;	   others	   like	   the	   U.S.	   saving	   and	   loan	   crisis	   involved	   non-­‐negligible	  
fiscal	   costs,	   but	   appeared	   to	   have	   limited	   macroeconomic	   consequences.	   With	   the	  
benefit	   of	   hindsight,	   naturally,	   we	   can	   say	   that	   this	   period	   of	   history	   amounted	   to	  

	  

3	  

	  

	  
nothing	  so	  much	  as	  an	  opportunity,	  albeit	  a	  self-­‐created	  one,	  for	  advanced	  countries	  
to	  lull	  themselves	  into	  a	  false	  sense	  of	  security.	  
Having	   dragged	   their	   macroeconomies	   out	   of	   the	   doldrums	   of	   the	   Depression	   and	  
the	  ravages	  of	  war,	  and	  having	  built	  elaborate,	  and	  at	  times	  repressive,	  systems	  of	  
financial	   regulation	   and	   supervision,	   these	   countries	   rode	   for	   three	   decades	   on	  
favorable	  tailwinds.	  A	  glorious	  thirty-­‐year	  phase	  of	  high	  growth,	  partly	  technological	  
and	  partly	  simple	  catch-­‐up,	  provided	  expanding	  real	  resources.	  Modest	  but	  positive	  
inflation	  allowed	  nominal	  resources	  to	  grow	  even	  faster,	  and	  debts	  to	  inflate	  away	  
gently	   but	   nontrivially,	   especially	   at	   long	   horizons.	   And	   finally	   the	   postwar	   financial	  
system	  was	  for	  a	  long	  time	  carrying	  low	  leverage,	  arising	  from	  a	  mixture	  of	  its	  own	  
technology,	   historically-­‐conditioned	   preferences	   informed	   by	   the	   disaster	   of	   the	  
1930s,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  constraints	  imposed	  by	  authorities.	  Such	  a	  framework	  simply	  
could	   not	   generate	   the	   kind	   of	   credit	   boom	   and	   bust	   cycles	   that	   had	   recurrently	  
derailed	   economies	   every	   decade	   or	   two	   from	   the	   beginnings	   of	   modern	   finance	  
capitalism	   circa	   1800	   up	   until	   the	   epic	   collapse	   and	   recalibration	   of	   the	   world	  
economy	  after	  the	  1930s.	  Though	  still	  attended	  to	  by	  those	  with	  any	  eye	  to	  history	  
(see	   e.g.,	   Kindleberger	   1978)	   or	   more	   lately	   to	   the	   emerging	   world	   (see	   e.g.,	  
Kaminsky	  and	  Reinhart	  1999),	  the	  contemplation	  of	  macro-­‐financial	  crisis	  risks	  was	  
naïvely	  ignored	  by	  most	  modern	  macroeconomists	  and	  policymakers.	  
However	  it	  remains	  an	  open	  question,	  and	  an	  object	  of	  current	  and	  future	  research	  
for	   many	   of	   us,	   to	   pin	   down	   exactly	   why	   that	   period	   from	   the	   1940s	   to	   the	   1970s	  
was	   so	   unusually	   quiescent,	   with	   no	   financial	   crises	   at	   all.	   And	   also,	   more	  
importantly,	  to	  ask	  the	  question	  at	  what	  price,	   if	  any,	  such	  tranquility	  was	  bought.	  
Up	   until	   the	   crisis	   of	   2008,	   the	   consensus	   view	   was	   that	   financial	   development	   —	  
meaning	  more	  finance,	  or	  more	  M2,	  or	  more	  loans	  relative	  to	  GDP,	  as	  well	  as	  more	  
financial	  instruments	  —	  all	  of	  these	  were	  an	  unalloyed	  good	  thing.	  
That	   premise	   is,	   as	   of	   now	   at	   least,	   not	   so	   easily	   taken	   for	   granted,	   and	   firm	  
empirical	   evidence	   for	   the	   proposition	   remains	   elusive.	   Earlier	   work	   emphasizing	  
potential	   benefits	   (e.g.,	   King	   and	   Levine	   1993;	   Rajan	   and	   Zingales	   1998;	   Levine	  
	  

4	  

	  

	  
2005)	  has	  been	  joined	  by	  new	  work	  pointing	  to	  potentially	  offsetting	  costs	  or	  risks	  
(e.g.,	  Rajan	  2005;	  Arcand	  et	  al.	  2012).	  
One	  way	  to	  frame	  the	  skeptical	  view	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  historical	  data	  might	  be	  as	  
follows:	  how	  was	  it	  that	  the	  advanced	  economies	  could	  enjoy	  Les	  Trente	  Glorieuses	  
up	   to	   1975	   despite	   having	   such	   small,	   repressed,	   and	   uninnovative	   financial	  
systems,	  as	  compared	  to	  the	  era	  since?	  What	  can	  we	  infer	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  those	  
olden	  times	  mobilized	  and	  allocated	  high	  volumes	  of	  saving	  to	  support	  rapid	  rates	  of	  
economic	   growth	   yet	   without	   inculcating	   instability,	   as	   compared	   to	   today’s	  
financial	  systems?	  
The	   specification	   problem	   is	   of	   course	   quite	   serious	   here:	   what	   indeed	   is	   the	  
counterfactual?	  Would	  post	  1970s	  growth	  have	  been	  even	  slower	  had	  limitations	  on	  
the	   financial	   system	   been	   maintained	   or	   expanded?	   Would	   the	   previous	   epoch	   have	  
been	   even	   more	   glorious	   had	   banks	   been	   allowed	   or	   encouraged	   to	   lever	   up	   and	  
take	  risks	  even	  sooner	  than	  they	  were?	  
Moreover,	  is	  it	  really	  just	  a	  question	  about	  the	  financial	  system	  anyway	  —	  after	  all,	  
many	   other	   things	   were	   different	   in	   the	   1950s	   and	   the	   1960s,	   including	   pervasive	  
fixed	  exchange	  rates	  resting	  on	  a	  foundation	   of	  capital	  controls.	  The	  Bretton	  Woods	  
style	   resolution	   of	   the	   trilemma	   was	   so	   different	   from	   what	   we	   see	   today	   at	   the	  
moment	   of	   writing	   (i.e.,	   setting	   aside	   potential	   imminent	   developments	   in	   the	  
Eurozone	  periphery).	  It	  is	  an	  important	  question	  whether	  that	  set	  of	  constraints	  on	  
the	   external	   finance,	   was	   a	   supporting	   or	   even	   dominating	   factor	   in	   preserving	  
financial	   stability,	   as	   compared	   to	   the	   many	   and	   varied	   internal	   restrictions	   on	  
domestic	   finance	   previously	   noted.	   We	   shall	   return	   later	   to	   this	   issue,	   when	   we	  
examine	  the	  links	  between	  capital	  flows,	  credit,	  and	  crises.	  
This	  is	  a	  deep	  and	  challenging	  research	  agenda	  that	  will	  keep	  us,	  and	  our	  successors,	  
busy	  for	  quite	  a	  while	  but	  I	  will	  try	  to	  expand	  on	  this	  point	  as	  it	  is	  a	  central	  question	  
as	   policymakers	   contemplate	   the	   tradeoffs	   inherent	   in	   any	   new	   designs	   for	   the	  
world’s	  macro-­‐financial	  architecture.	  	  
	  

	  

5	  

	  

	  
Fact	  2.	  Consequences:	  crises	  are	  depressing	  and	  deflationary	  
Perhaps	   because	   financial	   crises	   were	   almost	   forgotten,	   so	   too	   was	   much	   of	   the	  
accumulated	   historical	   evidence	   showing	   that	   the	   consequences	   of	   crises	   for	   the	  
economy	   could	   be	   profound	   and	   very	   damaging	   indeed	   compared	   to	   the	   normal	  
experience	  in	  garden-­‐variety	  downturns.	  And	  just	  as	  interest	  in	  this	  kind	  of	  evidence	  
was	   waning,	   so	   too	   did	   the	   attention	   of	   theory	   turn	   away	   from	   mechanisms	   that	  
incorporated	   monetary	   and	   financial	  phenomena,	   and	   their	  implications	  for	  the	  real	  
economy	  in	  times	  of	  crisis.	  For	  example,	  the	  analysis	  of	  phenomena	  such	  as	  panics,	  
deflation,	  flight-­‐to-­‐safety,	  liquidity	  traps,	  fiscal	  policies,	  etc.,	  with	  notable	  exceptions,	  
has	   only	   returned	   to	   the	   forefront	   of	   research	   prominence	  in	   the	   wake	   of	   the	   events	  
of	  2008.	  A	  return	  to	  a	  careful	  empirical	  evaluation	  of	  the	  history	  of	  financial	  crises	  is	  
long	  overdue,	  and	  may	  better	  support	  the	  development	  of	  theory	  going	  forward.	  
To	  summarize,	  I	  draw	  on	  some	  of	  my	  recent	  and	  ongoing	  collaborative	  work.	  This	  is	  
evidence-­‐based	   macroeconomics,	   and	   uses	   data	   from	   14	   advanced	   countries	   over	  
140	   years	   of	   history	   to	   analyze	   what	   goes	   on	   before,	   during,	   and	   after	   financial	  
crises.	   Some	   of	   the	   work	   is	   causal	   analysis,	   and	   other	   work	   looks	   at	   consequences	  
using	   an	   event	   study	   framework,	   an	   approach	   that	   is	   now	   being	   widely	   used	   to	  
establish	  long-­‐run	  stylized	  facts	  by	  others	  working	  in	  this	  field	  (Almunia	  et	  al.	  2010;	  
Reinhart	  and	  Rogoff	  2009).	  
A	  new	  ingredient	  in	  our	  work,	  however,	  is	  the	  inclusion	  of	  data	  not	  just	  on	  the	  dates	  
of	   sovereign	   and	   financial	   crises,	   and	   on	   levels	   of	   public	   debt,	   but	   also	   the	   collection	  
and	   compilation	   of	   data	   on	   levels	   of	   private	   credit,	   which	   is	   to	   say	   the	   amount	   of	  
loans	   and	   the	   size	   of	   balance	   sheets	   of	   the	   banking	   system	   (see	   Schularick	   and	  
Taylor	   2012;	   Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor	   2011ab).	   This	   is	   highly	   relevant	   to	  
current	  concerns,	  such	  as	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  financial	  crises	  tend	  to	  ultimately	  
stem	  in	  large	  part	  from	  fiscal	  problems	  (a	  potentially	  plausible	  argument	  for	  Greece)	  
or	   more	   typically	   reflect	   excesses	   in	   the	   private	   sector	   due	   to	   credit	   booms	   (the	  
more	  agreed	  upon	  narrative	  for	  catastrophic	  cases	  like	  Ireland	  or	  Spain,	  as	  well	  as	  in	  
other	  less	  distressed	  economies	  still	  affected	  by	  credit	  hangovers).	  
	  

6	  

	  

	  
Figure	  2	  

Trend	  Changes	  in	  Recessions:	  Normal	  Recessions,	  Financial	  Crisis	  
Recessions	  and	  Global	  Crisis	  Recessions	  	  

Normal

Global Crisis
Crisis

Prewar Recessions

Crisis
Normal

Postwar Recessions

-.08

-.025

-.04

-.02

-.06

-.03

-.015

-.04

-.02

-.01

-.02

-.01

-.005

0

Change in real loan growth rate
4 year windows before/after recession peak

0

Change in inflation rate
4 year windows before/after recession peak

0

Change in real GDP growth rate
4 year windows before/after recession peak

Normal

Global Crisis
Crisis

Prewar Recessions

Crisis

Normal

Normal

Postwar Recessions

Global Crisis
Crisis

Prewar Recessions

Crisis
Normal

Postwar Recessions

	  

Notes	  and	   source:	   The	  chart	   shows	  the	  change	  in	  the	  variable,	  on	  average,	  between	  the	  4-­‐year	  periods	  
just	   before	   and	   just	   after	   a	   recession	   peak.	   The	   bins	   are	   based	   on	   normal	   recessions,	   financial	   crisis	  
recessions,	  and	  global	  crisis	  recessions;	  all	  bins	  are	  present	  in	  the	  prewar	  sample	  (1870–39),	  and	  the	  first	  
two	  bins	  only	  in	  the	  postwar	  sample	  (1946–2008).	  Data	  from	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  (2011a).

	  

	  
Can	   history	   speak	   to	   these	   issues?	   The	   current	   crisis	   is	   but	   a	   small	   sample,	   yet	   by	  
drawing	  together	  episodes	  across	  time	  and	  space	  we	  can	  mitigate	  the	  “rare	  event”	  
problem	   for	   this	   phenomenon	   and	   thereby	   seek	   tighter	   inference.	   Figure	   2	   pulls	  
together	   some	   evidence	   along	   these	   lines	   and	   compares	   what	   happens	   before	   and	  
after	  in	  a	  typical	  normal	  recession	  (i.e.,	  without	  an	  associated	  financial	  crisis)	  with	  
what	  happens	  financial	  crises,	  either	  when	  the	  crisis	  is	  of	  a	  “local”	  kind	  or	  in	  the	  case	  
of	   the	   rarer	   but	   more	   intense	   case	   of	   a	   synchronized	   global	   financial	   crisis	   (like	  
1929,	   or	   1907,	   but	   excluding	   2008	   at	   the	   time	   of	   writing	  as	   the	   window	   had	   not	   yet	  

	  

7	  

	  

	  
closed).	   Here	   we	   show	   the	   effects	   on	   real	   GDP	   growth	   per	   capita,	   the	   rate	   of	  
inflation,	  and	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  credit	  (log	  real	  bank	  loans).	  
The	  evidence	  sends	  a	  clear	  message.	  Recessions	  might	  be	  painful,	  but	  they	  tend	  to	  
be	  even	  more	  painful	  when	  combined	  with	  financial	  crises	  or	  (worse)	  global	  crises,	  
and	   we	   already	   know	   that	   post-­‐2008	   experience	   will	   not	   overturn	   this	   conclusion.	  
The	  impact	  on	  credit	  is	  also	  very	  strong:	  financial	  crises	  lead	  to	  strong	  setbacks	  in	  
the	  rate	  of	  growth	  of	  loans	  as	  compared	  to	  what	  happens	  in	  normal	  recessions,	  and	  
this	   effect	   is	   strong	   for	   global	   crises.	   Finally,	   inflation	   generally	   falls	   in	   recessions,	  	  
but	  the	  downdraft	  is	  stronger	  in	  financial	  crisis	  times.	  
There	  is	  some	  sign	  of	  variation	  between	  the	  prewar	  and	  postwar	  samples,	  but	  not	  
always	   in	   an	   encouraging	   way.	   Postwar	   recessions	   have	   been	   less	   deflationary	   in	  
general,	   probably	   reflecting	   the	   escape	   from	   gold	   standard	   rules	   and	   mentalité,	  
whereby	   more	   activist	   central	   banks	   could	   offset	   to	   some	   degree	   the	   raw	  
deflationary	   forces	   at	   work.	   Against	   this,	   the	   credit	   crunches	   and	   real	   growth	  
slowdowns	   do	   not	   appear	   to	   have	   moderated	   much	   as	   we	   moved	   from	   prewar	   to	  
postwar	  periods,	  and	  credit	  contractions	  seem	  even	  stronger	  in	  recent	  times.	  
To	  sum	  up,	  where	  recessions	  are	  painful,	  those	  with	  financial	  crises	  are	   much	  more	  
painful,	  and	  those	  with	  global	  financial	  crises	  are	  even	  worse	  still.	  
	  
Fact	  3.	  Extreme	  leverage:	  size	  of	  the	  banking	  sector	  is	  unprecedented	  
Given	  these	  findings,	  a	  third	  fact	  is	  very	  much	  worth	  discussing,	  as	  it	  is	  central	  to	  the	  
argument.	   It	   is	   the	   fact	   that,	   looking	   back	   over	   the	   long	   sweep	   of	   history,	   the	  
financial	   sector	   in	   the	   world’s	   advanced	   economies	   is	   now	   larger	   than	   it	   ever	   has	  
been.	   The	   increase	   in	   size	   has	   been	   dramatic	   since	   the	   1980s;	   after	   that	   date,	  
compared	  with	  what	  had	  been	  the	  norm	  for	  more	  than	  a	  century,	  the	  banks	  almost	  
doubled	   in	   size	   relative	   to	   GDP	   measured	   by	   loan	   activity,	   and	   almost	   tripled	  
measured	  by	  total	  balance	  sheet	  size.	  
	  

8	  

	  

	  
The	  Size	  of	  the	  Banking	  Sector	  Relative	  to	  GDP:	  Loans,	  Assets,	  and	  Broad	  
Money	  in	  14	  Advanced	  Countries	  

0

.5

ratio
1

1.5

2

Figure	  3	  

1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Bank Loans/GDP

Bank Assets/GDP

Broad Money/GDP
	  

Notes	   and	   source:	   The	   sample	   period	   is	   1870–2008.	   Bank	   loans	   are	   loans	   by	   banks	   in	   aggregate	   to	   the	  
nonfinancial	   sector,	   excluding	   interbank	   lending	   and	   foreign	   currency	   lending.	   Bank	   assets	   are	   equal	   to	  
the	   total	   balance	   sheet	   size	   of	   all	   banks	   in	   aggregate.	   Broad	   money	   is	   M2	   or	   a	   proxy	   thereof.	   Data	   and	  
more	  detailed	  definitions	  can	  be	  found	  in	  Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  (2012).

	  

	  
This	   fact	   is	   displayed	   in	   Figure	   3,	   which	   shows	   the	   following	   three	   variables,	   bank	  
loans	   (aggregate	   to	   the	   nonfinancial	   sector),	   bank	   balance	   sheets	   (all	   inclusive,	  
including	   interbank	   lending),	   and	   broad	   money	   (typically	   M2),	   all	   relative	   to	   GDP.	  
The	  sample,	  again,	  is	  the	  14	  advanced	  countries,	  and	  the	  graph	  shows	  year	  effects,	  
that	  is	  to	  say	  averages	  for	  each	  period	  for	  the	  cross	  section,	  which	  serves	  to	  isolate	  
the	   global	   trends	   in	   these	   variable,	   whilst	   also	   smoothing	   out	   cross	   country	  
variation	  (Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  2012).	  

	  

9	  

	  

	  
The	  behavior	  of	  these	  variables	  up	  to	  the	  1970s	  would	  be	  almost	  as	  any	  economic	  
historian	  would	  have	  predicted,	  and	  the	  trends	  are,	  in	  particular,	  consistent	  which	  
the	   predominant	   monetarist	   view	   associated	   with	   Friedman	   and	   Schwartz	   (1963).	  
In	   that	   “money	   view”	   the	   fluctuations	   in	   the	   monetary	   liabilities	   of	   the	   banking	  
sector	  are	  a	  very	  good	  proxy	  for	  what	  is	  happening	  on	  the	  asset	  side	  of	  the	  banks’	  
balance	   sheet,	   and	   the	   levels	   and	   changes	   in	   both	   broad	   money	   and	   credit	   move	  
together	   almost	   hand	   in	   hand.	   We	   can	   refer	   to	   this	   first	   period	   from	   1870	   to	   the	  
1970s	  as	  the	  “Age	  of	  Money”	  and	  apart	  from	  the	  Great	  Depression,	  and	  subsequent	  
years	   of	   financial	   repression	   in	   the	   1940s	   and	   1950s,	   the	   ratio	   of	   loans	   to	   money	  
was	   more	   or	   less	   stable.	   Loans	   to	   GDP	   hovered	   in	   a	   range	   around	   0.4	   to	   0.5,	   with	  
broad	  money	  to	  GDP	  sitting	  a	  little	  higher	  at	  an	  average	  of	  about	  0.6	  to	  0.7.	  
From	   the	   1970s	   this	   picture	   changed	   dramatically,	   and	   we	   entered	   what	   might	   be	  
called	  the	  “Age	  of	  Credit.”	  Although	  broad	  money	  relative	  to	  GDP	  remained	  almost	  
flat	  at	  around	  0.7	  (rising	  a	  little	  only	  in	  the	  2000s),	  the	  asset	  side	  of	  banks’	  balance	  
sheets	   exploded.	   Loans	   to	   GDP	   doubled	   from	   0.5	   to	   1.0	   and	   assets	   to	   GDP	   tripled	  
from	   about	   0.7	   to	   roughly	   2.	   The	   decoupling	   of	   loans	   from	   broad	   money	   reflected	  
the	   rise	   of	   nonmonetary	   liabilities	   on	   bank	   balance	   sheets,	   such	   as	   wholesale	  
funding.	  The	  even	  faster	  expansion	  of	  bank	  assets	  reflected	  this	  too,	  plus	  the	  rise	  in	  
more	  interbank	  lending.	  Along	  the	  way	  risk	  also	  increased,	  as	  the	  banks’	  asset	  mix	  
put	   an	   ever	   diminishing	   weight	   on	   safe	   assets	   (government	   securities),	   a	   fraction	  
which	  was	  down	  to	  virtually	  zero	  in	  the	  2000s,	  after	  starting	  at	  60%–70%	  in	  1950.	  
Both	  trends	  went	  along	  with	  increased	  leverage	  as	  conventionally	  measured,	  or	  as	  
measured	   here	   by	   the	   leverage	   of	   loans	   relative	   to	   the	   stable	   funding	   base	   provided	  
by	  deposits,	  which	  by	  the	  postwar	  period	  had	  been	  insured	  to	  try	  to	  prevent	  runs.	  
However,	   in	   the	   end	   the	   banking	   system,	   insured	   against	   one	   type	   of	   run,	   can	   be	  
seen	   to	   have	   endogenously	   switched	   over	   time	   to	   alternative	   funding	   sources,	   like	  
wholesale,	  which	  had	  no	  such	  insurance,	  at	  least	  explicitly.	  
These	  trends	  highlight	  important	  changes	  in	  the	  modern	  financial	  landscape	  in	  the	  
last	   30	   or	   40	   years,	   and	   suggest	   that	   much	   more	   attention	   be	   given	   to	   how	   and	   why	  
	  

10	  

	  

	  
those	   changes	   took	   place,	   and	   with	   what	   beneficial	   (or	   harmful)	   effects.	   For	  
example,	  one	  hypothesis	  would	  be	  that	  banks’	  risk	  tolerance	  changed	  over	  time,	  as	  
they	  rebuilt	  their	  enterprises	  after	  the	  ravages	  of	  the	  Depression	  and	  World	  War	  2.	  
Another	   would	   be	   that	   binding	   regulations	   were	   gradually	   relaxed	   as	   a	   result	   of	  
financial	  liberalizations	  from	  the	  1970s	  on,	  allowing	  banks	  to	  push	  further	  out	  along	  
the	  volume/leverage/risk	  frontiers.	  The	  impact	  of	  Lender	  of	  Last	  Resort	  and	  deposit	  
insurance	   —	   the	   moral	   hazard	   argument	   —	   could	   also	   play	   a	   role,	   whereby	   the	  
authorities,	   trying	   to	   avert	   one	   problem	   after	   the	   1930s,	   created	   a	   new	   problem	  
down	  the	  road	  as	  an	  unintended	  consequence.	  
Two	  further	  points	  deserve	  mention.	  The	  first	  is	  that	  we	  can	  compare	  private	  debt	  
creation	   via	   the	   banks	   with	   public	   debt	   creation.	   The	   trends	   since	   1945	   are	   striking,	  
and	   show	   an	   almost	   complete	   inversion.	   The	   scale	   of	   the	   increase	   in	   the	   balance	  
sheets	   in	   the	   banking	   sector	   has	   effectively	   flipped	   the	   main	   credit	   risk	   nexus,	  
measured	   by	   debt	   magnitude,	   from	   the	   sovereign	   side	   to	   the	   banking	   side.	   After	   the	  
war,	  banks	  were	  cautious	  and	  had	  few	  loans	  to	  the	  private	  sector	  on	  their	  books,	  but	  
most	  of	  the	  sovereigns	   naturally	  had	  very	  large	  debts	  after	  the	  conflict.	  But	  by	  the	  
1990s	  and	  2000s	  —	  and	  even	  after	  substantial	  postcrisis	  increases	  in	  average	  public	  
debt	  in	  advanced	  countries	  —	  the	  reverse	  now	  holds	  true,	  as	  seen	  in	  Figure	  4.	  It	  is	  
private	   debts	   on	   bank	   balance	   sheets	   that	   far	   outweigh	   public	   debts	   on	   sovereign	  
balance	  sheets.	  
One	  can	  surely	  find	  exceptions	  (like	  Greece,	  which	  is	  not	  in	  our	  sample)	  but	  the	  data	  
suggest	   that	   recent	   Irish	   or	   Spanish	   tribulations	   are	   much	   more	   indicative	   of	   the	  
dangers	   that	   lurk,	   hopefully	   in	   a	   more	   contained	   fashion,	   in	   the	   balance	   sheets	   of	  
almost	   every	   advanced	   nation.	   There	   is	   much	   more	   private	   debt	   out	   there	   than	  
public	  debt,	  and	  this	  can	  only	  change	  rapidly	  if	  there	  is	  sudden	  debt	  shifting	  (as	  the	  
pollution	  of	  Irish	  and	  Spanish	  sovereign	  credit	  shows).	  

	  

11	  

	  

	  
Private	  (bank)	  loans	  v.	  public	  (sovereign)	  debt,	  14	  Advanced	  Countries	  

.2

.4

ratio
.6

.8

1

Figure	  4	  

1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Bank Loans/GDP

Public Debt/GDP
	  

Source:	  The	  sample	  period	  is	  1870–2008.	  Bank	  loans	  are	  loans	  by	  banks	  in	  aggregate	  to	  the	  nonfinancial	  
sector,	  excluding	  interbank	  lending	  and	  foreign	  currency	  lending	  based	  on	  Schularick	  and	  Taylor	   (2012).	  
Public	   debt	   is	   total	   sovereign	   debt	   outstanding	   based	   on	   Reinhart	   and	   Rogoff	   (2009).	   See	   Jordà,	  
Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  (forthcoming).

	  

	  
The	   other	   point	   to	   stress	   is	   that	   the	   phenomena	   under	   discussion	   are	   not	   just	   a	  
result	   of	   trends	   in	   a	   few	   countries,	   for	   example,	   the	   Anglo-­‐Saxons.	   Figure	   5	   shows	  
country	  trends	  over	  the	  long	  run,	  and	  the	  run	  up	  in	  credit	  in	  the	  postwar	  period	  is	  
evident	   across	   the	   board.	   The	   UK	   and	   US	   saw	   large	   expansions,	   but	   so	   too	   did	  
Australia,	   Canada;	   so	   did	   Germany,	   France;	   so	   did	   Scandinavia,	   Switzerland.	   They	  
may	  not	  be	  quite	  at	  peak	  Icelandic	  levels,	  but	  all	  the	  advanced	  countries	  now	  have	  
banking	   sector	   balance	   sheets	   that	   are	   a	   multiple,	   and	   in	   some	   cases	   quite	   a	   large	  
multiple,	  of	  national	  GDP.	  

	  

12	  

	  

	  
Long	  run	  trends	  by	  country	  

AUS

CAN

CHE

DEU

DNK

ESP

FRA

GBR

ITA

JPN

NLD

NOR

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Figure	  5	  

1870 1910 1950 1990
1870 1910 1950 1990
1890 1930 1970 2010
1890 1930 1970 2010
USA

-3

-2

-1

0

1

SWE

1870 1910 1950 1990
1870 1910 1950 1990
1890 1930 1970 2010
1890 1930 1970 2010

log(Loans/Broad Money)

log(Assets/Broad Money)
	  

Notes	   and	   source:	   Bank	   loans	   are	   loans	   by	   banks	   in	   aggregate	   to	   the	   nonfinancial	   sector,	   excluding	  
interbank	  lending	  and	  foreign	  currency	  lending.	  Bank	  assets	  are	  equal	  to	  the	  total	  balance	  sheet	  size	  of	  all	  
banks	   in	   aggregate.	   Broad	   money	   is	   M2	   or	   a	   proxy	   thereof.	   Data	   and	   more	   detailed	   definitions	   can	   be	  
found	  in	  Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  (2012).

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

13	  

	  

	  
Fact	  4.	  Global	  asymmetry:	  EMs	  buy	  insurance,	  DMs	  sell	  it	  
Moving	  from	  a	  focus	  on	  financial	  structures	   to	  financial	  flows,	  the	  last	  two	  key	  facts	  
focus	  on	  aspects	  of	  the	  global	  financial	  system	  which	  mark	  the	  last	  two	  decades	  as	  
one	  of	  the	  most	  unusual	  epochs	  ever	  witnessed	  in	  economic	  history.	  Here	  again,	  this	  
time	  is	  quite	  different	  when	  it	  comes	  to	  the	  emergence	  of	  global	  imbalances	  on	  the	  
scale	   we	   have	   seen.	   To	   grasp	   their	   causes	   and	   consequences,	   we	   will	   again	   need	   a	  
historical	   perspective	   to	   figure	   out	   why	   the	   flows	   emerged,	   what	   form	   they	   took,	  
and	  to	  understand	  when	  and	  how	  those	  forces	  might	  eventually	  unravel.	  
In	   the	   1990s,	   the	   global	   financial	   system	   changed	   fundamentally	   for	   two	   linked	  
reasons:	   emerging	   markets	   (EMs)	   joined	   developed	   markets	   (DMs)	   in	   an	   integrated	  
the	  global	  economy	  (globalization),	  but	  with	  very	  different	  economic	  fundamentals	  
(asymmetry).	  Globalization	  allowed	   EMs	  to	  expand	  their	  external	  balance	  sheets,	  to	  
admit	   both	   net	   and	   gross	   flows,	   either	   inward	   or	   outward.	   Which	   of	   these	   would	  
dominate?	   The	   neoclassical	   prediction	   once	   held	   sway.	   To	   quote	   H.	   Ross	   Perot,	  
many	  expected	  a	  giant	  sucking	  sound:	  a	  flow	  of	  investment	  “downhill”	  from	  rich	  to	  
poor	  countries.	  In	  the	  end,	  the	  opposite	  seemed	  to	  happen:	  a	  net	  flow	  “uphill”	  from	  
poor	  to	  rich.	  But	  a	  focus	  on	  net	  flows	  obscures	  crucial	  information	  in	  the	  structure	  of	  
capital	  flows	  in	  the	  post-­‐1990	  financially	  globalized	  world.	  
First,	   private	   capital	   has	   been	   flowing	   downhill	   all	   the	   time	   and	   in	   substantial	  
quantities.	  Here,	  in	  the	  area	  where	  private	  incentives	  for	  investment	  actually	  matter,	  
there	   is	   no	   paradox,	   no	   puzzle	   of	   uphill	   flows	   at	   all.	   Private	   investors	   have	   moved	  
capital	  from	  rich	  to	  poor	  countries	  all	  along,	  just	  as	  standard	  economic	  theory	  would	  
predict.	  Second,	  and	  especially	  after	  the	  Asian	  crises	  of	  the	  late	  1990s,	  official	  capital	  
has	  been	  flowing	  uphill	  from	  EM	  to	  DM,	  but	  at	  an	  even	  greater	  rate,	  sufficient	  on	  net	  
to	   more	   than	   offset	   the	   private	   capital	   flows	   from	   DM	   to	   EM.	   These	   official	   flows	   are	  
principally	  driven	  by	  what	  we	  might	  call	  the	  “Great	  Reserve	  Accumulation”	  (in	  the	  
region	  of	  $10	  trillion	  in	  EMs,	  after	  a	  brief	  run	  down	  in	  the	  crisis)	  plus	  a	  smaller	  but	  
rapidly	   growing	   component	   in	   sovereign	   wealth	   funds	   (where	   the	   data	   are	   more	  
opaque,	  but	  the	  totals	  may	  now	  be	  above	  $4	  trillion).	  
	  

14	  

	  

	  
Private	  and	  Official	  Capital,	  Stocks	  and	  Flows,	  Emerging	  Markets	  (EM)	  and	  
Developed	  Markets	  (DM)	  

6000

EM Official & Private BOP Account Flows

EM & DM NIIP Account Official Reserves Stocks

0

-1000

-500

2000

U.S. $ billion
0

U.S. $ billions

4000

500

1000

Figure	  6	  

1980

1990
EM Official Flows

2000

2010

1999q1 2001q1 2003q1 2005q1 2007q1 2009q1

EM Private Capital Flows

Emerging markets

Developed markets

	  

Notes	   and	   sources:	   The	   left	   panel	   shows	   EM	   financial	   account	   BOP	   data	   for	   official	   reserve	   flows	   and	  
private	   (nonreserve)	   financial	   flows;	   negative	   =	   capital	   outflow.	   The	   right	   panel	   shows	   EM	   and	   DM	   NIIP	  
data	  for	  stock	  of	  official	  reserves.	  Data	  from	  IMF;	  see	  Pradhan	  and	  Taylor	  (2011a).	  

	  
An	  extended	  discussion	  appears	  in	  Pradhan	  and	  Taylor	  (2011a),	  but	  Figure	  6	  shows	  
some	   key	   facts.	   Note	   that	   we	   have	   never	   seen	   anything	   like	   the	   Great	   Reserve	  
Accumulation	  at	  any	  time	  in	  previous	  economic	  history.	  There	  were	  episodes	  during	  
the	  Gold	  Standard	  where	  a	  country	  would,	  for	  idiosyncratic	  reasons,	  feel	  a	  need	  to	  
expand	   or	   replenish	   reserves.	   But	   that	   system	   was	   able	   to	   run	   on	   low	   reserve	   levels	  
on	   average,	   at	   least	   in	   the	   advanced	   countries	   of	   that	   time.	   Episodes	   such	   as	   the	  
Argentine	  gold	  accumulation	  of	  the	  1890s	  or	  the	  French	  hoarding	  in	  the	  1920s	  were	  
relatively	   rare.	   And	   it	   was	   a	   zero	   sum	   game	   given	   inelastic	   supply	   at	   most	   times:	   on	  
the	  whole	  one	  country’s	  gain	  in	  gold	  reserves	  had	  to	  be	  another’s	  loss.	  
	  

15	  

	  

	  
Now	  we	  live	  in	  a	  fiat	  world,	  and	  the	  reserve	  unit	  is	  the	  U.S.	  dollar,	  plus	  maybe	  one	  or	  
two	   other	   currencies,	   vying	   for	   a	   secondary	   role.	   (No	   doubt	   the	   plan	   was	   that	   the	  
euro	   would	   be	   vying	   for	   a	   primary	   role	   right	   now,	   but	   the	   current	   fiasco	   has	  
probably	   delayed	   that,	   and	   may	   yet	   destroy	   the	   possibility	   altogether.)	   And	   unlike	  
gold,	   these	   paper	   reserves	   can	   be	   created	   at	   will.	   Although	   therein	   lies	   a	   problem	  
because	  if	  the	  demand	  grows	  too	  far	  or	  too	  fast	  (as	  it	  could	  do	  given	  the	  possibility	  
divergent	  EM	  and	  DM	  growth	  rates),	  or	  if	  the	  supply	  of	  creditworthy	  reserve	  issuers	  
contracts	   (from	   over	   issuance	   in	   the	   case	   of	   several	   DMs,	   plus	   the	   risk	   of	   euro	  
collapse)	  then,	  in	  the	  Triffin	  sense,	  this	  game	  cannot	  go	  on	  for	  ever.	  
I	  interpret	  these	  trends	  as	  a	  result	  of	  insurance	  motives	  in	  the	  EMs,	  particularly	  after	  
the	   painful	   EM	   crises	   of	   the	   1990s	   made	   clear	   to	   EM	   policymakers	   that	   the	   risk	   of	  
currency	   crises,	   financial	   crises,	   and	   sovereign	   crises	   were	   extremely	   high	   for	   them,	  
a	  fact	  that	  was	  only	  amplified	  by	  the	  associated	  and	  well-­‐known	  political	  risks	  that	  
could	   befall	   you	   when	   one	   or	   more	   of	   those	   events	   took	   place	   on	   your	   watch.	  
Without	   insurance,	   a	   sudden	   stop,	   or	   perhaps	   more	   seriously,	   a	   sudden	   flight,	   could	  
leave	  your	  economy	  and	  polity	  in	  ruins,	  and	  entirely	  dependent	  on	  the	  kindness	  of	  
strangers	   —	   and	   given	   multiple	   equilibria,	   such	   fates	   may	   or	   may	   not	   be	   entirely	  
deserved.	   In	   recent	   collaborative	   work,	   I	   have	   argued	   that	  it	   is	   the	   potential	   flight	   of	  
liquid	   liabilities	   in	   quasi-­‐fixed	   exchange	   rate	   systems	   that	   drives	   the	   remarkable,	  
and	  ex	  post	  successful,	  reserve	  hoarding	  of	  EM	  countries	  in	  recent	  years	  (Obstfeld,	  
Shambaugh,	  and	  Taylor	  2009,	  2010).	  
Without	   market	   access,	   and	   absent	   reserves,	   a	   crisis	   meant	   that	   you	   had	   to	   go	  
looking	   for	   credit,	   at	   the	   IMF	   or	   elsewhere.	   As	   Korea	   and	   other	   countries	   learned	  
then	   (and	   as	   Greece,	   Ireland,	   Spain	   and	   others	   know	   now)	   such	   liquidity	   may	   arrive	  
in	   the	   end,	   but	   it	   could	   be	   too	   little,	   it	   could	   be	   too	   late,	   and	   it	   will	   almost	   always	  
come	   on	   terms	   that	   are	   stringent	   and	   humiliating.	   The	   only	   feasible	   alterative	   for	  
now	   is	   self-­‐insurance,	   absent	   some	   large,	   global,	   international	   risk	   pooling	   entity.	  
(But	  as	  the	  Eurozone	  example	  suggests,	  the	  latter	  may	  be	  a	  fantastical	  idea	  for	  the	  
foreseeable	  future;	  even	  at	  the	  level	  of	  Europe,	  a	  political	  project	  with	  over	  50	  years	  

	  

16	  

	  

	  
of	  groundwork	  and	  a	  deep	  historical	  sense	  of	  destiny,	  even	  ideas	  for	  limited	  forms	  of	  
international	  risk	  sharing,	  via	  full	  banking	  union	  or	  common	  bonds,	  face	  resistance).	  
In	   this	   way,	   ironically,	   EM	   policymakers	   have	   taken	   on	   board,	   with	   greater	   gusto	  
than	   many	   might	   have	   expected,	   the	   kind	   of	   advice	   on	   prudence	   and	   fiscal	   rectitude	  
handed	  out	  decades	  ago	  by	  the	  DMs:	  moving	  to	  more	  countercyclical	  policies	  over	  
the	   cycle	   and	   building	   up	   buffer	   stocks	   over	   the	   longer	   run	   (Frankel,	   Végh,	   and	  
Vuletin	   2011).	   Many	   DMs	   have	   done	   the	   opposite,	   piling	   up	   gross	   debits	   and,	   if	  
anything,	  undoing	  automatic	  stabilizers	  and	  practicing	  austerity	  during	  downturns.	  
One	   might	   marvel	   that	   on	   these	   dimensions	   the	   world	   has	   to	   some	   degree	   turned	  
upside	   down,	   but	   on	   reflection	   this	   is	   in	   large	   part	   a	   manifestation,	   perhaps	  
unanticipated,	  of	  the	  underlying	  deeper	  asymmetries	  that	  financial	  globalization	  has	  
brought	  to	  the	  surface.	  A	  natural	  question	  then,	  is,	  how	  long	  will	  this	  last?	  Is	  this	  a	  
permanent	  switch	  to	  a	  new	  state	  of	  affairs?	  Will	  the	  urge	  to	  hoard	  persist	  in	  the	  EMs,	  
and	   will	   this	   ultimately	   be	   a	   self-­‐defeating	   force	   that	   will	   run	   up	   against	   the	  
constraint	  that	  there	  can	  never	  be	  an	  infinitely	  elastic	  supply	  of	  safe	  assets?	  
	  
Fact	  5.	  Savings	  glut:	  short	  run	  panic	  v.	  long	  run	  demography	  	  
The	   data	   show	   that	   we	   have	   been	   living	   through	   a	   spectacular	   and	   never-­‐before	  
witnessed	   structural	   shift	   in	   gross	   and	   net	   flows,	   and	   thus	   stocks,	   with	   marked	  
differences	  between	  private	  and	  official	  behavior.	  The	  risk	  assets	  are	  almost	  all	  on	  
the	  private	  side,	  the	  safe	  assets	  on	  the	  official	  side.	  And	  the	  official	  flows	  have	  shown	  
little	  sign	  of	  diminution	  yet,	  with	  every	  signal	  in	  the	  market	  suggesting	  that	  growth	  
of	   demand	   is	   outstripping	   supply,	   e.g.,	   US	   10Y	   yields	   at	   all	   time	   lows	   (under	   1.5%	   of	  
late),	   and	   the	   Swiss	   curve	   turning	   negative	   out	   to	   the	   5Y	   tenor.	   So	   what	   happens	  
next?	  Are	  we	  going	  to	  be	  in	  savings	  glut	  mode	  forever?	  Is	  cheap	  capital	  here	  to	  stay?	  
I	   think	   there	   are	   three	   reasons	   to	   be	   wary	   of	   simply	   extrapolating	   the	   recent	   past	  
here,	  as	  argued	  in	  Pradhan	  and	  Taylor	  (2011b).	  

	  

17	  

	  

	  
One	   is	   simply	   to	   note	   that	   some	   of	   the	   demand	   for	   safe	   assets	   is	   probably	   panic-­‐
augmented,	   even	   though	   the	   trend	   in	   real	   yields	   goes	   back	   over	   a	   decade,	   beyond	  
the	   crisis.	   Historical	   experience	   shows	   that	   real	   and	   nominal	   yields	   always	   fall	   in	  
times	   of	   fear,	   and	   this	   time	   is	   no	   exception.	   When	   (or	   do	   we	   say	   if?)	   normality	  
resumes,	   as	   in	   every	   previous	   cycle,	   the	   reversal	   of	   the	   flight-­‐to-­‐safety	   trade	   will	  
start	   to	   undo	   the	   relentless	   downward	   pressure	   on	   the	   yields	   of	   safe	   sovereigns.	  
Investors	  will	  put	  capital	  to	  work	  in	  risk	  assets,	  and	  the	  hoarding	  will	  stop.	  In	  this	  
larger	   than	   normal	   cycle	   the	   postponement	   of	   investment	   has	   been	   of	   a	   more	  
extreme	  form,	  in	  magnitude	  and	  duration,	  so	  the	  rebound,	  when	  it	  comes,	  could	  be	  
sharp.	   (The	   moment	   is	   hard	   to	   predict	   given	   the	   special	   circumstances	   of	  
deleveraging	   plus	   the	   failure	   of	   policymakers,	   and	   Eurozone	   policymakers	   in	  
particular,	  to	  take	  decisive	  measures	  to	  end	  the	  depression	  in	  the	  developed	  world.)	  
Second,	   there	   is	   reason	   to	   doubt	   that	   the	   stocks,	   and	   hence,	   flows,	   of	   EM	   reserve	  
assets	   will	   expand	   ad	   infinitum	   at	   the	   same	   rate.	   The	   EMs	   were	   painfully	   short	   of	  
reserves	  in	  the	  1990s,	  as	  events	  revealed.	  So	  to	  some	  extent	  the	  last	  10	  to	  15	  years	  
have	  been	  about	  a	  step	  change,	  building	  up	  from	  a	  low	  toward	  an	  adequate	  level	  of	  
reserves.	  Once	  something	  deemed	  adequate	  has	  been	  reached,	  the	  catch	  up	  may	  be	  
nearly	  complete,	  and	  future	  accumulation	  only	  needs	  to	  keep	  pace	  with	  the	  growth	  
in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  EM	  economies.	  That	  force	  too	  may	  also	  be	  subject	  to	  slowdown	  in	  
the	   longer	   terms	   as	   the	   forces	   of	   economic	   convergence	  wane,	   and	   the	   development	  
gap	  continues	  to	  close.	  
Lastly,	   when	   we	   think	   about	   the	   deep	   determinants	   of	   real	   yields	   there	   are	   other	  
more	   fundamental	   forces	   at	   work	   in	   the	   medium	   run,	   and	   the	   key	   one	   is	  
demography.	   For	   decades	   first	   DMs	   and	   then	   EMs	   have	   experienced	   major	  
demographic	   tailwinds.	   The	   boomer	   cohorts	   in	   the	   DM	   world	   gave	   a	   boost	   to	  
savings	   world	   wide,	   and	   this	   trend	   was	   augmented	   by	   the	   start	   of	   a	   massive	  
demographic	  transition	  in	  the	  EM	  countries.	  But	  looking	  forwards	  these	  forces	  are	  
now	  starting	  to	  abate	  and	  will	  soon	  go	  into	  reverse	  as	  shown	  in	  Figure	  7.	  

	  

18	  

	  

	  

60

70

80

90

Long-­‐Run	  Demographic	  Trends,	  Dependents	  per	  100	  Working	  Age	  

50

Dependents as a percentage of working age (20–64)

Figure	  7	  

1970
World

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

More developed regions

2030

2040

Less developed regions
	  

Notes	  and	  sources:	  The	  dependency	  ratio	  is	  the	  population	  of	  ages	  0–19	  and	  65+	  divided	  by	  the	  working	  
age	  population	  of	  ages	  20–64.	  Data	  from	  U.N.	  Population	  Statistics;	  see	  Pradhan	  and	  Taylor	  (2011b).

	  

	  
The	  DM	  world	  now	  faces	  a	  demographic	  tailwind	  as	  the	  boomers	  retire,	  and	  in	  the	  
EM	   world	   aging	   populations	   are	   set	   to	   grow	   as	   the	   demographic	   transition	   winds	  
down.	   Substantial	   heterogeneity	   lies	   behind	   these	   averages	   of	   course,	   but	   these	  
patterns	  presage	  major	  changes	  in	  the	  saving-­‐investment	  balance	  going	  forward.	  
	  
Summing	  up	  the	  facts:	  what	  is	  happening?	  
At	   first	   glance,	   the	   historical	   record	   appears	   to	   present	   us	   with	   a	   rather	  
inconvenient	   truth,	   namely	   that	   financial	   crises	   might	   just	   be	   an	   occupational	  

	  

19	  

	  

	  
hazard,	   a	   simple	   fact	   of	   life,	   in	   modern	   finance	   capitalism.	   However,	   one	   major	  
exception	   was	   the	   era	   1950–70	   with	   tighter	   domestic	   financial	   regulation,	   and	  
external	  capital	  controls.	  This	  was	  a	  period	  of	  low	  credit	  growth,	   and	   very	   little	   in	  
the	  way	  of	  financial	  innovation.	  But	  it	  was	  also	  still	  a	  period	  of	  very	  high	  investment,	  
savings	  and	  real	  growth	  for	  the	  advanced	  economies.	  
This	   period	   did	   not	   last,	   thanks	   to	   a	   series	   of	   unfortunate	   events.	   Starting	   in	   the	  
1980s	  it	  gave	  way	  to	  a	  less	  regulated	  and	  more	  risk-­‐hungry	  world,	  reflected	  above	  in	  
the	   rapid	   growth	   of	   bank	   lending.	   By	   the	   1990s,	   with	   a	   firmer	   low-­‐inflation	   nominal	  
anchor,	   the	   entry	   of	   high-­‐saving	   self-­‐insuring	   emerging	   economies	   took	   the	   world	  
down	   a	   path	   of	   ever	   lower	   nominal	   and	   real	   rates.	   Ostensibly	   a	   good	   thing	   for	   the	  
consenting	   adults	   involved	   —	   who	   could	   object	   to	   cheaper	   capital?	   —	   with	  
hindsight	  we	  see	  that	  not	  every	  private	  project	  funded	  by	  this	  glut	  of	  funds	  was,	  ex	  
post,	  worthwhile	  from	  a	  risk-­‐reward	  point	  of	  view.	  In	  this	  respect	  a	  historian	  might	  
reflect	  that	  we	  have	  traversed	  back	  not	  only	  to	  the	  good	  aspects	  of	  integration	  seen	  
in	   the	   first	   era	   of	   globalization,	   but	   also	   its	   not	   so	   good	   aspects,	   namely	   increased	  
financial	  fragility,	  despite	  all	  we	  had	  supposedly	  learned	  along	  the	  way.	  
Will	   anything	   change?	   On	   some	   level,	   probably	   not.	   The	   EM	   economies	   have	   seen	  
their	  reserve	  accumulation	  strategies	  pay	  off	  handsomely,	  as	  they	  avoided	  the	  worst	  
of	  the	  crisis	  and	  bounced	  back	  strongly.	  The	  hunger	  for	  safe	  assets	  may	  well	  grow	  
for	   some	   time,	   and	   joined	   with	   persistent	   deleveraging	   and	   precautionary	   motives	  
in	  the	  DM	  world	  we	  are	  unlikely	  to	  see	  change	  in	  a	  hurry.	  Real	  rates	  will	  be	  low	  for	  
some	   time.	   And	   with	   that	   as	   a	   backdrop,	   plus	   the	   ongoing	   deflationary	   forces	  
amplified	   by	   the	   shift	   to	   cash	   and	   cash-­‐like	   safe	   instruments,	   safe	   sovereigns	   will	   be	  
able	  to	  fund	  themselves	  for	  a	  time	  at	  the	  low	  or	  even	  negative	  rates	  we	  now	  see.	  
They	  might	  be	  well	  advised	  to	  grab	  that	  opportunity	  while	  they	  can.	  Over	  a	  longer	  
time	  frame	  adjustments	  will,	  indeed	  must	  occur.	  As	  an	  accounting	  device,	  the	  long-­‐
run	  budget	  constraint	  alone	  tells	  us	  that	  one	  can	  no	  more	  borrow	  for	  ever	  than	  save	  
for	   ever,	   and	   historical	   experience	   tells	   us	   that	   at	   some	   point	   those	   limits	   do	   get	  
breached.	   Demographic	   shifts	   will	   start	   to	   put	   a	   drag	   on	   savings,	   and	   the	   world’s	  
	  

20	  

	  

	  
investment	   drought,	   intensified	   by	   the	   near-­‐disappearance	   of	   DM	   net	   capital	  
formation	   in	   2008–09,	   will	   leave	   a	   large	   overhang	   of	   unmet	   investment	  
requirements.	  
Yet	  even	  if	  a	  new	  more	  or	  less	  steady	  state	  makes	  its	  presence	  felt	  in	  the	  long	  run,	  its	  
nature	  and	  stability,	  and	  the	  path	  we	  take	  from	  here	  to	  there,	  are	  highly	  contingent	  
on	   what	   steps	   policymakers	   take	   in	   the	   short	   run.	   Thus,	   the	   remainder	   of	   this	   paper	  
turns	   from	   the	   macroeconomic	   and	   financial	   facts	   that	   we	   can	   see	   in	   past	   and	  
present,	  to	  the	  lessons	  we	  can	  draw	  for	  policy	  in	  the	  future.	  
	  
Lesson	   1:	   Past	   private	   credit	   growth	   does	   contain	   valuable	   predictive	  
information	  about	  likelihood	  of	  a	  crisis	  
The	   first	   point	   makes	   use	   of	   new	   evidence	   and	   new	   methods,	   but	   builds	   on	  
important	  precursors.	  Indeed	  any	  work	  in	  this	  area	  stands	  on	  the	  shoulders	  of	  the	  
BIS,	   and	   especially	   Borio	   and	   White	   (2004),	   whose	   warnings	   at	   Jackson	   Hole	   and	  
elsewhere	   went	   unheeded	   by	   those	   who	   should	   have	   known	   better.	   Bolstering	  
arguments	  can	  be	  found	  in	  Eichengreen	  and	  Mitchener	  (2004)	  on	  the	  origins	  of	  the	  
Great	  Depression	  as	  “a	  credit	  boom	  gone	  wrong.”	  
A	  more	  formal	  approach	  can	  confirm	  that,	  over	  the	  course	  of	  history,	  credit	  growth	  
turns	   out	   to	   contain	   valuable	   predictive	   information	   about	   the	   likelihood	   of	   a	  
financial	   crisis	   event	   (Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   2012).	   To	   see	   this	   in	   the	   historical	   data	  
we	   used	   a	   simple	   classification	   test,	   standard	   in	   clinical	   and	   other	   applications	   in	  
hard	   sciences.	   We	   stay	   agnostic	   about	   the	   policymaker’s	   utility	   function,	   but	   given	  
current	  information	  x,	  we	  just	  ask	  whether	  our	  classifier	  (a	  model	  signal	  f(x)	  and	  a	  
fixed	   threshold	   c)	   can	   generate	   something	   better	   than	   the	   null	   (a	   coin	   toss)	   in	  
sorting	  the	  binary	  crisis	  event	  data.	  
To	  proceed	  with	  inference	  we	  can	  chart	  true	  positives	  against	  true	  negatives	  in	  the	  
unit	   box,	   for	   all	   thresholds	   c,	   and	   create	   a	   Correct	   Classification	   Frontier	   (CCF).	   A	  
	  

21	  

	  

	  
classifier	  is	  informative	  if	  its	  CCF	  is	  above	  the	  null	  CFF	  of	  a	  coin	  toss	  which	  lies	  on	  
the	  diagonal,	  i.e.	  generates	  “more	  truth”.	  Formally,	  the	  area	  under	  the	  curve	  (AUC)	  
should	  exceed	  0.5	  for	  the	  null	  to	  be	  rejected,	  and	  inference	  on	  families	  of	  AUCs	  turns	  
out	  to	  be	  simple	  (they	  are	  asymptotically	  normal).	  In	  what	  follows	  we	  adopt	  a	  null	  of	  
country-­‐fixed-­‐effects,	  which	  captures	  the	  unconditional	  likelihood	  of	  a	  crisis	  in	  one	  
country	  versus	  another.	  
A	  key	  result	  is	  shown	  in	  Figure	  8,	  which	  covers	  14	  advanced	  countries	  for	  the	  period	  
1870	   to	   2008.	   We	   group	   predictions	   from	   the	   pre-­‐WW2	   and	   post-­‐WW2	   models	   in	  
Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   (2012),	  where	   it	  is	  in	  the	  postwar	  period	  that	  the	   distinctions	  
between	  money	  and	  credit	  are	  starkest.	  For	  reference,	  the	  area	  under	  the	  curve	  or	  
AUC	   for	   the	   credit-­‐based	   model	   (5-­‐year	   lagged	   moving	   average	   of	   the	   change	   in	  
loans	   to	   GDP	   ratio)	   is	   0.750;	   but	   the	   broad-­‐money	   based	   model	   is	   not	   all	   that	  
informative	  with	  an	  AUC	  of	  0.686.	  The	  credit	  model	  AUC	  is	  higher,	  and	  significantly	  
different	  from	  the	  country-­‐fixed	  effects	  null,	  whereas	  the	  money	  model	  AUC	  is	  not.	  
Similar	   results	   hold	   for	   the	   prewar	   and	   postwar	   samples,	   and	   robustness	   checks	  
confirm	   the	   results	   with	   controls	   for	   macroeconomic	   conditions,	   asset	   prices,	   and	  
other	   specifications	   (e.g.,	   multiple	   lags	   of	   annual	   credit	   growth).	   In	   a	   nutshell,	   credit	  
matters,	   and	   it	   matters	   more	   than	   broad	   money,	   as	   a	   useful	   predictor	   of	   financial	  
crisis	  events.	  Unfortunately,	  such	  indicators	  were	  not	  widely	  used	  —	  or	  if	  used,	  not	  
heeded	   —	   by	   central	   banks	   and	   financial	   stability	   authorities	   prior	   to	   the	   crisis.	  
Even	   the	   ECB’s	   monetary	   pillar	   was	   largely	   dormant,	   and	   one	   could	   argue	   that	   a	  
focus	  on	  money	  rather	  then	  credit	  was	  the	  wrong	  kind	  of	  pillar	  anyway.	  
If	   history	   is	   a	   guide,	   then	   it	   is	   surely	   welcome	   that	   we	   should	   finally	   see,	   as	   we	  
already	   do,	   interest	   among	   macroprudential	   authorities	   in	   including	   some	   form	   of	  
“excessive	   credit”	   indicators	   into	   the	   set	   of	   inputs	   that	   will	   be	   considered	   going	  
forward.	   Assessing	   exactly	   how	   to	   form	   reliable	   indicators,	   and	   more	   importantly	  
how	   one	   should	   act	   upon	   them,	   will	   remain	   an	   important	   goal	   for	   research	   in	   the	  
foreseeable	  future.	  

	  

22	  

	  

	  
Using	  Lagged	  Credit	  Growth	  as	  a	  Classifier	  to	  Forecast	  Financial	  Crises:	  
The	  Correct	  Classification	  Frontier	  

0.00

True positive rate
0.25
0.50
0.75

1.00

Figure	  8	  

0.00

0.25

0.50
True negative rate

Null, FE only (AUC = 0.640)
Money + FE (AUC = 0.686)

0.75

1.00

Credit + FE (AUC = 0.750)
Reference
	  

Notes	  and	  source:	  See	  Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  (2012).	  In	  this	  chart,	  for	  all	  models,	  the	  predictions	  from	  the	  
prewar	   and	   postwar	   country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	   logit	   models	   of	   Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   (2012)	   are	   combined	   to	  
give	  a	  crisis	  prediction	  for	  the	  full	  sample	  1870–2008	  and	  14	  advanced	  countries.	  War	  years	  are	  omitted.	  
Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   (2012)	   show	   that	   the	   models	   using	   credit	   and	   broad	   money	   differ	   significantly	  
between	  the	  two	  eras,	  with	  the	  predictive	  value	  of	  credit	  outstripping	  that	  of	  broad	  money	  after	  WW2.	  
The	  “Null”	  is	  the	  model	  with	  country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	  only	  and	  no	  other	  regressors.	  The	  “Money”	  model	  uses	  
a	  5-­‐year	  lagged	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  change	  in	  broad	  money	  to	  GDP	  ratio.	  The	  “Credit”	  model	  uses	  5-­‐
year	  lagged	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  change	  in	  loans	  to	  GDP	  ratio.	  The	  chart	  shows	  the	  Correct	  Classification	  
2
Frontiers	  (akin	  to	  ROC	  curves)	  and	  inference	  is	  based	  on	  a	  χ 	  test	  of	  the	  area	  under	  the	  curve,	  AUC,	  which	  
would	  be	  0.5	  under	  the	  “Reference”	  null	  of	  no	  information.	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

23	  

	  

	  
Lesson	   2:	   As	   symptoms	   of	   financial	   crises,	   external	   imbalances	   are	   a	  
distraction,	  and	  so	  are	  public	  debts	  
But	  with	  the	  correct	  classification	  test	  apparatus	  we	  can	  do	  much	  more	  than	  analyze	  
which	   variables	   may	   contain	   useful	   predictive	   information	   about	   financial	   crisis	  
risk.	   We	   can	   also	   seek	   to	   find	   out	   which	   variables	   do	   not.	   In	   the	   current	   debate	   over	  
the	  origins	  of	  the	  crisis,	  a	  couple	  of	  candidate	  variables	  cry	  out	  for	  such	  scrutiny.	  
The	   first	   comes	   from	   those	   worried	   about	   the	   risks	   from	   global	   imbalances	   —	  
according	  to	  this	  view,	  excessive	  external	  current	  account	  deficits	  could	  amplify	  or	  
spillover	   into	   the	   risk	   of	   a	   financial	   crisis.	   The	   second	   comes	   from	   those	   worried	  
about	  fiscal	  excess	  —	  according	  to	  that	  view,	  rising	  public	  sector	  debt	  levels	  could	  be	  
an	  important	  risk	  trigger	  for	  financial	  crisis.	  However,	  neither	  of	  these	  hypotheses	  
follows	   unambiguously	   from	   theory,	   and	   each	   rests	   on	   a	   number	   of	   assumptions.	   So	  
these	   hypotheses	   are	   not	   a	   priori	   valid;	   they	   are	   empirically	   testable	   propositions,	  
and,	  as	  such,	  ideal	  candidates	  for	  the	  statistical	  framework	  we	  have	  at	  our	  disposal.	  
So	   what	   do	   the	   historical	   data	   say?	   Have	   current	   account	   deficits	   or	   rising	   public	  
debt	   levels	   contributed	   anything	   to	   the	   elevation	   of	   financial	   crisis	   probabilities?	  
Drawing	   on	   ongoing	   work	   (Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor,	   forthcoming),	   Figure	   9	  
provides	   an	   answer,	   by	   taking	   our	   existing	   and	   quite	   successful	   forecast	   model	  
based	   on	   credit,	   and	   running	   it	   against	   rival	   models	   with	   a	   different	   variable	   added:	  
in	   the	   upper	   panel	   it	   is	   the	   5-­‐year	   lagged	   moving	   average	   of	   the	   change	   in	   the	  
current	  account	  to	  GDP	  ratio,	  and	  in	  the	  lower	  panel	  it	  is	  the	  5-­‐year	  lagged	  moving	  
average	  of	  the	  change	  in	  the	  public	  debt	  to	  GDP	  ratio.	  Each	  model	  can	  be	  run	  with	  
credit,	  the	  other	  variable,	  both	  or	  neither	  (the	  null	  being	  fixed-­‐effects	  only,	  again).	  
The	   question	   is,	   do	   any	   of	   these	   other	   variables	   add	   any	   information	   at	   all,	   either	  
relative	  to	  the	  null	  or	  relative	  to	  the	  credit-­‐based	  model,	  when	  they	  are	  added	  in	  the	  
classifier,	   as	   judged	   by	   a	   positive	   and	   statistically	   significant	   increase	   in	   the	   area	  
under	  the	  CCF?	  And	  the	  answer	  in	  both	  cases	  is	  very	  clearly	  no.	  

	  

24	  

	  

	  
Using	  Lagged	  Credit	  Growth	  plus	  Current	  Accounts	  or	  Public	  Debts	  as	  a	  
Classifier	  to	  Forecast	  Financial	  Crises:	  The	  Correct	  Classification	  Frontier	  

0.00

True positive rate
0.25
0.50
0.75

1.00

Figure	  9	  

0.00

0.25

0.50
True negative rate

Null, FE only (AUC = 0.641)
CA + FE (AUC = 0.685)
Reference

0.75

1.00

Credit + FE (AUC = 0.750)
Credit + CA + FE (AUC = 0.767)

0.00

True positive rate
0.25
0.50
0.75

1.00

	  

0.00

0.25

0.50
True negative rate

Null, FE only (AUC = 0.638)
Pub. debt + FE (AUC = 0.645)
Reference

0.75

1.00

Credit + FE (AUC = 0.745)
Credit + pub. debt + FE (AUC = 0.747)

	  

Notes	  and	  source:	  See	  Figure	  8	  and	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  (2011a	  and	  forthcoming).	  In	  the	  upper	  
panel,	   “CA”	   uses	   a	   5-­‐year	   lagged	   moving	   average	   of	   change	   in	   the	   current	   account	   to	   GDP	   ratio.	   In	   the	  
lower	  panel,	  “Pub.	  debt”	  uses	  a	  5-­‐year	  lagged	  moving	  average	  of	  change	  in	  the	  public	  debt	  to	  GDP	  ratio.	  
Relative	   either	   to	   the	   “Null”	   or	   the	   “Credit”	   model,	   the	   addition	   of	   “CA”	   or	   “Pub.	   Debt”	   does	   not	  
significantly	   improve	   the	   classifier.	   In	   this	  chart,	   for	   all	   models,	   the	  predictions	  of	  the	  prewar	  and	  postwar	  
country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	  logit	  models	  are	  combined	  as	  in	  Figure	  8.

	  

	  
	  

25	  

	  

	  
Adding	   the	   current	   account	   slightly	   improves	   on	   the	   country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	   null	   (AUC	  
rises	  from	  0.641	  to	  0.685,	   p=0.02),	  but	  credit	  does	  much	  better	  (AUC	  rises	  to	  0.750,	  
p=0.00).	   Once	   credit	   is	   in	   the	   model,	   adding	   the	   current	   account	   on	   top	   achieves	  
little	  (AUC	  of	  0.767).	  After	  a	  moment’s	  though,	  this	  result	  perhaps	  should	  not	  come	  
as	  too	  much	  of	  a	  surprise.	  There	  are	  clearly	  cases	  of	  countries	  today,	  and	  certainly	  in	  
the	  past,	  where	  current	  account	  deficits	  have	  gone	  hand	  in	  hand	  with	  credit	  booms	  
and,	   ultimately,	   financial	   crises	   —	   the	   Eurozone	   periphery	   comes	   to	   mind.	   But	   by	  
the	   same	   token	   there	   have	   been	   cases	   today	   of	   current	   account	   surplus	   countries	  
ending	  up	  in	  financial	  distress.	  Why?	  
Credit	  booms	  and	  busts	  can	  be	  driven	  just	  as	  easily	  by	  domestic	  savings	  as	  foreign	  
saving.	  Gross	  stocks	  and	  flows	  can	  often	  be	  delinked	  from	  net	  flows	  across	  border,	  
so	  balance	  sheets	  can	  expand	  even	  if	  no	  net	  cross	  border	  flows	  are	  recorded.	  Finally,	  
at	  a	  disaggregated	  level,	  current	  account	  gross	  and	  net	  flows	  can	  be	  composed	  of	  a	  
widely	   varying	   mix	   of	   bank,	   debt,	   equity,	   FDI	   and	   other	   claims,	   and	   each	   type	   has	  
very	  different	  risk	  characteristics,	  with	  bank	  and	  debt	  flows	  being	  the	  ones	  at	  risk	  of	  
rollover	   risk	   (stops,	   flight).	   Recent	   evidence	   points	   to	   all	   of	   these	   factors	   playing	   a	  
role	   in	   the	   current	   crisis,	   globally	   and	   within	   the	   Eurozone,	   and	   in	   away	   that	   should	  
push	   future	   analysis	   beyond	   the	   narrow	   and	   simplistic	   “global	   imbalance”	  
framework	  which	  all	  too	  often	  dominated	  discussions	  in	  the	  last	  decade.1	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

1	  See,	  for	  example,	  Lane	  (2012)	  and	  Obstfeld	  (2012)	  for	  suggestions	  as	  to	  the	  way	  ahead.	  Past	  policy	  

misdirection	   is	   acutely	   observed	   in	   the	   self-­‐flagellating	   IMF	   (2011)	   postmortem	   into	   the	   global	  
financial	   crisis,	   viz.:	   “For	   much	   of	   the	   period	   [2004–07]	   the	   IMF	   was	   drawing	   the	   membership’s	  
attention	   to	   the	   risk	   that	   a	   disorderly	   unwinding	   of	   global	   imbalances	   [and	   inflation]….	   The	   IMF	   gave	  
too	   little	   consideration	   to	   deteriorating	   financial	   sector	   balance	   sheets,	   financial	   regulatory	   issues,	   to	  
the	   possible	   links	   between	   monetary	   policy	   and	   the	   global	   imbalances,	   and	   to	   the	   credit	   boom	   and	  
emerging	   asset	   bubbles.	   It	   did	   not	   discuss	   macro-­‐prudential	   approaches	   that	   might	   have	   helped	  
address	   the	   evolving	   risks.	   Even	   as	   late	   as	   April	   2007,	   the	   IMF’s	   banner	   message	   was	   one	   of	  
continued	  optimism	  …	  benign	  global	  environment	  …	  positive	  near-­‐term	  outlook	  and	  fundamentally	  
sound	  financial	  market	  conditions.	  Only	  after	  the	  eruption	  of	  financial	  turbulence	  did	  the	  IMF	  take	  a	  
more	  cautionary	  tone	  ….	  	  The	  lack	  of	  a	  coherent	  macro-­‐financial	  storyline	  to	  underpin	  the	  laundry	  list	  
of	   risks	   …	   created	   an	   impression	   that	   the	   IMF	   was	   warning	   only	   about	   global	   imbalances	   and	  
inflation.	  This	  was	  the	  message	  heard	  by	  authorities,	  other	  stakeholders,	  and	  most	  staff	  interviewed	  
for	  this	  evaluation	  …	  Confirmation	  bias	  …	  may	  explain	  staff’s	  focus	  on	  the	  IMF’s	  primary	  concern	  —	  
global	   imbalances	   and	   a	   disorderly	   dollar	   decline	   —	   as	   the	   key	   risk	   to	   global	   stability,	   largely	  
ignoring	  evidence	  pointing	  to	  other	  risks.”	  

	  

26	  

	  

	  
Historical	   evidence	   backs	   this	   idea	   of	   an	   important	   distinction	   between	   current	  
account	  flows	  and	  the	  behavior	  of	  credit.	  Suppose	  we	  look	  back	  over	  history	   since	  
1870	   and	   compute	   correlations	   in	   the	   aforementioned	   14-­‐country	   advanced-­‐
economy	   datasets	   between	   external	   inflows	   (current	   account,	   %	   of	   GDP)	   and	   the	  
change	  in	  aggregate	  credit	  (change	  in	  bank	  loans,	  %	  of	  GDP).	  If	  we	  divide	  the	  panel	  
into	   20-­‐year	   periods	   from	   1870,	   excluding	   the	   two	   world	   wars,	   the	   answer	   is	   that	  
over	  the	  long	  run	  the	  correlation	  has	  been	  essentially	  zero.	  Only	  in	  one	  period,	  1870	  
to	   1889,	   was	   there	   a	   significant	   negative	   correlation	   between	   the	   current	   account	  
and	   changes	   in	   bank	   lending.	   Not	   surprising:	   this	   was	   a	   peak	   period	   of	   settler	  
economy	   capitalism	   with	   large	   capital	   flows	   out	   of	   high	   saving	   core	   economies.	   In	  
one	   later	   period,	   the	   postwar	   years	   1949–1968,	   there	   was	   a	   positive	   correlation:	  
high	   saving	   economies	   were	   in	   current	   account	   surplus	   but	   also	   expanding	   credit	  
rapidly.	  Apart	  from	  these	  periods,	  and	  on	  average,	  the	  correlation	  was	  zero.	  
Thus,	   compared	   to	   credit	   conditions,	   the	   horse	   race	   shows	   that	   current	   accounts	  
seem	  to	  perform	  poorly	  in	  a	  head-­‐to-­‐head	  contest	  to	  explain	  the	  incidence	  of	  crises.	  
A	  similar	   exercise	   can	   be	   undertaken	   for	   public	   debt,	  by	   adding	   the	   change	   in	   public	  
debt	   to	   GDP	   ratios	   as	   a	   crisis	   predictor,	   as	   shown	   in	   the	   second	   panel	   of	   Figure	   9.	  
This	   might	   as	   well	   be	   a	   one	   horse	   race.	   The	   public	   debt	   variable	   clearly	   has	   no	  
benefit	   as	   a	   predictor	   even	   as	   compared	   to	   the	   country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	   null	   (AUC	   of	  
0.645	   versus	   0.638,	   p=0.45).	   Thus,	   the	   idea	   that	   financial	   cries	   have	   their	   roots	   in	  
fiscal	  problems	  is	  not	  supported	  over	  the	  long	  sweep	  of	  history.	  Some	  cases	  may	  of	  
course	  exist	  —	  like	  Greece	  today	  —	  but	  these	  have	  been	  the	  exception	  not	  the	  rule.	  
In	  general	  —	  like	  Ireland	  and	  Spain	  today	  —	  financial	  crises	  can	  be	  traced	  back	  to	  
developments	  in	  the	  financial	  sector	  itself,	  namely	  excess	  credit.	  
Over	   140	   years	   there	   has	   been	   no	   systematic	   correlation	   of	   financial	   crises	   with	  
either	   prior	   current	   account	   deficits	   or	   prior	   growth	   in	   public	   debt	   levels.	   Private	  
credit	  has	  always	  been	  the	  only	  useful	  and	  reliable	  predictive	  factor.	  
	  
	  

27	  

	  

	  
Lesson	   3:	   After	   a	   credit	   boom,	   expect	   a	   more	   painful	   “normal	   recession”	   as	  
well	  as	  a	  more	  painful	  “financial	  crisis	  recession”	  
As	   far	   as	   they	   go,	   these	   results	   may	   be	   somewhat	   provocative,	   but	   could	   be	  
downplayed.	   If	   boom-­‐bust	   cycles	   of	   credit	   were	   occasionally	   responsible	   for	   rare,	  
but	   still	   quite	   painful,	   financial	   crises,	   that	   might	   be	   a	   useful	   finding.	   But	   from	   a	  
policymaking	  standpoint	  it	  would	  be	  like	  a	  doctor	  faced	  with	  a	  test	  for	  a	  very	  rare	  
disease.	  If	  the	  treatment	  is	  painful,	  in	  any	  utility-­‐weighted	  decision	  the	  incentive	  to	  
act	   will	   be	   downweighted	   for	   two	   reasons:	   the	   cost	   of	   a	   false	   positive,	   and	   the	  
infrequency	  of	  positive	  outcomes	  overall.	  
Thus,	  in	  more	  recent	  collaborative	  work,	  we	  sought	  to	  address	  the	  relevance	  of	  the	  
credit	   cycle,	   not	   just	   for	   the	   rare	   events	   known	   as	   “financial	   crises”	   but	   for	   all	  
recessions	  of	  any	  form	  (Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  2011b).	  To	  do	  this	  we	  classify	  
all	   recession	   events	   in	   all	   countries,	   and	   classify	   them	   as	   normal	   recessions	   or	  
financial	  crisis	  recessions	  based	  on	  coincidence	  (±2	  years)	  with	  a	  crisis	  event.	  This	  
takes	   our	   sample	   size	   way	   up,	   and	   brings	   into	   view	   recession	   events	   that	   are	   far	  
more	   frequent	   than	   financial	   crises.	   In	   just	   under	   140	   years	   for	   14	   countries	   we	  
observe	  over	  200	  recessions	  of	  all	  kinds	  (normal	  and	  financial).	  
The	   question	   we	   wanted	   to	   ask	   here	   was:	   are	   the	   echoes	   of	   credit	   booms	   during	   the	  
expansion	  phase	  only	  manifested	  in	  the	  likelihood	  of	  a	  financial	  crisis	  taking	  place	  in	  
subsequent	  years,	  a	  zero-­‐one	  binary	  outcome?	  Or	  is	  there	  a	  more	  generalized	  echo	  
of	   a	   credit	   boom,	   whereby	   more	   leverage	   in	   the	   expansion	   years	   can	   be	   traced	   to	  
weaker	  economic	  performance	  in	  the	  subsequent	  recession	  phase?	  
Figure	   10	   sums	   up	   what	   appears	   to	   be	   a	   clear	   answer,	   one	   that	   is	   robust	   to	   many	  
different	   controls,	   samples,	   and	   specifications,	   some	   of	   which	   we	   shall	   see	   in	   a	  
moment.	  The	  bottom	  line	  here	  is	  that	  our	  earlier	  argument	  that	  credit	  booms	  matter	  
as	  a	  financial	  crisis	  risk	  factor	  is	  a	  rather	  narrow	  conclusion,	  and	  that	  a	  more	  general	  
and	  worrying	  correlation	  is	  evident.	  

	  

28	  

	  

	  
Figure	  10	  

“Excess”	  Credit	  Growth	  in	  Expansion	  and	  the	  Intensity	  of	  Recession	  

0
-10
-20
-30
-40

Level of log real GDP per capita in year 1-5, orthogonal component

10

Level of log real GDP per capita in year 1-5, orthogonal component
-40
-20
0
20

Normal recessions

coef = -.50628744, se = .17115664, t = -2.96

-4

-2

0

2

4

Financial recessions

coef = -.76393738, se = .22300767, t = -3.43

-2

Excess credit in prior expansion, orthogonal component

0

2

4

6

Excess credit in prior expansion, orthogonal component

	  
Source:	   Based	   on	   the	   data	   in	   Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor	   (2011b).	   The	   charts	   show	   simple	   added-­‐	  
variable	   plots	   (partial	   scatters)	   between	   the	   deviation	   of	   the	   level	   of	   log	   real	   GDP	   per	   capita	   in	  
recession/recovery	  years	  1-­‐5	  after	  a	  normal	  or	  financial	  peak,	  and	  the	  annual	  rate	  of	  change	  of	  credit-­‐to-­‐
GDP	   in	   the	   prior	   expansion.	   The	   left	   chart	   shows	   financial	   crisis	   recessions	   only,	   the	   right	   chart	   normal	  
recessions	  only.	  In	  the	  underlying	  regression,	  additional	  control	  variables	  include	  5-­‐year	  time	  fixed	  effects	  
interacted	   with	   normal	   and	   financial	   recession	   dummies.	   Both	   partial	   correlations	   are	   statistically	  
significant	  at	  the	  1%	  level.	  

	  
During	   any	   business	   cycle,	   whether	   ending	   in	   a	   financial	   crisis	   recession	   or	   just	   a	  
normal	  recession,	  there	  is	  a	  very	  strong	  relationship	  between	  the	  growth	  of	  credit	  
(relative	  to	  GDP)	  on	  the	  upswing,	  and	  the	  depth	  of	  the	  subsequent	  collapse	  in	  GDP	  
on	  the	  downswing.	  
The	   import	   of	   these	   results	   is	   broader,	   and	   applies	   to	   recessions	   not	   just	   crises.	  
Following	  credit	  should	  not	  only	  interest	  financial	  policymakers	  or	  macroprudential	  
powers	   who	   are	   mainly	   concerned	   with	   averting	   a	   low-­‐probability	   crisis	   or	   tail	  
event.	   It	   should	   also	   concern	   central	   bankers	   and	   other	   policymakers	   who	   are	  
	  

29	  

	  

	  
concerned	  with	  overall	  macroeconomic	  stability	  at	  business-­‐cycle	  frequencies,	  that	  
is,	  even	  in	  more	  typical	  cycles	  when	  crises	  are	  averted	  and	  the	  economy	  suffers	  only	  
a	  “normal”	  recession	  (see,	  e.g.,	  Drehmann	  et	  al.	  2011,	  Turner	  2011).	  
In	  a	  very	  important	  way	  history	  matters:	  in	  recessions	  following	  bigger	  credit	  build	  
ups,	  our	  research	  shows	  that	  an	  “unconditioned”	  policy	  forecast	  would	  be	  prone	  to	  
optimistically-­‐biased	   errors,	   whereas	   under	   a	   properly	   “conditioned”	   policy	  
allowance	   is	   made	   for	   that	   fact	   that	   economic	   outcomes	   are	   systematically	   worse	  
the	   larger	   has	   been	   the	   prior	   credit	   boom.	   If	   such	   a	   finding	   were	   ever	   to	   have	   any	  
applicability,	  it	  might	  be	  in	  the	  present	  circumstances.	  
The	   importance	   of	   such	   findings	  is	   apparent.	   The	   results	   challenge	   the	   view	   held	   by	  
some	   economists	   that	   credit	   is	   an	   epiphenomenon:	   something	   driven	   by	   real	  
fundamentals,	  but	  not	  an	  interesting	  or	  important	  economic	  driver	  in	  its	  own	  right.	  
In	  a	  naïve	  view,	  high-­‐	  and	  low-­‐	  levels	  of	  credit-­‐to-­‐GDP	  growth	  in	  expansion	  phases	  
might	  occur,	  with	  credit	  intensity	  levels	  given	  by	  disturbances	  around	  some	  mean;	  
these	   might	   be	   followed	   by	   weak-­‐	   or	   harsh–	   recession	   phases,	   or	   even	   financial	  
crises,	  with	  these	  outcomes	  also	  distributed	  around	  some	  mean.	  But,	  after	  properly	  
conditioning	  the	  cyclical	  data,	   it	   is	  not	  clear	  why	  there	  should	  still	  be	   a	   systematic	  
link	  between	  the	  two,	  which	  is	  what	   we	  actually	   tend	  to	   see	  in	  the	  historical	  data.	  In	  
closing,	  we	  take	  a	  closer	  look	  at	  other	  patterns	  which	  strengthen	  this	  point.	  
	  
Lesson	  4:	  In	  a	  financial	  crisis	  with	  large	  run-­‐up	  in	  private	  sector	  credit,	  mark	  
down	  growth/inflation	  more	  	  
The	  final	  two	  lessons	  take	  off	  from	  the	  preceding	  idea	  of	  conditioning	  recession	  path	  
outcomes	   on	   economic	   conditions	   seen	   at	   the	   pre-­‐recession	   peak	   or	   in	   the	   prior	  
expansion	   phase,	   but	   in	   what	   follows	   we	   can	   expand	   the	   modeling	   framework	   using	  
local	   projection	   methods	   to	   ask	   two	   questions	   of	   contemporary	   salience	   (Jordà,	  
Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  2011b).	  

	  

30	  

	  

	  
Figure	  11	  

“Excess”	  Credit	  Growth	  and	  the	  Paths	  of	  Normal	  and	  Financial	  Recessions	  
Cumulative Change From the Start of the Recession

10

15
10

-10

0

0

5

Normal

0

1

2

3

4

5

5
0

-30

-10

-5

-20

Financial

CPI Prices
20

Real Investment per capita

10

Real GDP per capita

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

	  

.1
0
-.2

-.2
-.6

-.3

-.4

10
0
-10

	  

-.1

0

20

.2

30

Real Lending per capita
Govt. Short-term Interest Rates Govt. Long-term Interest Rates
Notes	  and	  source:	  Paths	  shown	  are	  cumulative	  impacts	  in	  percent.	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  (2011b).	  
Results	   from	   a	   conditional	   local-­‐projection	   model.	   Sample	   of	   14	   advanced	   countries,	   1870–2008.	   Solid	  
lines	   =	   recession	   paths	   with	   0%	   pa	   excess	   growth	   of	   credit	   in	   prior	   expansion	   measured	   by	   rate	   of	   change	  
of	  loans	  to	  GDP	  ratio	  percentage	  points	  per	  year;	  blue	  =	  normal	  recession	  with	  95%	  confidence	  interval,	  
red	  =	  financial	  recession.	  Dashed	  lines	  show	  perturbations	  to	  forecast	  when	  excess	  credit	  measure	  rises	  
by	  +1,	  +2	  or	  +3	  percentage	  points	  per	  year.	  

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

First,	  we	  ask:	  how	  are	  macroeconomic	  characteristics	  of	  the	  recession	  path	  related	  
Current Account to GDP Ratio
.3

.4

to	  expansion	  phase	  credit	  build	  up?	  In	  Figure	  11	  we	  show	  cumulative	  impacts	  from	  a	  
.2

local-­‐projection	   estimation	   cumulated	   over	   5	   years	   after	   a	   recession	   peak	   for	   our	  
.1

sample	  of	  14	  countries	  for	  1870	  to	  2008.	  The	  experiment	  is	  to	  compute	  the	  marginal	  
0

treatment	  effect	  on	  each	  path	  of	  an	  extra	  unit	  (here	  +1	  s.d.)	  in	  the	  rate	  of	  change	  of	  
-.1

the	   loan	   to	   GDP	   ratio	   during	   the	   prior	   expansion.	   For	   reference,	   actual	   observed	  
0
1
2
3
4
5
average	  
rate	  
of	   change	  
during	  
expansions	   is	   +0.25	   percentage	   points	   per	   year	   just	  

before	   normal	   recessions	   (s.d.	   =	   2),	   and	   about	   +1.25%	   percentage	   points	   per	   year	  
(s.d.	  =	  2.5)	  before	  financial	  recessions.	  
In	   the	   chart,	   the	   dark/blue	   solid	   path	   is	   that	   for	   a	   normal	   recession	   under	   the	  
average	   excess	   credit	   expansion	   in	   the	   prior	   expansion	   (with	   shaded	   95%	  
confidence	  interval).	  The	  dark/blue	  dotted	  path	  is	  for	  a	  normal	  recession	  under	  the	  
marginal	  treatment	  with	  an	  increase	  of	  1	  s.d.	  in	  excess	  credit	  in	  the	  prior	  expansion.	  
The	   light/red	   solid	   and	   dashed	   lines	   show	   the	   path	   in	   a	   financial	   crisis	   recession	  

	  

31	  

	  

	  
when	   excess	   credit	   at	   its	   mean,	   and	   mean	   +	   1	   s.d.,	   respectively,	   in	   the	   prior	  
expansion.	  
Important	   inferences	   quickly	   follow	   from	   this	   chart	   based	   on	   over	   a	   century	   of	  
experiences.	   First,	   unsurprisingly,	   excess	   credit	   generally	   makes	   matters	   worse,	   but	  
especially	   so	   in	   a	   financial	   crisis,	   with	   lower	   output,	   investment	   and	   inflation.	   The	  
working	   paper	   also	   documents	   slower	   lending,	   lower	   interest	   rates,	   and	   a	   sharper	  
move	   to	   current	   account	   surplus	   for	   that	   case—characteristics	   that	   are	   highly	  
noteworthy	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  present	  weak	  recovery	  in	  crisis-­‐hit	  countries	  from	  
the	  2008	  financial	  shock.	  
The	   point	   is	   simply	   that	   from	   an	   empirical	   point	   of	   view,	   a	   credit	   boom	   and	   a	  
financial	   crisis	   together	   appear	   to	   be	   a	   very	   potent	   mix	   that	   correlate	   with	  
abnormally	  severe	  downward	  pressures	  on	  growth,	  prices	  and	  capital	  formation	  for	  
sustained	   periods.	   A	   “normalization”	   of	   the	   economy	   on	   all	   these	   dimensions	   just	  
takes	  much	  longer	  under	  such	  a	  scenario.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  see	  how,	  policymakers,	  if	  they	  
happened	   to	   be	   ignorant	   of	   such	   factors,	   might	   carelessly	   wander	   into	   unduly	  
optimistic	   forecasts,	   or	   premature	   policy	   actions,	   putting	   at	   risk	   a	   very	   fragile	  
recovery	  path.	  
	  
Lesson	   5:	   In	   a	   financial	   crisis	   with	   large	   public	   debt,	   and	   large	   run-­‐up	   in	  
private	  sector	  credit	  mark	  down	  your	  forecast	  even	  more	  	  
The	   final	   lesson	   builds	   on	   the	   last	   one.	   Now	   we	   can	   add	   the	   much-­‐debated	   fiscal	  
policy	   dimension	   to	   the	   analysis.	   Such	   is	   the	   flexibility	   of	   the	   local	   projection	  
framework	  that	  it	  can	  be	  easily	  used	  to	  generate	  forecasts	  adapted	  to	  discrete	  bins	  
corresponding	   to	   various	   conditioning	   events,	   or	   it	   can	   be	   used	   with	   a	   continuous	  
conditioning	   variable	   to	   see	   how	   outcomes	   vary	   over	   some	   meaningful	   range	   of	  
conditions.	  The	  question	  we	  focus	  on	  here	  is	  how	  the	  fiscal	  health	  of	  the	  government	  
ex	  ante,	  at	  the	  start	  of	  the	  recession,	  might	  shape	  the	  subsequent	  recession	  path.	  

	  

32	  

	  

	  
Figure	  12	  

“Excess”	  Credit	  Growth	  and	  the	  Paths	  of	  Real	  GDP	  in	  Normal	  and	  
Financial	  Recession	  Contingent	  on	  Initial	  Public	  Debt	  Levels	  
Change in growth rate in each year after start of recession

1

2

Real GDP per Capita

Financial: Debt/GDP = 0%

Percent
-1

0

Normal: Debt/GDP = 0%
Normal: Debt/GDP = 50%
Financial: Debt/GDP = 50%

-3

-2

Normal: Debt/GDP = 100%

-4

Financial: Debt/GDP = 100%

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years
Normal recession: Debt/GDP = 50%

Financial crisis recession: Debt/GDP = 50%

Normal recession: Debt/GDP = 0–100%

Financial crisis recession: Debt/GDP = 0–100%

	  
Notes	  and	  source:	  Paths	  shown	  are	  dynamic	  impacts	  at	  each	  date,	  not	  cumulative.	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  
Taylor	  (forthcoming).	  Results	  from	  a	  conditional	  local-­‐projection	  model.	  Sample	  of	  14	  advanced	  countries,	  
1870–2008.	   Zero	   =	   recession	   path	   with	   0%	   pa	   excess	   growth	   of	   credit	   in	   prior	   expansion	   measured	   by	  
loans	   to	   GDP.	   Blue	   dashed	   and	   red	   solid	   paths:	   normal	   and	   financial	   recession	   paths,	   at	   +1%	   pa	   excess	  
credit	   growth	   in	   prior	   expansion	   when	   country	   starts	   recession	   with	   initial	   public	   debt	   to	   GDP	   ratio	   of	  
50%.	   Dark	   and	   light	   gray	   fans:	   deviation	   from	   these	   last	   two	   respective	   paths	   as	   starts	   recession	   with	  
initial	  public	  debt	  to	  GDP	  ratio	  varying	  from	  0%	  to	  100%.	  

	  
Figure	   12,	   from	   work	   in	   progress	   (Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor,	   forthcoming),	  
studies	   the	   impact	   of	   a	   similar	   marginal	   treatment	  as	  in	  the	  last	  exercise	   (here	   +1%	  
per	  year	  of	  extra	  loan	  to	  GDP	  growth	  during	  the	  prior	  expansion),	  but	  here	  the	  fan	  
chart	   shows	   dynamic	   impacts	   (in	   this	   case,	   noncumulative)	   with	   forecast	   paths	   for	  
varying	   levels	   of	   public	   debt	   to	   GDP	   at	   the	   recession	   onset,	   where	   the	   range	   goes	  
from	  0%	  to	  100%	  across	  the	  fan	  (shaded),	  with	  a	  central	  forecast	  (colored	  line)	  at	  

	  

33	  

	  

	  
the	   50%	   public	   debt	   to	   GDP	   level.	   The	   exercise	   is	   revealing.	   For	   brevity	   we	   examine	  
here	  just	  the	  results	  for	  the	  GDP	  path.	  
First	   look	   at	   normal	   recessions	   (dark/blue	   dashed	   line,	   dark	   shaded	   fan).	   Extra	  
credit	   growth	   in	   the	   prior	   expansion	   is	   correlated	   with	   mild	   drag	   in	   the	   recession,	  
say	  50–75	  bps	  in	  the	  central	  case,	  but	  the	  effect	  is	  small,	  and	  does	  not	  vary	  all	  that	  
much	   when	   we	   condition	   on	   public	   debt	   to	   GDP	   levels	   (the	   dark	   fan	   is	   not	   that	  
wide).	  
Now	  look	  at	  financial	  crisis	  recessions	  (light/red	  solid	  line,	  light	  shaded	  fan).	  Extra	  
credit	   growth	   in	   the	   prior	   expansion	   is	   correlated	   with	   much	   larger	   drag,	   almost	  
twice	  as	  large	  at	  100–150	  bps,	  and	  the	  impact	  is	  very	  sensitive	  to	  public	  debt	  to	  GDP	  
levels	   going	   in	   (the	   light	   fan	   is	   very	   wide).	   At	   public	   debt	   to	   GDP	   levels	   near	   100%	   a	  
sort	  of	  tailspin	  emerges	  after	  a	  financial	  crisis,	  and	  the	  rate	  of	  growth	  craters	  down	  
from	  the	  reference	  levels	  by	  400	  bps	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  window.	  (Recall,	  effects	  in	  this	  
chart	  are	  shown	  as	  non-­‐cumulative.)	  
In	   terms	   of	   historical	   resonance,	   these	   results	   have	   a	   deep	   ring	   to	   them	   as	   we	  
contemplate	   the	   current	   crisis.	   Exposure	   to	   a	   credit	   boom	   can	   make	   recessions	  
painful,	  but	  when	  combined	  with	  an	  adverse	  fiscal	  position	  at	  the	  onset	  of	  the	  crash,	  
economies	   are	   perhaps	   even	   more	   vulnerable.	   Such	   empirical	   evidence	   would	  
suggest	  that	  even	  if	  the	  stakes	  are	  lower	  in	  normal	  recessions,	  countries	  with	  more	  
“fiscal	   space”	   are	   better	   able	   to	   withstand	   a	   financial	   crisis,	   perhaps	   by	   having	   room	  
to	   offer	  stabilizing	   support	   to	   their	   economy	   —	   or	   at	   least	   dodge	   austerity,	   whether	  
“voluntary”	  or	  “involuntary”.	  
	  
Summing	  up:	  what	  next	  for	  macroeconomics	  and	  policy?	  
In	   many	   old-­‐fashioned	   macroeconomic	   models	   and	   policy	   frameworks,	   the	   key	  
issues	   at	   the	   core	   of	   the	   crisis	   were	   frequently	   simplified	   to	   the	   point	   of	  
unrecognizability,	   or	   else	   assumed	   away	   altogether:	   for	   example,	   banks,	   financial	  
	  

34	  

	  

	  
crises,	   defaults,	   lenders	   of	   last	   resort,	   safe	   assets,	   credit,	   leverage,	   debt-­‐deflation,	  
central	  banking	  (beyond	  simple	  targets	  and	  policy	  rules),	  and	  even	  money	  itself,	  to	  
name	  a	  few.	  
For	   observers	   with	   a	   longer	   perspective,	   however,	   such	   matters	   were	   far	   from	  
irrelevant,	   and	   surely	   not	   merely	   epiphenomena.	   Instead,	   they	   seemed	   so	   to	   be	   so	  
systematically	  important	  and	  have	  such	  recurrent	  patterns	  across	  the	  broad	  sweep	  
of	  economic	  history	  that	  it	  was	  hard	  to	  see	  how	  they	  could	  be	  placed	  to	  one	  side.	  
If	  a	  better	  empirical	  foundation	  is	  to	  be	  found,	  then	  what	  features	  of	  the	  real	  world	  
should	   new	   and	   better	   models	   and	   policymaking	   pay	   heed	   to?	   If	   something	  
beneficial	   can	   be	   said	   to	   have	   come	   out	   of	   the	   crisis,	   it	   has	   at	   least	   reignited	   interest	  
in	  crucial	  macro-­‐financial	  issues.	  
With	  a	  focus	  on	  banking	  systems	  and	  credit,	  this	  paper	  has	  summarized	  some	  new	  
historical	  evidence	  on	  the	  evolution	  of	  a	  key	  part	  of	  the	  global	  financial	  system,	  its	  
workings,	  and	  its	  fragility.	  Arguably,	  empirical	  research	  is	  now	  ahead	  of	  theory,	  but	  
the	  two	  will	  need	  to	  work	  together.	  
For	   researchers,	   constructing	   models	   consistent	   with	   the	   evidence,	   as	   well	   as	  
strengthening	  and	  expanding	  the	  evidence	  itself,	  is	  a	  major	  challenge	  for	  the	  future.	  
For	  policymakers,	  unfortunately,	  the	  challenge	  is	  right	  now,	  and	  first	  and	  foremost	  it	  
is	   to	   understand,	   based	   on	   these	   and	   other	   empirical	   observations	   emerging	   from	  
the	   historical	   laboratory,	   the	   peculiar	   nature	   of	   the	   fiercely	   depressing	   and	  
deflationary	  spiral	  in	  which	  the	  advanced	  world	  now	  finds	  itself	  —	  and,	  once	  they	  
grasp	  that,	  to	  then	  figure	  out	  what	  to	  do	  about	  it.	  

	  

35	  

	  

	  

	  
References	  
Almunia,	  Miguel,	  Agustin	  Bénétrix,	  Barry	  Eichengreen,	  Kevin	  H.	  O’Rourke,	  and	  Gisela	  
Rua.	  2010.	  From	  Great	  Depression	  to	  Great	  Credit	  Crisis:	  Similarities,	  Differences	  
and	  Lessons.	  Economic	  Policy	  62:	  219–52.	  
Arcand,	  Jean-­‐Louis,	  Enrico	  Berkes,	  and	  Ugo	  Panizza.	  2012.	  Too	  Much	  Finance?	  IMF	  
Working	  Paper	  No.	  12/161,	  June.	  
Bordo,	   Michael,	   and	   Barry	   Eichengreen,	   Daniela	   Klingebiel,	   and	   Maria	   Soledad	  
Martinez-­‐Peria.	   2001.	   Is	   the	   Crisis	   Problem	   Growing	   More	   Severe?	   Economic	  
Policy	  16(32):	  51–82.	  
Borio,	   Claudio,	   and	   William	   R.	   White.	   2004.	   Whither	   Monetary	   and	   Financial	  
Stability?	   The	   Implications	   of	   Evolving	   Policy	   Regimes.	   In	   Monetary	   Policy	   and	  
Uncertainty:	  Adapting	  to	  a	  Changing	  Economy.	  	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  2003	  Jackson	  
Hole	   Economic	   Policy	   Symposium,	   Jackson	   Hole,	   Wyo.,	   28–30	   August,	   pp.	   131–
211.	  
Drehmann,	   Mathias,	   Claudio	   Borio,	   and	   Kostas	   Tsatsaronis.	   2011.	   Anchoring	  
Countercyclical	   Capital	   Buffers:	   The	   Role	   of	   Credit	   Aggregates.	   International	  
Journal	  Of	  Central	  Banking	  7(4):	  189–240.	  
Eichengreen,	   Barry,	   and	   Kris	   James	   Mitchener.	   2004.	   The	   Great	   Depression	   as	   a	  
Credit	  Boom	  Gone	  Wrong.	  Research	  in	  Economic	  History	  22:	  183–237.	  
Frankel,	   Jeffrey	   A.,	   Carlos	   A.	   Végh,	   and	   Guillermo	   Vuletin.	   2011.	   On	   Graduation	   from	  
Fiscal	  Procyclicality.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  17619.	  
Friedman,	   Milton,	   and	   Anna	   Jacobson	   Schwartz.	   1963.	   A	   Monetary	   History	   of	   the	  
United	  States,	  1867–1960.	  Princeton,	  N.J.:	  Princeton	  University	  Press.	  
IMF.	  2011.	  IMF	  Performance	  in	  the	  Run-­‐Up	  to	  the	  Financial	  and	  Economic	  Crisis:	  IMF	  
Surveillance	  in	  2004–07.	  Washington,	  D.C.:	  International	  Monetary	  Fund.	  
Jordà,	   Òscar,	   Moritz	   Schularick,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor.	   2011a.	   Financial	   Crises,	   Credit	  
Booms,	   and	   External	   Imbalances:	   140	   Years	   of	   Lessons.	   IMF	   Economic	   Review	  
59(2):	  340–78.	  
Jordà,	  Òscar,	  Moritz	  Schularick,	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor.	  2011b.	  When	  Credit	  Bites	  Back:	  
Leverage,	  Business	  Cycles,	  and	  Crises.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  17621.	  
Jordà,	  Òscar,	  Moritz	  Schularick,	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor.	  Sovereigns	  Versus	  Banks:	  Crises,	  
Causes,	  and	  Consequences.	  Forthcoming.	  
Kaminsky,	  Graciela	  L.,	  and	  Carmen	  M.	  Reinhart.	  1999.	  The	  Twin	  Crises:	  The	  Causes	  
of	   Banking	   and	   Balance-­‐of-­‐Payments	   Problems.	   American	   Economic	   Review	  
89(3):	  473–500.	  

	  

36	  

	  

	  
Kindleberger,	   Charles	   P.	   1978.	   Manias,	   Panics,	   and	   Crashes:	   A	   History	   of	   Financial	  
Crises.	  New	  York:	  Basic	  Books.	  
Lane,	   Philip	   R.	   2012.	   Financial	   Globalisation	   and	   the	   Crisis.	   Paper	   presented	   at	   the	  
11th	   BIS	   Annual	   Conference	   on	   The	   Future	   of	   Financial	   Globalisation.	   Lucerne,	  
June	  21–22.	  http://www.bis.org/events/conf120621/lane.pdf	  
Levine,	   Ross.	   2005.	   Finance	   and	   Growth:	   Theory	   and	   Evidence.	   In	   Handbook	   of	  
Economic	   Growth	   edited	   by	   Philippe	   Aghion	   and	   Steven	   Durlauf.	   Amsterdam:	  
Elsevier,	  pp.	  865–934.	  
Obstfeld,	  Maurice.	  2012.	  Does	  the	  Current	  Account	  Still	  Matter?	  American	  Economic	  
Review	  102(3):	  1–23.	  
Obstfeld,	   Maurice,	   Jay	   C.	   Shambaugh,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor.	   2009.	   Financial	   Instability,	  
Reserves,	   and	   Central	   Bank	   Swap	   Lines	   in	   the	   Panic	   of	   2008.	   American	  Economic	  
Review	  99(2):	  480–86.	  
Obstfeld,	   Maurice,	   Jay	   C.	   Shambaugh,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor.	   2010.	   Financial	   Stability,	  
the	   Trilemma,	   and	   International	   Reserves.	   American	   Economic	   Journal:	  
Macroeconomics	  2(2):	  57–94.	  
Pradhan,	  Manoj,	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor.	  2011a.	  The	  Great	  Rebalancing.	  Emerging	  Issues,	  
Morgan	  Stanley,	  February	  18.	  
Pradhan,	  Manoj,	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor.	  2011b.	  Are	  EMs	  the	  New	  DMs?	  Emerging	  Issues,	  
Morgan	  Stanley,	  May	  4.	  
Reinhart,	   Carmen	   M.,	   and	   Kenneth	   S.	   Rogoff.	   2009.	   This	   Time	   is	   Different:	   Eight	  
Centuries	  of	  Financial	  Folly.	  Princeton,	  N.J.:	  Princeton	  University	  Press.	  
Rajan,	   Raghuram	   G.	   2006.	   Has	   Financial	   Development	   Made	   the	   World	   Riskier?	   In	  
The	  Greenspan	  Era:	  Lessons	  for	  the	  Future.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  2005	  Jackson	  Hole	  
Economic	  Policy	  Symposium,	  Jackson	  Hole,	  Wyo.,	  August	  25–27,	  pp.	  313–69.	  
Rajan,	   Raghuram	   G.,	   and	   Luigi	   Zingales.	   1998.	   Financial	   Dependence	   and	   Growth.	  
American	  Economic	  Review	  88(3):	  559–86.	  
Turner,	   Adair.	   2011.	   Debt	   and	   deleveraging:	   Long	   Term	   and	   Short	   Term	   Challenges.	  
Presidential	   Lecture:	   Centre	   for	   Financial	   Studies,	   Frankfurt,	   November	   21.	  
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/library/communication/speeches/2011/1121_at.shtml	  

	  

37	  

	  

