                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            RISK AND RETURNS TO EDUCATION

                                          Jeffrey Brown
                                          Chichun Fang
                                         Francisco Gomes

                                       Working Paper 18300
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18300


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2012




We would like to thank Janice Eberly, Darren Lubotsky, George Pennachi, Jason Seligman, Moto
Yogo, and seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the LERA Conference
and the NBER meetings for helpful comments on this paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jeffrey Brown, Chichun Fang, and Francisco Gomes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk and Returns to Education
Jeffrey Brown, Chichun Fang, and Francisco Gomes
NBER Working Paper No. 18300
August 2012
JEL No. G12,H52,I21,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the returns to education in a life-cycle framework that incorporates risk preferences, earnings
volatility (including unemployment), and a progressive income tax and social insurance system. We
show that such a framework significantly reduces the measured gains from education relative to simple
present-value calculations, although the gains remain significant. For example, for a range of preference
parameters, we find that individuals should be willing to pay 300 to 500 (200 to 250) thousand dollars
to obtain a college (high school) degree in order to benefit from the 32 to 42 percent (20 to 38 percent)
increase in annual certainty-equivalent consumption. We also explore how the measured value of education
varies with preference parameters, by gender, and across time. In contrast to findings in the education
wage-premia literature, which focuses on present values and which we replicate in our data, our model
indicates that the gains from college education were flat in the 1980s and actually decreased significantly
in 1991-2007 period. On the other hand, the gains to a high school education have increased quite
dramatically over time. We also show that both high school and college education help to decrease
the gender gap in life-time earnings, contrary again to the conclusion from wage premia calculations.


Jeffrey Brown                                        Francisco Gomes
Department of Finance                                Finance Department
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign           London Business School
515 East Gregory Drive                               Sussex Place
Champaign, IL 61820                                  London NW1 4SA
and NBER                                             UK
brownjr@illinois.edu                                 fgomes@london.edu

Chichun Fang
Institute for Social Research
University of Michigan
426 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
chichunf@umich.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

        Trade-offs between risk and return play a central role in standard financial and economic
models of investment in physical capital. In contrast, a very large literature on investment in
human capital, i.e., the returns to education, has largely focused on average returns without
giving full consideration to risk. Rather, the standard approach in the returns to education
literature, which traces to Mincer’s (1974) seminal paper, is to regress wages (or other dollar-
denominated outcomes) against the level of education, controlling for demographic and job
characteristics. Such an approach does not capture variation in the value of education that arises
from other life-cycle factors, including the concavity of utility over consumption, differences in
unemployment risk or earnings volatility by education, or the progressive tax and social
insurance system that may dampen the returns to education.
        In this paper, we examine the returns to education in a utility-based model that accounts
for several important life-cycle factors. Valuing human capital is equivalent to computing the
price of a non-tradeable risky asset: we need an estimate of the expected dividends and an
appropriately risk-adjusted discount rate. We estimate the expected dividends from micro-data
and we compute the discount rate from a structural lifecycle model of consumption and saving
decisions (see, for example, Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Carroll (1997) or Hubbard, Skinner
and Zeldes (1995)). 2 Because it is well known that education reduces the probability of
unemployment and is also associated with changes in earnings volatility (see Moffitt and
Gottschalk (2011) for a recent review), we incorporate these factors into our analysis.
Specifically, we model the income process by following the approach of MaCurdy (1982) and
Abowd and Card (1989), combining a deterministic component (capturing the hump shape of life
cycle earnings and retirement income) and two random components that capture both transitory
and permanent (e.g., career) uncertainty. We estimate the earnings process – differentiated by
education level – using the 1968-2007 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).
For each education group, our model accounts for this stochastic labor income process, the
probability of unemployment, the receipt of unemployment insurance income, a progressive
income tax system, and a progressive Social Security system for providing benefits in retirement.



2
 Huggett and Kalpan (2012) use a similar approach to compute “the value of a man”. Here we focus on the
differential values by education and the risk-return trade-off for human capital.


                                                       1
       We find that the typical high school graduate will enjoy a 24% higher level of annual
consumption than those who did not attend high school at all. When expressed in terms of life-
time certainty equivalent (i.e., risk-adjusted) wealth, this corresponds to an increase of $220k
(after-tax) dollars. In other words, an individual with our baseline preference specifications
(relative risk aversion of 2, and discount factor of 0.99) should be willing to pay as much as
$220k to attend and complete high school. The gains from obtaining a college education are even
larger: the (risk-adjusted) present-value of human capital of the average college graduate is over
$432k (after-tax) dollars higher than the human capital of an otherwise identical high school
graduate. This corresponds to a 38% increase in annual certainty-equivalent consumption, and it
is substantially more than the typical cost of a college education. While substantial, these gains
are significantly lower than many estimates of the returns to education that are based on average
returns (and which are frequently cited in the popular press).
       Our approach allows us to decompose the sources of the gains. First, accounting for a
progressive income tax system and Social Security taxes and benefits generally reduces the gains
from education, due to the redistributive nature of these programs, and this is particularly the
case for college degrees. Second, unemployment risk and earnings volatility are important
considerations, although the effects are more complex than simple intuition suggests. In a
lifecycle model that ignores income shocks and considers only the average life-time income
processes, the returns to education are lower than a simple present value calculation would
suggest. This is because, ceteris paribus, agents prefer less steep income profiles so that they can
avoid liquidity constraints and increase consumption early in life. Holding average income
constant, steeper income profiles are less valuable because in the presence of borrowing
constraints, individuals are unable to optimally smooth consumption. When we incorporate
uncertainty (including transitory shocks, permanent shocks and unemployment) into this utility-
based model, we find that the gains from high school increase. This is because, consistent with
our estimation results, high school graduates have lower volatility of income shocks and a very
similar probability of unemployment relative to agents without high school education. Therefore,
a high school degree both provides an increase in average life-time income and a decrease in the
volatility of potential outcomes.
       In contrast, the gains from college are slightly smaller when one accounts for earnings
uncertainty. College graduates do have a much lower probability of unemployment than do high



                                                 2
school graduates, which would serve to increase the value of education. However, college
graduates also face a much more skewed distribution of life-time earnings (i.e., they experience
very high career earnings heterogeneity), so assigning them the average income over-estimates
the value of college education for a risk-averse agent.
       The importance of the utility-based calculations becomes even clearer when we compare
the certainty equivalent gains for different values of the preference parameters. As previously
discussed, high school graduates benefit both from a higher average income, and from a
reduction in earnings risk. Naturally, the value of the second component will depend on the
agent’s risk preferences. Therefore, we should expect that the gains from education will vary
across the population. In fact we find that, for reasonable preference parameters, the welfare
gains from high school can vary from about $201k (risk aversion of 1 and discount factor of 0.99)
to nearly $253k (risk aversion of 4 and discount factor of 0.99). The reverse pattern is visible for
college graduates: the more risk-averse agents will assign a lower value to college education,
since it implies a much higher dispersion of outcomes than a high school degree.
       We can also examine trends over time. It is well-documented in labor economics
literature that education wage premia, especially those for college degrees, increased in
substantially in the 1980s and again in the 1990s (see, for example, Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2008), Goldin and Katz (2007), Lemieux (2006), Card (1999), Katz and Autor (1999) or Katz
and Murphy (1992)). In addition, it has been shown that earnings volatility increased in the
1980s (Moffitt and Gottschalk (2008), Cunha and Heckman (2007), and Gottschalk and Moffitt
(1994)). Motivated by this evidence, we divide our sample in three different time periods: 1969-
1980, 1981-1990, and 1991-2007 and repeat our analysis for each. Consistent with the previous
literature, we find that volatilities have increased in the 1980s for all education groups. The
patterns in the 1991-2007 period are more complex: we find that transitory earnings volatilities
have increased over this period, but that the volatility of permanent earnings shocks (career
uncertainty) increased only for college graduates. Interestingly, we observe noticeable reductions
in the average life-time earnings for both high school and no-high school in the 1980s, followed
by a small recovery for high school graduates in the last sub-period, and a further reduction for
those without a high school degree. For college graduates, there was a modest decrease in
average earnings in the 1980s followed by an increase in the 1991-2007 period.




                                                 3
       As a result, if we compute the gains from education as the ratio of the present value of
average life-time earnings for higher versus lower education groups, we conclude that the gains
from college have increased steadily over time, consistent with the wage premia literature. Under
the same calculations, the gains from high school have remained relatively constant in the 80s
and increased afterwards. However, when we compute the risk-adjusted certainty-equivalents we
observe very important differences, particularly in the later sample period. For college graduates,
we find that the certainty-equivalent gain is significantly lower in the 1991-2007 period (by
14.98%), even though the average expected income is significantly higher (by 13.00%). The
explanation for this striking difference lies in the very large increase in the dispersion of earnings
for college graduates. In other words, average present-value calculations ignore the impact of the
concurrent substantial increases in the volatility of college graduates earnings (namely in their
career heterogeneity). Even though their average income is higher, most college graduates will
earn much less than this average number and, even if they are mildly risk averse, this is enough
to make the distribution of future earnings in the 1991-2007 period less valuable than the one in
the 1981-1990 period. On the other hand, for high school graduates, the gains are actually much
higher than the average present-value calculation would suggest (14.15% versus 4.26%). This is
driven by the large increase in income risk for those with no high school education, relative to a
much more modest increase for those with high school degrees.
       Finally, we study gender differences in the returns to education. Across all education
levels the volatility of income shocks is much higher for women than for men, while the average
life-time present discount values are much higher for men than for women. On net, the gains
from high school degree are much higher for women than for men (75.28% versus 16.75%), due
both to larger increases in average life-time income and to a more significant reduction in
earnings uncertainty. In other words, high school education helps to reduce the gender gap in
life-time earnings. For college the gains are again higher for women, but the differences are
much smaller (40.65% versus 37.93%). Interestingly, if we had only considered expected
earnings we would conclude that women benefit much less than men from college education,
again highlighting the importance of computing risk-adjusted certainty equivalents. In a utility-
based setting, college education helps to decrease the gender gap.
       The primary aim of this paper is to make the conceptual point that preference parameters,
earnings volatility, and fiscal parameters (e.g., taxes) have important implications for how we



                                                  4
think about the returns to education. In doing so, we provide numerical estimates of the impact
using longitudinal data from the PSID. We discuss below the ways in which our specific
numerical estimates may be biased and why we believe such biases are likely to be small. But the
core contribution of this paper is to make the broader point about the importance of accounting
for life-cycle issues when analyzing the value of education and how it varies across groups and
over time.
        This paper proceeds as follows. In section 1 we describe the life-cycle model used for the
certainty equivalent calculations and the labor income process. In section 2 we describe the data
used in the estimation of this income process, and in section 3 we present the estimation results.
Section 4 reports the gains from education in a baseline case, while sections 5, 6 and 7 we study
how these vary with preferences, by gender, and across time. Finally, in section 8 we offer
concluding remarks.


2. LIFE CYCLE MODEL AND LABOR INCOME PROCESS
        We begin with a standard life-cycle model of consumption and savings decisions along
the lines of Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Carroll (1997) or Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995).


2.1 Preferences
        Time is discrete and t denotes adult age, which, following the typical convention in this
literature, corresponds to actual age minus 21. Each period corresponds to one year and agents
live for a maximum of 79 (T) periods (age 100). The probability that a consumer is alive at time
(t + 1) conditional on being alive at time t is denoted by pt (p0 equal to 1). Life-time preferences
are given by a standard time-separable power utility function:
                             T             t 1
                                                        C t 1     
                      U  E       t 1
                                                  ps                      (1)
                             t 1          s0          1          
where β<1 is the discount factor, Ct is the level of date-t consumption, and γ > 0 is the coefficient
of relative risk aversion.
        We consider the same starting age (22) for all education groups because, in a utility-
based model, including a different number of years effectively changes the functional form of the
utility function and invalidates comparisons across education groups. Therefore we consider
income earned at earlier ages (by those with lower education levels) as an opportunity cost of


                                                          5
education to be treated in the same manner as the direct cost of education (i.e., to be netted
against the computed gains to education).


2.2 Income and Wealth Accumulation
        Agents work during the first 44 (denoted K in equations (3) and (5) below) periods of
their adult lives, and retire at age 66.3 Before retirement, agents supply a fixed amount of labor
each period, and earn labor income (Yt) that will depend on their own productivity. Labor
productivity is a function of both agent-specific shocks and education level, as described in detail
in the next subsection.
        Savings are invested in a risk-free account with constant gross return R = 2%, an
approach that is standard in the consumption-savings literature. Introducing a portfolio decision,
as in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005), should not affect our conclusions for two reasons.
First, we can always calibrate different levels for the rate of return on the portfolio to
approximate the average return on any given portfolio. Second, as shown in Cocco et al. (2005),
the portfolio allocations implied by this model are very similar across education groups, and thus
would not significantly alter the returns to education.4 The agent’s wealth accumulation equation
is then given by:
                             Wt 1  R(Wt - C t )  Yt 1                        (2)
where Wt denotes financial wealth at time t.
        We assume that the agents cannot borrow against their future labor income or retirement
wealth, so: Wt 1  0  t This constraint is standard in this class of models, and can be motivated
using the standard moral hazard and adverse selection arguments.5 We solve the maximization
problem numerically using standard backward induction methods.6

3
  For simplicity, we assume that the retirement age is exogenous and deterministic as in Gourinchas and Parker
(2002), Carroll (1997) or Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995). We set the retirement age at 66 because we assume
our stylized agent was born in 1945, and 66 is the age when people born in 1945 can retire and receive the full
amount of social security benefit.
4
  There are differences in stock market participation rates across different education groups, but we could also
capture these by considering different rates of return in our analysis, without actually having to endogeneize the
participation decisions (as in Gomes and Michaelides (2005) for example).
5
  Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005) and Davis, Kubler and Willen (2006) consider versions of this model that
allow for some level of uncollateralized borrowing.
6
  We optimize using grid search, discretize the state-space for the continuous state variable (cash-on-hand),
interpolate the value function using a cubic spline algorithm, and compute expectations using Gaussian quadrature.
More details are available upon request.


                                                        6
2.3 Labor Income Process

        The income process follows closely the one originally proposed by MaCurdy (1982) and
Abowd and Card (1989), and used in the life-cycle consumption and savings literature (e.g.
Carroll and Samwick (1997), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), or Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout
(2005)).     Before retirement, the logarithm of labor income is the sum of deterministic
components that can be calibrated to capture the hump shape of life cycle earnings as well as two
random components, one transitory and one permanent. More precisely, agent i’s labor income at
time t is given by:
                     log(Yi ,t )  f (t , ei , Z i ,t )  vi ,t   i ,t , for t  K ,         (3)

where f(t,ei,Zi,t) is a function of age (t), the individual’s education level (ei), and other individual
characteristics (Zi,t),  i ,t is an idiosyncratic temporary shock with a distribution of N (0,  2 (ei )) ,

N (0,  2,i ) , where   ,i    (ei ) is a function of education level (ei), and vi ,t is defined as:

                                           vi ,t  vi ,t 1  ui ,t                      (4)

in which ui ,t is uncorrelated with  i ,t and distributed as N (0,  u2,i ) , where  u ,i   u (ei ) .7 So the

volatilities of the different income shocks are also a function of the individual’s education level.8
        Each year agents have a probability of suffering an unemployed spell (π), in which case
they will receive unemployment insurance for the duration of the spell. Therefore, the total
“labor” income for that year will be the sum of the unemployment insurance collected and the
wages earned before and after. For tractability, we model income in a year in which an
unemployment spell occurs as a fixed fraction (θ) of the worker’s current income. Both the
probability and this fraction are allowed to vary with the level of education, but they are
otherwise identical across households: πi = π(ei) and θi = θ(ei)
        Finally, retirement income is modeled as a constant fraction  (ei ) of permanent labor

income in the last working year, where  (ei ) is allowed to vary by the level of education. Thus:

                log(Yi ,t )  log( (ei ))  f ( K , Z i , K )  vi , K , for t  K                 (5)

7
  Other studies have estimated a general first-order autoregressive process for vt and found the autocorrelation
coefficient very close to, and often undistinguishable, from one (Guvenen 2009, Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes 1995).
8
  Huggett, Ventura, and Yaron (2006) show that these volatilities are also age dependent. We abstract from this in
our analysis because the estimation of such age-variation would be too noisy in most of our sub-samples.


                                                                      7
This specification significantly facilitates the solution of the model, since it does not require the
introduction of additional state variables.


2.4 Selection and unobserved heterogeneity
        Before proceeding, it is important to acknowledge the implicit simplifying assumptions in
our estimation approach, both with respect to the level of average earnings, and the dispersion of
earnings, by education level. With regard to the level of earnings, the standard concern with
using OLS to estimate the effect of education on earnings is that it might be biased. For example,
ability may be correlated with education choice, leading to an upward bias if those with higher
abilities are more likely to spend more time in school and also have higher earnings. Of course,
it might also be biased downward if those with higher abilities are more likely to enter the labor
force early and gain additional experience. A very large literature has examined these biases,
using IV estimation methods, sample selection models and natural experiments to isolate the
causal effect of education on earnings. In his excellent survey of the literature, Card (1999)
concludes that most IV estimates (using either interventions in the school system or family
background as instruments) are slightly higher than standard OLS counterparts but that the
difference is often quite small (with the noticeable exception of Staiger and Stock (1997)),
suggesting that the (upward) ability bias in the OLS estimates may be offset by other factors
inducing downward bias, such as the one mentioned above and measurement error in education.
We hence estimate our earnings profile by regressing earnings on age dummy variables
conditional on education and family structure.9 To the extent that individual heterogeneity may
bias the age-earnings profile, we include individual fixed-effect in our model as well. It is also
important to recognize that we consider our primary contribution to be the evaluation of the
returns to education in a life-cycle context, rather than simply providing new estimates of the
earnings profiles themselves, and our methodology could be applied to alternative estimates of
age-earnings profiles by education.
        With regard to the variance of earnings, the realized dispersion in observed earnings
results both from unexpected income shocks and from unobserved heterogeneity across workers.
Chen (2008), Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Cunha, Heckman and Navarro (2005) decompose

9
  This is equivalent to estimating an OLS model with the interactions between education and age on the right-hand
side. Because we are interested in calculating life cycle earnings profiles and shocks across different population
sub-groups and over time, the combination of IV and small samples would not allow for an efficient estimation.


                                                         8
this cross-sectional heterogeneity in income into these two components. In the context of models
with an endogenous education decision, this distinction is important. Because the heterogeneity
is known to the agent, only the income shocks represent risk. For our purposes, we would ideally
capture only the risk, and not the unobserved heterogeneity component, and combining both
would upward bias our measure of income risk. However, there is also an important selection
issue that biases our estimate down: because unobserved heterogeneity affects the agents’
education choice, the realized cross-sectional dispersion of income is effectively a truncated
distribution, which means that observed wage inequality understates the potential wage
inequality for a given level of education. In the PSID we can control for significant unobserved
heterogeneity by including individual-specific fixed effects in the regressions, however this still
leaves out time-varying unobserved characteristics. Chen (2008) explores these biases in a
setting with an income process relatively similar to ours and finds that the two effects come very
close to cancelling each other: after adjusting for both factors, the final estimate is within five
percent of the unadjusted observed wage inequality. We explicitly rely on the Chen result that
the overall bias is very small and use our estimated measure of labor income risk as a reasonable
proxy for actual income risk. Nevertheless, later on we will also report results where we scale
down the estimated variances to take into account for this potential bias.


3. DATA


3.1 Sample Construction and Exclusions
         We use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), a longitudinal survey of
representative U.S. individuals and their families. When it started in 1968, the PSID had two
independent samples: a cross-sectional national sample and a national sample of low-income
families. We use the core cross-sectional sample of 2,930 households, which was drawn by the
Survey Research Center (SRC) and was an equal probability sample of U.S. families in
contiguous 48 states. 10 The second sample (known as the Survey of Economic Opportunity
sample), which we exclude from our analysis, was an over-sample of low-income families.
Between 1968 and 1996, the PSID annually interviewed individuals from the households in the

10
  It is worth mentioning that, while the PSID started out as nationally representative, the manner in which they have
followed people over time has led to a sample that is no longer fully representative (for example, it under-weights
recent immigrants).


                                                         9
core sample. Household splits and merges were tracked; adults were observed as they aged, and
children were followed as they grew into adulthood and formed their own family units. Since
1997, the PSID interviews have been bi-annual, and the most recent wave available at the time
we began this analysis was conducted in 2007.
         Only PSID household heads who are still in the labor force (self reported as “working
now”, “temporary laid off”, or “unemployed and looking for job”) and aged between 20 (or
22)11and 65 are included in the analysis of labor income process. We include both genders in our
baseline estimates, and later we will separate the two samples and present results for each. We
only include individuals who have an “exact” level of education: no high school, high school
graduates, and college graduates. Those with some college education (but no college degree) or
some post-secondary education are not used in our analysis, in order to obtain homogeneous
education groups. Individuals who are younger than age 20 (22 if college graduate) are excluded.
For those aged 66 to 80, we use only their Social Security income when estimating income
profiles. In the final sample, we have 7,050 agents and 67,222 annual earnings records.
Descriptive statistics of individual characteristics and labor income of household heads aged
between 20 (22 if college graduates) and 65 are shown in table 1.


                                        --- Insert table 1 about here. ---


3.2 Definition of Education Levels
         We obtain completed years of education from the PSID individual data. In the years for
which this is not available or missing, we use the information from the most recent wave. We
then split the sample according to the level of education into five mutually exclusive categories
based on years of schooling information: high school dropouts (less than 12 years), high school
graduates (12 years), some college (more than 12 but less than 16 years), college graduates (16
years), and post-secondary degrees (more than 16 years). In order to obtain homogenous
education groups, only people who have “exact” states in education are included, so we exclude
people who had some but did not finish college, as well as those who spent any amount of time


11
  We include earnings at age 20 and 21 for high school dropouts and high school graduates to maximize the
efficiency of the labor income calibration, but we start at age 22 for college graduates. For all education groups, we
use only earnings from 22 through 65 in our life-cycle, utility-based model of education value, as previously
discussed


                                                         10
in school beyond college graduation. This is important because drop-out rates among college
graduates, in particular, are very high: according to data from the National Center for Education
Statistics 36.8% (35.2%) of people enrolled in college in 89/90 (95/96) did not graduate and are
no longer enrolled in the program after six years. These drop-out rates may imply non-trivial
differences between the expected returns to education from enrolling in college and the expected
returns to education conditional on actually obtaining a college degree (see, for example,
Restuccia and Urrutia (2004), Athrey and Eberly (2011) or Ionescu (2011)). In our analysis we
focus on the latter, so we use clean measures of completed education.
         We estimate the earning equations separately for each of the three education groups: high
school dropouts, high school graduates, and college graduates. Modeling income process with
individual fixed effect is potentially problematic if education changes endogenously over the life
cycle. However, since we only use individuals older than 20 (or 22 if the agent is a college
graduate), there is not much variation in the level of education within each individual. In the
small number of cases where an individual spent enough years in school and moved to a higher
level defined-above, we consider the individual as a new entity once the level of education is
changed.


3.3 Definition of Income
         Three sources of income are used in our analysis: labor income, unemployment income,
and Social Security benefits. We convert all income figures to 2010 U.S. Dollars using CPI-W.
         Annual labor income is obtained through the household questionnaires in all years.
Because the income is subject to progressive income taxation, thus lowering the net-of-tax
returns to education, we perform our analysis based on post-tax labor income. For purposes of
applying taxes, we effectively create a synthetic cohort from our observations. Specifically, we
calculate the mean earnings at each age, regardless of the actual year of earnings. We then
assume that our stylized agent turns 66 and retires on the first day of 2011, and then apply prior
year income tax schedules based on age. For example, we apply the 2010 federal income tax
schedule to age 65 earnings, the 2009 schedule to age 64 earnings, and so forth, back to age 20.12
We assume our stylized agents file individual (rather than married) tax returns and do not have


12
  In order to do so, we have to deflate the earnings to the nominal earnings of the year that the income tax is used.
The after-tax earnings are then adjusted to 2010 dollars.


                                                          11
any additional sources of earnings other than labor income, unemployment compensation, and
Social Security benefits. We hence ignore earnings made by other household members. We
apply only the federal income tax schedule and do not consider state income taxes. For simplicity,
only labor income is subject to taxes: unemployment and Social Security benefits are assumed to
be exempt from the income tax in our model. 13 Finally, because we include Social Security
benefits in our analysis, we also include in the total federal tax burden the portion of the FICA
payroll tax that is dedicated to Social Security. Only the employee portion of the Social Security
tax is included (because the labor earnings we observe in the PSID are already net of the
employer portion). We do not include the taxes or benefits associated with Medicare due to the
difficulty of valuing the future benefits by income group (see, for example, Bhattacharya and
Lakdawalla (2006)). Similar to the way we apply the federal income tax, we also apply the
Social Security payroll tax rate based on the age when the earnings are made, assuming that they
retire at age 66. In the remainder of the paper, unless otherwise specified, we use post-tax
earnings unless otherwise specified, and the term “post-tax” is omitted to simplify exposition.
        Annual unemployment income is also available in 1968-1992, 2005, and 2007 waves of
PSID household questionnaires.14 For the remaining period (1993 to 2003), the PSID provides
two pieces of information on unemployment insurance income: the amount and the unit of time
(weekly, bi-weekly, or annually). Along with weeks of unemployment, we can calculate the
amount of unemployment income that an individual received each year, assuming that
unemployed workers receive unemployment compensation during the whole spell of
unemployment. This probably overestimates unemployment income because benefits are
typically available for only 26 weeks after the initial claim.15 As a quick robustness check, we

13
   Based on the current tax scheme, the first $2,400 of unemployment benefit and first $25,000 of social security
benefits are exempted from the federal income tax. Only 1.5% of the observations in the PSID have unemployment
income larger than $2,400, and the taxable part of unemployment benefit among these people is on average
$2,000. This implies this 1.5% of the sample would see their annual after-tax earnings decrease by $200 or $300 if
unemployment earnings become taxable in our framework. This is at most 1% of the consumption certainty
equivalent. Also, our estimates of Social Security benefits based on the benefit calculator suggest that high school
dropouts and high school graduates have average annual Social Security benefits lower than the $25,000 threshold.
College graduates do have social security benefits higher than $25,000, but including tax would only decrease the
replacement rate by around 0.2%. Assuming all of unemployment and Social Security benefits are not taxable would
therefore have only a trivial effect on our numerical results and does not change our main arguments and findings.
14
   Between 1968 and 1976, unemployment income is reported in brackets rather than actual numbers. In these years,
the median of each bracket is used as an individual’s unemployment income instead.
15
   The federal government may extend the eligibility during economic downturns. For example, during the recent
recession, the federal government pays up to 73 weeks of unemployment benefits, bringing the total duration of
unemployment insurance benefits up to 99 months.


                                                        12
examined whether there is a discontinuity in the amount of unemployment benefits received
around 1993, and found no evidence of a spike in the pattern of mean individual unemployment
income when the measure changed.
       Measuring Social Security income is more complicated. Social Security benefits at the
individual level are only available in limited waves (1986-1993, 2005, 2007). Most of the time
the PSID only asks for these benefits at the household level, and therefore includes spousal
benefits as well as other family benefits, such as those paid to any minor children in the
household. Because it is impossible to recover Social Security benefits at the individual level,
we feed the pre-tax age-earnings profile into the Social Security benefit calculator provided by
the Social Security Administration to calculate individual level benefits, assuming the stylized
agent turns 66 on January 1st, 2011 and starts to receive benefits on that day. To calculate the
average Social Security replacement rate for each education group, we take twelve times the
amount of the monthly Social Security benefit (which is equal to the Social Security “Primary
Insurance Amount” for those retiring at the Normal Retirement Age), and divide it by mean
annual earnings. We assume the replacement rate is the same for all agents who have the same
level of education. As a check on our methodology, calculating Social Security benefits in this
manner gives numbers very close to those reported in the PSID if we evenly distribute the
household level benefits reported in the PSID among potentially eligible household members
(those who are older than 65).


3.4 Mortality Rates
       The present value of the lifetime benefits of education will also depend on the
distribution of possible life spans. We use cohort mortality rates from the U.S. Social Security
Administration. We use the 1945 birth cohort table because we assume our stylized agents were
born in 1945 and turn 66 in the beginning of 2011. We use these mortality rates to calculate the
cumulative survival probabilities in equation [1] above. It is well-known that education is
negatively correlated with mortality rates (i.e., more highly educated individuals live longer).
We do not incorporate this into our calculations, however, because the survival probabilities
enter the lifetime utility function in equation [1], and the calculation of certainty equivalents is
not well-defined when the utility function itself differs across the two states being compared.




                                                13
4. ESTIMATING THE INCOME PROCESS
4.1 Labor income profile and shocks
       We first estimate the labor income process (equation (3)), by regressing the logarithm of
income on age dummies, individual fixed effects, and a set of other control variables. In the
estimation stage, we consider two alternative types of income: labor income only, and labor
income plus unemployment compensation. In our main analysis we will consider the first set of
estimations because, as previously discussed, we will model unemployment separately as a
different state. Nevertheless, we find it useful to compare the estimation results with those
obtained when combining all sources of income because this alternative specification is often
used both in the life-cycle consumption and savings and literature and in the labor economics
literature. For those aged 65+, only Social Security benefits are counted toward income.
Consequently, we are excluding records of people who work beyond age 65 or retire before 65.
This is done both for both practical and conceptual reasons: practically, it substantially simplifies
the computational process; conceptually, it allows us to abstract away from individual decisions
about whether to consume part of potential income in the form of earlier retirement. As is
standard in the literature, for purposes of solving the numerical model, we will capture the age
component of the income process as a third-order polynomial of age. Therefore, after estimating
this process, we regress the age dummies coefficients from the estimated income process on a set
of age polynomials. Figure 1 shows the fit of the third-order age polynomials over life cycle
labor income profile.


                                 --- Insert figure 1 about here. ---


       Finally, we compute the retirement income replacement ratios as described in section 3.3.
As noted above, the benefits and replacement ratios calculated based on the SSA benefit
calculator are very similar to the PSID household numbers after adjusting for the number of
individuals over age 65 in the household. As expected given the design of the non-linearity of the
Social Security benefit formula, the average Social Security benefits increase with the education
level ($1,532, $1,845 and $2,266, respectively for the different groups), while the replacement
ratios of average life-time earnings decrease (64.55%, 61.05% and 47.56%, respectively for the
different groups).



                                                 14
4.2 Variance Decomposition
        After obtaining the residuals from equation (3), we now decompose the income variation
into a permanent and a transitory component. 16 As previously discussed, we assume that the
permanent component follows a random-walk process, and we apply the methodology proposed
in Carroll and Samwick (1997) to estimate the variances of the two shocks. If we define ri ,d as

                  ri ,d  log(Yi *,t  d )  log(Yi*,t ) , d  {1, 2,...,39}           (6)

where Yt * is given by

                  log(Yi*,t )  log(Yi ,t )  fˆ (t , Z i ,t )                         (7)

it follows that
                  Var (ri ,d )  d   u2  2   2                                   (8)

We can thus estimate  u2 and  2 with any two difference series of ri ,d by running an OLS

regression of Var (ri ,d ) on d and a constant term (for all d). By doing so, we constrain the

estimates of  u2 and  2 to be the same across all individuals. In our estimates, we include all

possible series of ri ,d to maximize efficiency. We also apply Winsorization on ri ,d and replace

extreme values (below 1st percentile or above 99th percentile) with the values of 1st percentile and
99th percentile, respectively. Our results of variance decomposition are shown in table 2. We first
use annual labor income of those who are fully employed in a given year (that is, hour of
unemployment is zero) only, and then use labor plus unemployment income and also include
those who have experienced unemployment.


                                             --- Insert table 2 about here. ---


        Comparing across education groups we find a decreasing pattern for transitory shocks,
and a u-shape for permanent shocks. The null hypotheses that transitory shocks are the same and
permanent shocks are the same across education groups are both rejected. These results suggest
that less-educated workers face more year-on-year income risk, while college graduates have

16
  In section 3.2 we discussed the potential impact of biases due to unobserved heterogeneity and sample selection,
and evidence suggesting that they probably have a very small impact on our estimates.


                                                                 15
significantly higher career hetereogeneity. Previous studies have found mixed results on this
dimension. For example, Low, Meghir, and Pistaferri (2009) used both the SIPP and PSID, and
estimate higher volatility of both permanent and transitory shocks for those with higher
education level. However, they only consider two different education groups (“high school or
less” versus “at least some college”), which might explain the differences in the case of the
permanent shocks. Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994) used a limited time period - the 1983-
1987 PSID sample - and the same definition of levels of education as in our study, and find a
decreasing pattern for both types of shocks. Carroll and Samwick (1997) consider the 1981-1987
PSID sample and obtain a decreasing pattern for permanent shocks and a u-shape for transitory
shocks, across five different education groups.17,18
        The magnitudes of the volatilities for the permanent component (table 2) are slightly
lower than those reported in previous studies, but the differences are attributable to our use of
post-tax earnings. We have also run our analysis using pre-tax income and found results similar
to the previous literature. For example, in the specification that is more directly comparable with
ours, Low, Meghir, and Pistaferri (2009) obtain a standard deviation of 0.152 (pooled for all
education levels) for the permanent component. Guvenen (2009) utilizes the PSID from 1968 to
1993 and estimates volatilities between 0.100 and 0.158 for the permanent component,
depending on the education group and the earnings process specification. Carroll and Samwick
(1997) estimated volatilities of permanent income shocks between 0.107 and 0.166 across five
different education groups, and Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994) using the 1983-1987 PSID
sample and the same definition of levels of education as in our study, obtain volatilities of
permanent shocks between 0.126 and 0.181.
        Our estimates of transitory volatility are higher than those most commonly found in the
consumption and savings literature. For example, Carroll and Samwick (1997) estimate standard
deviations of transitory shocks between 0.185 and 0.257, while Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes
(1994) estimate values between 0.118 and 0.200. Four main factors contribute to our higher
estimates. First, as discussed above we consider after-tax income, and while this decreases the
17
   The five groups are: some high school, high school degrees, some college, college degrees, and post-secondary
degrees.
18
   Other studies either do not provide the same decomposition of shocks or do not report comparable numbers, but
overall the results are again mixed. Some found college graduates have the smallest wage variations (see, for
example, Jensen and Shore (2008), Dynan et al. (2007), Heckman et al. (2003), or Cameron and Tracy (1998)),
while others found higher educated group actually have larger wage variations (see, for example, Moffitt and
Gottschalk (2011), or Cunha and Heckman (2007)).


                                                      16
volatility of the permanent component of income, it increases the volatility of its transitory
component because tax rate changes become an additional source of (transitory) shocks. Second,
these two studies exclude income outliers while we prefer instead to winsorize the data.19 Third,
they estimate their profiles at the household-income level, while we use individual income data
because we want to measure the returns to education for a given individual. Naturally, when
measured at the household level, income volatility decreases due to the smoothing across
household members. Our choice of individual income data also follows standard practice in the
labor economics literature (see, for example, most of the papers cited in the previous paragraph).
Finally, we consider a different time period and, as we will show below (when we present Table
10), these variances have increased over time, consistent with the results in Moffitt and
Gottschalk (2011), Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994).
        Estimates of the volatility of transitory shocks can be upward biased due to measurement
error, and for this reason some authors prefer to “scale down” the estimated values. Gourinchas
and Parker (2002) argue for this type of adjustments to correct for measurement error and
potential upward estimation bias due to mis-specification of the earnings process. Bound and
Krueger (1991) study measurement error in a similar panel (the CPS), and conclude that 35% to
20% of the variance is indeed due to mis-measurement. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995)
assume that the transitory shocks are purely measurement error and exclude them completely
from their analysis. Given the possibility that these are over-stated, we will report two alternative
scenarios for the volatility parameters: one with the estimated parameters values and one where
we have scaled down our estimates by multiplying them by ¾.
        As previously discussed, even though we included individual fixed effects in the
estimation, there is still a potential upward bias in the estimate of the volatility of permanent
shocks due to time varying individual-level heterogeneity. Therefore, robustness analysis, we
also scale down these estimates by the same factor (¾).


4.3 Probability of unemployment, and income in unemployment-spell year



19
  For example, Carroll and Samwick (1997) exclude households whose income in any year is less than 20% of
average over sample period, while Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994) exclude households with annual income
less than $3,000. Including these exclusion criteria would eliminate several unemployed individuals from our
sample, and we want to capture this dimension of income risk as well.


                                                    17
       Our estimate of the income process for the employed is based on the sample those who
have positive labor income and zero hours of unemployment in that year. We then estimate
separately the income of those who were unemployed for some period during the year, and the
probability of such event occurring within our sample. In the U.S., an unemployed individual can
receive the unemployment insurance for up to 26 weeks. However, the average duration of
unemployment is substantially less than this: the mean unemployment spell in the U.S. is 9
weeks (McCall 1996, Meyer 1990). The mean replacement rate of weekly unemployment
benefits is around 45% of pre-displacement weekly earnings (McCall 1996). Hence, it is not
plausible to assume an agent is either fully-employed or fully-unemployed in an entire year when
we attempt to account unemployment risk in our model. To address this, we define
“unemployment rate” in a year as the proportion of individuals who ever experience
unemployment in that given year, regardless of the length of unemployment spell. The
“unemployment earnings” of these individuals are then defined as their unemployment benefits
when they are not working plus the labor earnings when they are working. In other words, the
“unemployment earnings” in our framework is the expected annual income from unemployment
benefits and labor earnings among those who experience any unemployment spells in a year.
Similarly, the replacement rate of unemployment earnings is calculated as the ratio of annual
income, including labor earnings and unemployment benefits if applicable, between those who
experience unemployment and those who do not experience unemployment in a given year.
       Table 3 tabulates the probability of experiencing an unemployment spell within a year in
our sample, across the different education groups (π(ei)). Similarly, for the different education
groups, we also report the average yearly income for the two separate samples (those with and
without an unemployment spell) which we then use to compute the replacement rate of income
during an unemployment state within our model (θ(ei)). The averages are computed using the
PSID sample weights.


                                 --- Insert table 3 about here. ---


       As expected, the probability of unemployment decreases significantly with education, as
did the volatilities of transitory income shocks above. This confirms that short-term income risk
is more severe for workers with less education. In particular, college graduates have a much



                                                18
lower probability of being unemployed than the other two groups (7.15% versus 14.7% for high
school graduates, and 20.05% for those with no high school). Of course, higher income
individuals lose a higher fraction of their income when unemployed (with a replacement rate of
52.87% versus 73.89% for high school graduates and 78.17% for those with no high school),
owing in large part to the fact that unemployment benefits are capped.


5. BASELINE RESULTS
       By solving the model for a given income process (and hence a given level of education),
we can compute the life-time expected utility of the agent conditional on education. Following
the convention in the literature, we express life-time utility as a certainty equivalent level of
consumption. In addition, we convert these certainty equivalents into wealth levels, since those
provide risk-adjusted present-values of human capital, and can thus be compared with direct
measures of the costs of education.


5.1 Gains from education: expected life-time earnings
       In this section, we start by calculating the gains from education by comparing average
outcomes conditional on education, without incorporating of the utility consequences of
unemployment and income risk. These results will allow us to disentangle the different
components of the returns to education
       Relative to the bulk of the existing literature on the returns to education, even our
baseline case has several important differences. First, we are computing lifetime present values
as opposed to wage differentials conditional on age. Second, we incorporate income and payroll
taxes, mortality rates and Social Security benefits. To understand the impact of these different
elements, we start with pre-tax earnings in the first two panels of table 4. Those are the only two
cases in paper in which the gains from education are expressed in pre-tax terms.


                                 --- Insert table 4 about here. ---


       In the first panel of table 4, we show the gains from education simply as the undiscounted
summation of mean pre-tax inflation-adjusted labor earnings between 22 and 65 multiplied by
the conditional survival probabilities for each age, by different education groups. In the second



                                                19
panel we repeat this calculation using a 1% real annual discount rate. We set the discount rate for
this calculation to 1% because our baseline discount factor in the utility-based model is 0.99,
thus allowing for an easier comparison of results between the two approaches. The percentage
gains are almost identical in the two cases, so we can focus on panel B. The net-present value of
a high school degree is $1,549,627, corresponding to a gain of $349,413 (29.1%) relative to the
no-high-school scenario, while the net-present value of a college degree is $2,543,858,
corresponding to a gain of $994,231 (64.16%) relative to a high school degree. These simple
present-value calculations are very much in-line with estimates of the value of a college degree
reported in the popular press.20
        In Panel C we repeat the calculations from Panel B, but using after-tax income. Naturally,
all present-values decrease and, due to the progressive nature of income taxation, it decreases
more for those with higher education. Workers with a high school degree have average after-tax
discounted lifetime earnings $257,858 higher than those without high school diploma (a 26.6%
increase), while individuals with college degrees have after-tax lifetime earnings which are
$667,072 higher than those of high school graduates (a 54.4% increase).
        In the panel D we show how the gains from education change after we add unemployed
agents to the sample. The gains from education here are calculated as the expected value of
earnings, which are equal to the likelihood of employment times expected labor earnings plus the
likelihood of unemployment multiplied by the level of unemployment benefits (discounted and
adjusted for mortality as in the previous panels). The comparison between panels C and D
confirms that considering the likelihood of unemployment will increase the value of education
due to the higher probability of unemployment for less educated people. The gains from high
school education increase to 27.3% and the gains from college increase to 55.16%.21 The effect
here is not very large because, as shown in table 3, the reduction in income during
unemployment is more severe for those with higher education. However, it is important to recall
that this calculation ignores risk preferences (we are only computing expected values) and, as
shown later on, the impact of income risk is much larger when we take into account for
individuals’ risk aversion.



20
   For example, http://usgovinfo.about.com/od/moneymatters/a/edandearnings.htm reports the results of Census
Bureau estimates that a college degree is worth about $1 million more over ages 25 to 65 than a high school degree.
21
   The dollar gains are slightly smaller since the net-present values are naturally lower for all.


                                                        20
       In the final panel (E) we include Social Security income, i.e., income received during the
retirement period. Naturally all present-values increase and, as a result, the dollar gains are also
higher. The percentage gains, however, are lower, reflecting the non-linear Social Security
benefit structure that provides higher replacement rates for individuals with lower lifetime
earnings. This is particularly noticeable for college graduates, for whom the percentage gain
decreases from 55.2% to 50.5%.
       Overall, these numbers are lower than those mentioned in conventional estimates of the
value of college education, especially those reported in the popular press, which often range from
$800,000 and $1,000,000. 22 This is due to the inclusion of taxes, Social Security benefits,
unemployment probabilities, mortality adjustments and time-discounting. The results in Panel B,
which only adjust for discounting and mortality risk, are actually very similar to conventional
estimates, suggesting the importance of the other factors. By comparing the results in the
different panels, we can see that the largest difference in levels and percentage gains comes from
the inclusion of income taxes. Next, we turn to a discussion of how these results change when
one takes into account risk preferences in a utility-based model.


5.2 Gains from education: a baseline case
       We now compute the returns to education from our utility-based calculations. In our
baseline case, we assume that all agents have a relative risk aversion coefficient (γ) of 2 and a
discount factor (β) of 0.99. We report both the certainty-equivalent consumption levels (standard
calculation within a utility-based model) and the corresponding certainty equivalent initial
wealth levels, the latter of which are more directly comparable to the results in Table 4. These
measures can be compared to the cost of education and with the typical estimates in the returns
to education literature. The results are shown in Table 5.


                                  --- Insert table 5 about here. ---


       In Panel A we first report the results without unemployment risk and without income
shocks, to facilitate the transition from Table 4. In other words, these calculations assume that all

22
    As another example, see a Wall Street Journal article on February 2, 2010 by Mary Pilon
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703822404575019082819966538.html?mod=WSJ_hps_sections_
personalfinance).


                                                 21
agents within a given education group will receive the average income within that group, just
like the ones in the previous table. Comparing the results we find much lower certainty
equivalent gains for both levels of education. For high school (college) the improvement in the
present value of after-tax life-time average earnings is now $219k ($545k) versus $287k ($696k)
in Panel E of Table 4, corresponding to percentage gains of 19.33% (40.30%) versus 26.25%
(50.49%) in the previous calculations. Since risk-preferences are still irrelevant in this
calculation, the differences in the results are coming exclusively from life-cycle aspects. In
particular, with upward sloping age-income profiles, agents are liquidity constrained early in life,
and therefore the marginal utility of current consumption is high. As one approaches retirement,
we observe the opposite. As a result, conditional on the level of average lifetime income, steeper
income profiles, such as the one for college graduates, are not as highly valued in utility terms as
they are in a simple present-value calculation.
           In Panel B we report results from the lifecycle model that include all sources of income
shocks. We find that the typical high school graduate will enjoy a 24% higher level of
consumption, per year, than those who did not attend high school at all. When expressed in terms
of life-time certainty equivalent (i.e. risk-adjusted) wealth, this corresponds to an increase of
$220k. The risk-adjusted present-discounted value of the human capital of an agent without any
high school education is $903k, while for a high school graduate that number rises to almost $1.1
million. In other words, an individual with relative risk aversion of 2, and discount factor of 0.99
should be willing to pay as much as $220k to attend and complete high school.
           The net gains from college education are again larger. The (risk-adjusted) present-value
of human capital of the average college graduate is more than 1.5 million dollars, and $432k
higher than the human capital of an otherwise identical high school graduate. This corresponds to
a 38.5% increase in annual certainty-equivalent consumption, and it is still significantly higher
than the cost of college education, even if we include the opportunity cost in terms of foregone
earnings during college. As a back-of-the-envelope calculation, in the academic year of 2008-
2009, average tuition and fees for a four-year public (private) college is $6,585 ($25,243) and the
cost for room and board is $7,707 ($8,996) per year, for a four-year (non-discounted) total of
$57,168 ($136,956).23 Even taking into account the forgone earnings from age 18-22 for those
that attend college instead of entering the labor force, college education is a positive present

23
     http://militaryfinance.umuc.edu/education/edu_college.html


                                                         22
value investment. However, the net benefit is far lower than the “million dollar” figures often
cited in the popular press – perhaps only a quarter as high.24
         By comparing the results in Panels A and B, we see that while the gains from high school
increase when we take into account earnings heterogeneity and risk preferences (from 19.33% to
24.36%), the gains from college actually decrease slightly (from 40.30% to 38.47%).25 These
results can be understood from the estimations results reported in tables 2 and 3. Relative to
workers without high school education, high school graduates have much lower income
volatilities (for both permanent and transitory shocks) and a much lower probability of suffering
an unemployment spell (with a very similar replacement ratio), Therefore, a high school degree
also decreases life-time earnings variability thus increasing its value even further once we take
into account for risk aversion. On the other hand, relative to high school graduates, college
graduates face a much more skewed earnings distribution with much higher career heterogeneity
(higher volatility of permanent earnings shocks). This is partially attenuated by the fact that they
are less subject to temporary shocks (lower volatility of transitory earnings shocks and a much
lower probability of unemployment), but the overall earnings distribution is more uncertain, and,
therefore, the corresponding percentage certainty equivalent gain is slightly lower when we
account for risk aversion.
         Finally, as previously discussed, the estimates of the volatility of earnings shocks are
potentially subject to measurement error and/or inflated due to unobserved individual-level
heterogeneity. To take this into account, in Panel C we repeat our calculations under alternative
volatility measures (we decrease our estimated numbers by multiplying by a factor of ¾). The
results are very similar and therefore we conclude that these potential concerns do not seem to
have a significant impact on our calculations. Consequently, for the remainder of the paper, we
only report results for the first case.




24
   The mean annual earnings of high school students aged between 18 and 22 in the PSID ranged from low-$30,000s
in earlier years to mid- or low-$20,000s in recent years (all in 2010 U.S. Dollars). The cost of attending college, in
terms of both forgone earnings plus college tuitions combined, is hence still dwarfed even by our smallest estimate
of gain from attending the college.
25
   If we compare dollar gains, the certainty equivalent wealth increase for high school graduates is almost unchanged
(from $219,234 to $220,004). But certainty equivalents are naturally much smaller once we account for uncertainty.
Therefore a given percentage gain would now correspond to a lower dollar value benefit. For the same reason, the
small reduction in the percentage wealth certainty equivalent gain from college actually corresponds to a very large
decrease in the dollar gain (from $545,477 to $432,053).


                                                         23
6. GAINS FROM EDUCATION: THE ROLE OF PREFERENCE HETEROGENEITY
       The previous results apply to an agent with a risk aversion coefficient of 2, and a discount
factor of 0.99. In this section we now consider different alternative values for the preferences
parameters, and explore how the gains from education might vary across different groups of the
population, and in particular they might be affected by the agents’ risk preferences.
       In Panel A of table 6 we report the gains from high school education measured in (risk-
adjusted) present-value of life-time human capital, both in dollar terms and in percentages.


                                  --- Insert table 6 about here. ---


       The gains from high school education increase as risk aversion increases. For example,
moving from 2 to 4 increases the certainty equivalent gain by $20-22k. As previously shown
(Tables 2 and 3), high school graduates have much lower income volatilities (for both permanent
and transitory shocks) and much lower unemployment risk than those without high school
education. Therefore, in addition to providing higher average income, a high school degree also
decreases life-time earnings variability which is particularly valuable for the more risk-averse
agents. Overall we find that, for reasonable preference parameters, the welfare gains can vary
from just over $201k (risk aversion of 1 and discount factor of 0.99) to nearly $253k (risk
aversion of 4 and discount factor of 0.99). These numbers highlight the role of preference
heterogeneity, and in particular risk preferences, when computing the certainty equivalents from
education.
       In panel B of Table 6 we report the returns to college education for different values of the
preference parameters. These gains are also sensitive to risk preferences, but they decrease with
risk aversion. For individuals with risk aversion of 1 the gains are close to $500k, while for those
with risk aversion of 4 they are approximately $300k. Part of this difference is simply due to the
fact that the dollar value of certainty equivalents naturally decreases with risk aversion, hence
even for the same percentage gain, the dollar value improvement would be lower. However, we
can see that, even in percentage terms, the gains are lower for the more risk-averse agents: close
to 30% versus approximately 40% for the less risk-averse agents.
       To understand these results we again need to consider the empirical estimates in tables 2
and 3. Relative to high school graduates, college graduates are less subject to temporary shocks



                                                 24
(lower volatility of transitory earnings shocks and a much lower probability of unemployment),
but they have more career heterogeneity (higher volatility of permanent earnings shocks). In
other words, although the average life-time earnings are much higher than for high school
graduates, the distribution is much more skewed. Therefore, the more risk-averse agents will
place a lower value on this this distribution of potential income realizations than would agents
with lower risk aversion coefficients. The significant heterogeneity in certainty equivalent gains
highlights again the importance of taking into account for heterogeneity in risk preferences when
computing the gains from education. Moreover, if we compare these numbers with the ones
reported in calculations in Table 4, we find that the gain for an agent with risk aversion of 4 is
actually less than half of the one computed by the simple baseline which implicitly assumes risk
neutrality (300 thousand dollars versus 696 thousand dollars).


7. GAINS FROM EDUCATION: GENDER DIFFERENCES
       In this section we study how the returns to education vary across genders. We start by
estimating the after-tax income process from the PSID for the male and female sub-samples
separately. In Table 7 we report the standard deviations of the different income components
(transitory and permanent) for men and women separately.


                                  --- Insert table 7 about here. ---


Without exception, all 6 standard deviations are higher for women than for men, both for
transitory (8.2%, 4.5% and 4.2%) and for permanent shocks (5.1%, 4.2% and 1.8%). These
differences are statistically significant and economically very large.
       In Table 8 we compute the average present-discounted value of life-time earnings, i.e. the
valuations under risk-neutrality, for both men and women separately. To account for the gender
difference in longevity, we compute the results in this section based on the mortality rates from
male and female cohort tables of 1945, respectively.


                                  --- Insert table 8 about here. ---




                                                 25
       There are three main results. First the average present-values are much smaller for
women than for men, for all education categories. The average discounted after-tax life-time
earnings of a woman with a high school degree are $968k versus $1,429k for a man with the
same level of education. Equally large differences apply for those without high school education
($633k for women versus $1,162k for men) and for those with a college degree ($1,341k for
women versus $2,144k for men).
       Second, the improvement in average discounted after-tax life-time earnings for high
school graduates is much higher for women than for men, $334k versus $266k, which, given the
much lower base earnings for women (discussed above), maps into a percentage gain of 52.72%
versus 22.92%, respectively. Third, this result is reversed for college graduates. While women
with a college degree enjoy an increase in discounted after-tax life-time earnings of $373k, the
equivalent number for men is $716k. In percentage terms the difference is “smaller” due again to
the lower base for women, but the result remains: 38.53% versus 50.10% respectively.
       In Table 9 we now report the gains from education for the men and women sub-samples
separately, under the utility-based calculations.


                                  --- Insert table 9 about here. ---


       The certainty equivalents for each level of education are much lower for women than for
men. This comes naturally from the results in both table 8, where we found the same pattern for
the average present-discounted values, and table 7, which showed that the earnings distribution
for women exhibits much higher volatility than the male counterpart. The results in table 7 also
suggested that the gains from education should increase much more for women than for men in
the utility-based calculations, because they benefit from much more significant reductions in
earnings volatility. Indeed this is what we find. The percentage certainty equivalent gain from
high school is dramatically higher for women than for men (75.28% versus 16.75% respectively).
A similar effect is present in the welfare gains from college degree where we now observe a
higher percentage gain for women than for men (40.65% versus 37.93%, respectively) even
though table 8 documented lower average life-time earnings increases for women (38.53%
versus 50.10%, respectively). These results once again re-enforce the importance of the utility-
based calculations.



                                                    26
8. GAINS FROM EDUCATION OVER TIME
        It is well-documented in labor economics literature that the education wage premia have
increased over time (for example, Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Goldin and Katz (2007),
Lemieux (2006), Card (1999), Katz and Autor (1999) or Katz and Murphy (1992)), particularly
in the 1980s.26 In addition, it has also been shown that earnings volatility has increased since
1980s (Moffitt and Gottschalk (2008), Cunha and Heckman (2007), and Gottschalk and Moffitt
(1994)).
        These findings have several possible implications for our study. Naturally, increases in
baseline returns to college education will increase the certainty equivalents. However, if the
simultaneous increase earnings variation is concentrated among the more educated workers, this
may decrease the gains from education for risk-averse agents. We address these issues in this
section.


8.1 Volatility Estimates for different time periods
        In the following analysis, we repeat our calculations for three separate sample periods:
1969-1980, 1981-1990, and 1991-2007. Even though these three periods have different length
(both in terms of time and waves of data), we consider these splits based on the (previously-
discussed) evidence that returns to education, especially to college degrees, have increased over
time, particularly during the 1980s. Our results also reflect the changes in the tax system: we
assume stylized agents retire in the end of 1980, 1990, and 2010, respectively, for the three
subsamples. And hence, in the 1969-1980 subsample, we apply 1980 payroll and federal income
tax schedules to earnings at age 65, the 1979 tax schedule to earnings at age 64, and so forth.
Similarly, the 1990 tax schedule is applied to age 65 earnings in the 1981-1990 subsample, the
1989 tax schedule is applied to age 64 earnings, etc. We use the same tax scheme as what we
used in previous two sections for the 1991-2007 subsample. Because the payroll tax was not
levied until 1937, earnings in 1935 and 1936 (i.e., age 20 and 21 earnings for the cohort retiring

26
   Different explanations have been proposed and discussed, namely an increased demand for college graduates
(Katz and Murphy (1992)). Related to this, some authors argue in favor of a skill-biased technological change
(Krueger (1993) and Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998)), which asserts that the technology development in 1980s and
early 1990s was biased toward higher-educated people. Although this theory has been challenged by some recent
studies (for example, Card and DiNardo (2002) or Lemieux (2006)), it also provides an explanation for the increase
of wage inequality in the U.S. since 1980s (Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008).


                                                       27
in the end of 1980) are not subject to the payroll tax. The U.S. income tax has, in general,
become less progressive over time. In Table 10 we report the standard deviations of the different
income components (transitory and permanent) for the three education groups in each sub-
sample.


                                 --- Insert table 10 about here. ---


       Consistent with the above-mentioned previous findings in the literature, 5 out of the 6
standard deviations are higher in the 1980s than in the first part of the sample (with the 6th
difference being statistically insignificant). The estimates for transitory volatility are
significantly higher for both college graduates (+4.4%) and high school graduates (+5.2%). For
permanent shocks, there are very large increases for college graduates (+3.6%) and for those
with no high school (+3.2%).
       In the later part of the sample we observe even larger increases in the point estimate of
transitory volatility for all groups: +11.8% for college graduates, 7.8% for high school graduates,
and +19.3% for those without high school. With regards to the permanent shocks, we now find
decreases for the two lowest education groups and a further increase for college graduates.
       Overall, college graduates have experienced significant increases in both sources of
earnings dispersion over time, i.e., both career heterogeneity and transitory earnings volatility are
much higher in the later sample. High school graduates have large experienced consistent
increases in transitory volatility, but the impact of permanent shocks has remained relatively
constant. Finally, those with no high school registered a very large increase in career uncertainty
in the 1980s, followed by a decrease in the later part of the sample when transitory volatility
almost doubled.


8.2 Certainty equivalent gains for different time periods
       As before, we start by reporting the simple average present-discounted value of life-time
earnings. This is shown in Table 11 for the three different sub-periods. To reflect the change in
longevity over time, we use the cohort mortality tables in 1915, 1925, 1945 for the 1969-1980
(age 66 in 1981), 1981-1990 (age 66 in 1991), and 1991-2007 (age 66 in 2011) subsamples,
respectively. We also account for the changes in Social Security benefits schedule by feeding



                                                 28
the age-earnings profile into the benefit calculator provided by the Social Security
Administration assuming stylized agents retire in the end of 1980, 1990, and 2010. Interestingly,
we observe noticeable reductions in the certainty equivalents from both high school and no-high
school in the 1980s (from $1,464k to $1,284k, and from $1,128k to $991k, respectively),
followed by a small recovery for the former in the third part of the sample (to $1,301k) and a
further marginal reduction for the latter (to $973k). For college, there was also a decreased in the
certainty equivalent in the 80s but a modest one (from $1,963k to $1,904k) followed an
increased in the 90s and beyond (to $2,099k).


                                 --- Insert table 11 about here. ---


       As a result, the gains from college education have increased consistently over time, both
in percentage terms (from 34.06% to 48.31% and then 61.31%) and in dollar value (from $499k
to $620k and then $798k). In percentage terms, the gains from high school remained constant in
the 1980s (29.47% versus 29.74%) and increased afterwards (to 33.73%). Due to the lower
certainty equivalent values in the 1980s, this corresponds to a decrease in the dollar gain measure
for that period ($292k versus $336k).
       In Table 12 we now report the gains from education for the three sub-samples, under the
utility-based calculations.


                                 --- Insert table 12 about here. ---


       For high school education, we again observe a slightly decrease in the percentage gain in
the 1980s, but a much larger gain in the final part of the sample. As shown in table 10, in the
1980s, the volatility of earnings increased both for high school graduates and for those without
high school (particularly for transitory shocks for the former, and for permanent shocks for the
latter). As a result the change in gains from education is mostly driven by the change in the
average expected value therefore this result is very similar to the one in Table 11. In the 1991-
2007 period, while both groups experienced reductions in career uncertainty and increases in the
volatility of transitory shocks, these increases were much more pronounced for the lower
education group. As a result the gains under the utility-based evaluation increase much more



                                                 29
than under the simple present-value comparison: 14.15% (from 33.65% to 47.80%) versus 4.26%
(from 29.47% to 33.73%).
       The results for college graduates exhibit even more significant differences. While in the
1980s we again observe similar changes in the certainty equivalent gains in Tables 11 and 12
(+14.25% and +17.95%, respectively), in the 1991-2007 period we actual find the opposite result:
the 13% increase in Table 11 is now a 14.98% decrease in Table 12. So, although the average
present-value of labor income for a college graduate has increased over this period, the
dispersion of outcomes is now significantly larger, particularly when compared with the one for
high school graduates (as previously shown in Table 10): in the 1980-1990 period both groups
had almost the same exact volatility of permanent shocks (9.4% and 9.6%) while in the 1991-
2007 period this volatility has decreased for high school graduates (to 8.5%) and increased for
college graduates (to 11%).
       Interestingly, under the utility-based calculations, the certainty equivalent gains from
college in the final part of the sample are significantly lower than the certainty equivalent gains
from high school, (34.06% versus 47.80%, respectively), and as a result even the dollar value
gains are very similar, ($391k versus $371k, respectively). Finally, it is interesting to compare
the magnitudes of gains from college in Tables 11 and 12. The simple average present-value
calculation (Table 11) suggests that the average agent should have been willing to pay (in tuition
and foregone earnings while in school) $620k to attend college in the 1980-1990 period, and
$798k in the 1991-2007 period, which dramatically over-estimate the actual certainty equivalents
(Table 12): $499k and $391k, respectively.


9. CONCLUSION
       The main theme of this paper is to show that life cycle factors, preference parameters,
earnings volatility, and fiscal parameters have important implications for how we think about the
returns to education. Using a utility-based model that is standard in the life-cycle consumption
and saving decisions analysis, we show that accounting for earnings risks and individual risk
preference significantly changes the relative values of three different education levels—no high
school, high school degree, and college degree. A high school degree confers not only higher
expected lifetime earnings, but also reduced earnings volatility and lower risk of unemployment.
College graduates on average have much higher expected lifetime earnings compared to high



                                                30
school graduates, but because they also face higher earnings volatility our results suggest the
value of college degree declines with risk aversion. Accounting for progressive income taxation,
unemployment insurance, and Social Security taxes and benefits further reduce the value of
education. Overall, we conclude that the value of a college (high school) degree to be $300k to
$500k ($200k to $250k), depending on the parametric assumption of risk aversion. While the
returns to a college education remain high relative to the cost of a college education (both in
terms of direct costs as well as foregone earnings while in school), the net gains are substantially
below those commonly reported in the popular press.
          We also find that while the value of education is larger for men in dollar terms, it is larger
for women in percentage terms. Similar to the other studies in returns to education, we also find
the value of education changed significantly over the past 40 years. Overall, these results show
the importance of accounting for risk, preferences, and the tax-and-transfer environment when
calculating the value of education. Finally it is important to mention that our analysis ignores
non-monetary payoffs from education, such as happiness, longevity, improved democratic
processes, or lowered crime rates, as studied by McMahon (2009) and Orepoulos and Salvanes
(2009).




                                                   31
REFERENCES
Abowd, John and David Card, 1989, “On The Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
Change,” Econometrica, 57, 2, 411-445.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, 1991, “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 979-1014.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa Kearney, 2008, "Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300-323.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger,1998, "Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1169-1213.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia E. Rouse, 1998, “Income, Schooling and Ability: Evidence from a
New Sample of Identical Twins”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113:1, 253-284.
Ashenfelter, Orley and David Zimmerman, 1997, “Estimates of the Return to Schooling from
Sibling Data: Fathers, Sons, and Brothers.” Review of Economics and Statistics 79: 1-9.
Athreya, Kartik and Janice Eberly, 2011, “The Education Risk Premium”, Working Paper.
Becker, Gary S., 1964, “Human Capital,” Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
Bhattacharya, Jay and Darius Lakdawalla, 2006, “Does Medicare benefit the poor?” Journal of
Public Economics, 90, 277-292.
Bound, John and Alan Krueger, 1991, “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 9, 1, 1-24.
Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman, 1994, “Endowments and the
Allocation of Schooling in the Family and the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment”,
Journal of Political Economy 102: 1131-1174.
Cameron, Stephen, and Joseph Tracy, 1998, “Earnings Variability in the United States: An
Examination Using Matched-Cps Data,” Working Paper.
Card, David, 1999, "The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings," in Handbook of Labor
Economics, Orley Ashenfelter, and David Card, eds. (New York, NY: Elsevier).
Card, David, 2001, “Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
problems,” Econometrica, 69: 5, 1127–1160.
Card, David, and John E. DiNardo, 2002, "Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles," Journal of Labor Economics, 20, 733-783.
Carroll, Christopher, 1997, “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1–55.
Carroll, Christopher, and Andrew Samwick, 1997, “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(1), pp. 41-71.
Chamberlain, Gary and Keisuke Hirano, 1999, “Predictive Distributions Based on Longitudinal
Earnings Data,” Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 55-56.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Ming-Ching Luoh, 2003, “Gender Differences in Completed
Schooling,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 3, 559-577.


                                              32
Chen, Stacey, 2008, “Estimating the Variance of Wages in the Presence of Selection and
Unobserved Heterogeneity”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 275-289.
Cocco, Joao, Francisco Gomes, and Pascal Maenhout, 2005, “Portfolio Choice Over The Life
Cycle,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 491-533.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman, 2007, “The Evolution of Inequality, Heterogeneity and
Uncertainty in Labor Earnings in the U.S. Economy,” NBER Working Paper 13526.
Davis, Steven, Felix Kubler and Paul Willen, 2006, “Borrowing Costs and the Demand for
Equity over the Life Cycle,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 348-362.
Dynan, Karen, Douglas Elmendorf, and Daniel Sichel, 2007 “The Evolution of Household
Income Volatility,” Working Paper.
Dynarski, Susan, and Jonathan Gruber, 1997, “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 229-303.
Chamberlain, Gary, 1977, “Omitted Variable Bias in Panel Data: Estimating the Returns to
Schooling”, Annals de l'Insee 30-31: 49-82.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, 2007, “The Race Between Education and Technology: The
Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005”, NBER Working Paper 12984.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, “Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation:
Understanding the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 60, 869-904.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt, 1994, “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S.
Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 217-54.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan Parker, 2002, “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,”
Econometrica, 70, 47–91.
Guvenen, Fatih, 2009 “An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes.” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 12(1), pp. 58-79.
Griliches, Zvi, 1977, “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems”,
Econometrica 45: 1-22.
Harmon, Colm and Ian Walker, 1995, “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling for the
United Kingdom”, American Economic Review 85: 1278-1286.
Heckman, James, Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd, 2003, “Fifty Years of Mincer Earnings
Regressions,” NBER Working Paper 9732.
Hill, Martha, 1991, “The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: A User's Guide,” Sage Publications.
Hoffmann, Florian, 2009, “An Empirical Model of Life-Cycle Earnings and Mobility Dynamics”,
Working Paper.
Hubbard, Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes, 1994, “The Importance of Precautionary
Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving,” NBER Working Paper 4516. 1994.
Hubbard, Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes, 1995, “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 360–399.




                                             33
Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron, 2006, “Human capital and earnings
distribution dynamics,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 265–290.
Huggett, Mark and Greg Kaplan, 2012, “The Money Value of a Man”, Working Paper
Georgetown.
Ionescu, Felicia, 2011, “Risky Human Capital and Alternative Bankruptcy Regimes for Student
Loans”, Working Paper.
Jensen, Shane, and Stephen Shore, 2008, “Changes in the Distribution of Income Volatility,”
Working Paper.
Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor, 1999, "Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality," in Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley Ashenfelter, and David Card, eds. (New
York, NY: Elsevier).
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy, 1992, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35-78.
Krueger, Alan B., 1993, "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Microdata 1984-1989," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 33-60.
Lemieux, Thomas, 2006, "Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy
Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?," American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 461-498.
Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2009, “Wage Risk and Employment Risk
over the Life Cycle,” NBER Working Paper 14901.
MaCurdy, Thomas, 1982, “The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of
Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis”, Journal of Econometrics, 18, 83-114.
McCall, Brian P., 1996, “Unemployment Insurance Rules, Joblessness, and Part-Time Work,”
Econometrica, 64 (3), 647-682.
McMahon, Walter W., 2009, “Higher Learning, Greater Good: The Private and Social Benefits
of Higher Education,” The Johns Hopkins University Press
Miller, Paul, Charles Mulvey and Nick Martin, 1995, “What do Twins Studies Reveal About the
Economic Returns to Education? A Comparison of Australian and U.S. Findings”, American
Economic Review 85: 586-599.
Mincer, Jacob, 1974 “Schooling, Experience, and Earnings,” New York: NBER Press
Meyer, Bruce D., 1991, “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,” NBER Working
Paper 2546.
Moffitt, Robert and Peter Gottschalk, 2011, “Trends in the Transitory Variance of Male Earnings
in the U.S., 1970-2004,” NBER Working Paper 16833.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell Salvanes, 2009, “How Large are the Returns to Schooling? Hint:
Money Isn’t Everything”, NBER Working Paper 15339.
Restuccia, Diego and Carlos Urrutia, 2004, “Intergenerational Persistence of Earnings: The Role
of Early and College Education”, American Economic Review, 94 (5), 1354-1378.
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, 1997, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments”, Econometrica 65: 557-586.


                                              34
Figure 1: Labor Income Profile over Age

                                             Labor Income Profile over Age
                                                         All PSID Heads
                               80
   Thousands of 2010 U.S. Dollars
   0    20      40     60




                                    20      30           40          50             60             70
                                                               Age

                                         No HS, Age Dummies               No HS, 3rd Order Poly.
                                         HS Grad, Age Dummies             HS Grad, 3rd Order Poly.
                                         Coll Grad, Age Dummies           Coll Grad, 3rd Order Poly.




                                                              35
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, PSID Household Head Aged 20-65

                                             Panel A
                                                           High School
                                No High School                                    College Graduates
                                                            Graduates
     Number of Agents                1,785                      3,706                  1,389
Average Number of Records
                                       8.3                       9.4                    11.0
       Each Agent
                                             Panel B
               Proportion of                         Years of      Labor Income        Number of
    Year                            Age
                   Male                             Education      in 2010 USD          Agents
    1970          85.98%           42.59               11.02            $50,240           1,397
    1980          81.07%           39.34               12.18            $50,222           1,860
    1990          77.88%           39.50               12.73            $49,430           1,907
    2001          77.87%           41.13               12.98            $55,957           2,314




                                               36
Table 2: Variance Decomposition
                                  Panel A: Labor Income Only
                                                    High School
                          No High School                                  College Graduates
                                                     Graduates
                               0.473                   0.329                     0.326
    (Transitory)
                              (0.018)                 (0.008)                   (0.009)
                               0.112                   0.097                     0.100
   u (Permanent)
                              (0.003)                 (0.001)                   (0.002)
                     Panel B: Labor Income Plus Unemployment Income
                                                     High School
                          No High School                                  College Graduates
                                                      Graduates
                              0.541                      0.397                   0.375
     (Transitory)
                             (0.018)                    (0.009)                 (0.009)
                              0.119                      0.097                   0.101
    u (Permanent)
                             (0.003)                    (0.002)                 (0.001)
Note: Numbers are standard deviations of the variance components with clustered standard errors
in parentheses.




                                              37
Table 3: Expected Income, Unemployment Rate, Unemployment Income and Replacement Rate
of Average Employed Worker’s Income, by Levels of Education
                                                  No High    High School     College
                                                   School     Graduates     Graduates
Expected Annual Labor Income without
                                                 $28,481.93  $36,266.45    $57,117.56
Unemployment Spells in a Year
Likelihood of Experiencing Unemployment in a
                                                   20.05%      14.79%        7.15%
Year
Expected Annual Labor plus Unemployment
                                                 $22,264.32  $26,797.27    $30,198.05
Income with Unemployment
Replacement Rate of Income, with versus without
                                                   78.17%      73.89%        52.87%
Unemployment
Expected Annual Social Security Earnings upon
                                                 $18,384.00  $22,140.00    $27,192.00
Retirement
Replacement Rate of Retirement Earnings         64.55%        61.05%        47.56%




                                          38
Table 4: Gains from Education: Expected Life-Time Earnings
  Panel A: Pre-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65, without Adjustment for
                         Likelihood of Unemployment, No Discount
   Education Level         Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain           Percentage Gain
No High School                $1,469,279                   --                       --
High School                   $1,905,949                $436,670                 29.72%
College                       $3,179,050               $1,273,101                66.80%
    Panel B: Discounted Pre-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65, without
             Adjustment for Likelihood of Unemployment (Discount Rate = 1%)
   Education Level         Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain           Percentage Gain
No High School                $1,200,215                   --                       --
High School                   $1,549,627                $349,413                 29.11%
College                       $2,543,859                $994,231                 64.16%
    Panel C: Discounted Post-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65, without
              Adjustment for Likelihood of Unemployment (Discount Rate = 1%)
   Education Level         Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain           Percentage Gain
No High School                 $969,071                    --                       --
High School                   $1,226,929                $257,858                 26.61%
College                       $1,894,001                $667,072                 54.37%
     Panel D: Discounted Post-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65, with
             Adjustment for Likelihood of Unemployment (Discount Rate = 1%)
   Education Level         Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain           Percentage Gain
No High School                 $926,652                    --                       --
High School                   $1,179,551                $252,898                 27.29%
College                       $1,830,184                $650,633                 55.16%
   Panel E: Discounted Post-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65 plus Social
 Security Earnings between Age 66 and 100, with Adjustment for Likelihood of Unemployment
                        between Age 22 and 65 (Discount Rate = 1%)
   Education Level         Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain           Percentage Gain
No High School                $1,091,859                   --                       --
High School                   $1,378,510                $286,651                 26.25%
College                       $2,074,542                $696,032                 50.49%
Note: All numbers in panels A through E are adjusted for likelihood of survival based on the
Social Security 1945 cohort mortality table.


                                               39
Table 5: Gains from Education in the Baseline Case (Risk Aversion Equal to 2 and Discount
Rate Equal to 0.99).

                      Panel A: Without unemployment risk or income risk
      Education         Consumption         Percentage       Total Wealth       Total Wealth
        Level               CE                 Gain               CE            CE Increase
    No High
                           $26,518              --            $1,134,150              --
    School
    High School            $31,644           19.33%           $1,353,384          $219,234
    College                $44,398           40.30%           $1,898,861          $545,477
                                        Panel B: Baseline
      Education         Consumption         Percentage       Total Wealth       Total Wealth
        Level               CE                 Gain               CE            CE Increase
    No High
                           $21,116              --             $903,111               --
    School
    High School            $26,260           24.36%           $1,123,116          $220,004
    College                $36,362           38.47%           $1,555,169          $432,053
                                Panel C: With adjusted volatilities
      Education         Consumption         Percentage       Total Wealth       Total Wealth
        Level               CE                 Gain               CE            CE Increase
    No High
                           $21,611              --             $924,282               --
    School
    High School            $26,824           24.12%           $1,147,237          $222,955
    College                $37,344           39.22%           $1,597,168          $449,931
Note: In Panel C we report results for the case in which the estimated volatilities were scaled
down by ¾ to take into account for potential measurement error.




                                                40
Table 6: Gains from Education for Different Values of the Preference Parameters, with
Unemployment and Income Risks
                                  Panel A: High School Education
Education Level      γ        β          Total Wealth CE Gain        Wealth Percentage Gain
  High School        1      0.97               $215,086                      20.94%
  High School        1      0.99               $201,357                      19.95%
  High School        2      0.97               $222,912                      24.34%
  High School        2      0.99               $220,004                      24.36%
  High School        4      0.97               $242,757                      34.38%
  High School        4      0.99               $252,936                      38.49%
                                    Panel B: College Education
Education Level      γ        β          Total Wealth CE Gain        Wealth Percentage Gain
    College          1      0.97               $486,797                      39.19%
    College          1      0.99               $506,942                      41.87%
    College          2      0.97               $406,178                      35.67%
    College          2      0.99               $432,053                      38.47%
    College          4      0.97               $300,453                      31.66%
    College          4      0.99               $301,009                      33.07%




                                               41
Table 7: Variance Decomposition by Gender Subsamples
                                          Panel A: Men
                                                     High School
                           No High School                                  College Graduates
                                                      Graduates
                                0.454                   0.324                    0.325
  (Transitory)
                               (0.018)                 (0.007)                  (0.008)
                                0.105                   0.093                    0.098
 u (Permanent)
                               (0.003)                 (0.001)                  (0.001)
                                         Panel B: Women
                                                       High School
                           No High School                                    College Graduates
                                                        Graduates
                                  0.536                   0.369                    0.367
  (Transitory)
                                 (0.033)                 (0.007)                  (0.017)
                                  0.156                   0.135                    0.116
 u (Permanent)
                                 (0.005)                 (0.001)                  (0.003)
Note: Numbers are standard deviations of the variance components with clustered standard errors
in parenthesis. Calculated with labor earnings only using agent-year records with no
unemployment spells in a given year.




                                              42
Table 8: Gains from Education: Expected Lifetime Earnings by Gender
                                        Panel A: Males
  Education Level        Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain        Percentage Gain
No High School              $1,162,280                      --                 --
High School                 $1,428,640                   $266,359           22.92%
College                     $2,144,436                   $715,796           50.10%
                                     Panel B: Females
  Education Level        Lifetime Earnings         Earnings Gain        Percentage Gain
No High School               $633,847                       --                 --
High School                  $967,997                    $334,150           52.72%
College                     $1,341,005                   $373,008           38.53%
Note: The Table reports discounted Post-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65
plus Social Security Earnings between Age 66 and 100, with Adjustment for Likelihood of
Unemployment between Age 22 and 65 (Discount Rate = 1%), and adjustment for likelihood of
survival based on the Social Security 1945 cohort mortality table.




                                             43
Table 9: Gains from Education in the Baseline Case (Risk Aversion Equal to 2 and Discount
Rate Equal to 0.99), by Gender
                                    Men                                  Women
 Education Level
                    Total Wealth CE    Percentage Gain    Total Wealth CE    Percentage Gain
No High School         $999,261               --             $438,464               --
High School           $1,166,678           16.75%            $768,517            75.28%
College                $1,609,229          37.93%           $1,080,953           40.65%




                                             44
Table 10: Variance Decomposition by Different Sub-periods
                                     Panel A: 1968-1980
                                                     High School
                           No High School                                  College Graduates
                                                      Graduates
                                0.433                   0.270                    0.239
  (Transitory)
                               (0.011)                 (0.006)                  (0.008)
                                0.101                   0.090                    0.060
 u (Permanent)
                               (0.002)                 (0.001)                  (0.001)
                                     Panel B: 1980-1990
                                                     High School
                           No High School                                  College Graduates
                                                      Graduates
                                0.419                   0.322                    0.283
  (Transitory)
                               (0.030)                 (0.010)                  (0.007)
                                0.133                   0.094                    0.096
 u (Permanent)
                               (0.005)                 (0.002)                  (0.001)
                                     Panel C: 1991-2007
                                                       High School
                           No High School                                    College Graduates
                                                        Graduates
                                  0.612                   0.400                    0.411
  (Transitory)
                                 (0.055)                 (0.010)                  (0.014)
                                  0.115                   0.085                    0.110
 u (Permanent)
                                 (0.009)                 (0.002)                  (0.002)
Note: Numbers are standard deviations of the variance components with clustered standard errors
in parenthesis. Calculated with labor earnings only using agent-year records with no
unemployment spells in a given year.




                                              45
Table 11: Gains from Education: Expected Lifetime Earnings by Different Sub-periods
                                    Panel A: 1968-1980
  Education Level        Lifetime Earnings        Earnings Gain          Percentage Gain
No High School              $1,128,494                   --                     --
High School                 $1,464,063               $335,569                29.74%
College                     $1,962,671               $498,608                34.06%
                                    Panel B: 1980-1990
  Education Level        Lifetime Earnings        Earnings Gain          Percentage Gain
No High School               $991,335                    --                     --
High School                 $1,283,529               $292,194                29.47%
College                     $1,903,626               $620,096                48.31%
                                    Panel C: 1991-2007
Education Level          Lifetime Earnings        Earnings Gain          Percentage Gain
No High School               $972,850
High School                 $1,300,993               $328,142                33.73%
College                     $2,098,588               $797,595                61.31%
Note: The Table reports discounted Post-Tax Lifetime Labor Earnings between Age 22 and 65
plus Social Security Earnings between Age 66 and 100, with Adjustment for Likelihood of
Unemployment between Age 22 and 65 (Discount Rate = 1%), and adjustment for likelihood of
survival based on the Social Security 1945 cohort mortality table.




                                             46
Table 12: Gains from Education in the Baseline Case (Risk Aversion Equal to 2 and Discount
Rate Equal to 0.99), by Different Sub-Periods

                                              Panel A: 1968-1980
    Education Level                                Total Wealth
                          Total Wealth CE                              Percentage Gain
                                                   CE Increase
  No High School              $936,476                  --                    --
  High School                $1,264,795             $328,319               35.06%
  College                    $1,658,062             $393,267               31.09%
                                              Panel B: 1981-1990
    Education Level                                Total Wealth
                          Total Wealth CE                              Percentage Gain
                                                   CE Increase
  No High School              $761,847                  --                    --
  High School                $1,018,213             $256,366               33.65%
  College                    $1,517,548             $499,335               49.04%
                                              Panel C: 1991-2007
    Education Level                                Total Wealth
                          Total Wealth CE                              Percentage Gain
                                                   CE Increase
  No High School              $776,173                  --                    --
  High School                $1,147,194             $371,021               47.80%
  College                    $1,537,933             $390,739               34.06%




                                             47
