                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT IN EUROPE:
                DIAGNOSIS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS




                         Jeffrey D. Sachs




                      Work-ing Paper No. 1830




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 1986




Presented at the Seminar on Unemployment, sponsored by the SAF, in
Yx-tahoim, Sweden, in September 1985. I would like to thank Sabine
Miltner for hepFui discussions and excellent research assistance,
and Merri Ansara and Rochelle Furman for careful preparation of the
manuscript. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   ER Drking Paper         #1830
                                                   February 1986




                          High Unemployment in Europe:
                       Diagnosis and Policy Implications



                                    ABSTRACT



     Econometric evidence suggests that the non—accelerating inflation rate of
unemployment (the NAIRU) has risen sharply in Europe in the past fifteen
years. In the first section of this paper, I review the recent proliferation
of supply-side models that say interesting things about why the NAIRU has
increased so substantially in Europe. In the second section of the paper, I
employ a simple example to show how aggregate demand should optimally be
managed in response to transitory and permanent supply shocks, especially
those shocks that cause a persistent rise in the NAIRU. Also, I discuss some
policy implications of the increasingly popular "hysteresis hypothesis, that
the NAIRU itself is influenced by the time path of actual unemployment.




                                                   Jeffrey Sachs
                                                  1partirent of      EconontLcs
                                                  Harvard University
                                                  Littauer•   M-14
                                                  carrbridge, NA 02138
         Unemployment continues to rise in Europe, as it has in almost every year

 since 1970. The unemployment rate is at double digit rates in Belgium, Italy,

 Netherlands, and the U.K., and is quickly approaching the double digit level

 in France. Very few countries in Europe (notably Austria, Sweden, and

Switzerland) have been able to avoid the scourge of high unemployment, and

even in those cases, unemployment has been avoided only through other costly

expedients. Remarkably, even though inflation seems well under control in

many high-unemployment countries (especially Germany and the Netherlands),

there continues to be great pessimism in the ability of the European economies

to reverse the trend of swelling unemployment.

     Of course, such pessimism may prove unfounded. Continuing low rates of

inflation in Germany are now provoking political pressures in that country in

support of expansionary measures. Also, two favorable supply "shocks" are

looming on the horizon. A sharp decline in the price of oil, or a sharp

depreciation of the U.S. dollar relative to the European currencies, would

offer European policymakers significant scope for expansionary actions.     Also,

real structural reforms in several countries have begun to lay the groundwork

for sustained growth. Ironically, such reforms are most in evidence in

Socialist France, where Mitterand is now valiantly reversing the lax wage

policies of Giscard D'Estaing and of his own administration in its first two

years.

     On the darker side, however, the reasons for caution in stimulating the

European economies are all too evident. Contrary to the optimism of some
American macroeconomists, such as Tobin (1984) and Gordon (1985), the

warning signs against rapid expansion still abound. Consider the case of the

United Kingdom for example, with the following recent pattern of inflation and

unemployment:


                           1983      1984      1985


     Inflation (CPI)        4.6       5.0       5.1

     Unemployment Rate     12.7      13.0      13.3


     Source: CPI is taken from the International Financial Statistics; the
     unemployment rate is the standardized OECD unemployment rate for the U.K.
     CPI inflation for 1985 is the year—over—year inflation rate for August.
     The unemployment rate for 1985 is the average for January to May.


The standard Keynesian, or demand-centered analysis, would argue that

unemployment rates in the range of 12 or 13 percent provide a prima facie case

for expansion, particularly since unemployment averaged a "mere 4.8 percent in

the period 1970-80. But such models would also predict that the extremely high

rates of the past three years should have caused a significant reduction in

inflation, something that they manifestly did not accomplish! Econometric

equations that I presented in 1983 (Sachs, 1983b) correctly suggested that even

at very high unemployment rates in the United Kingdom, little progress in infla-

tion could be expected in the absence of other policy reforms (which have not

been forthcoming).

     The data from the U.K., and from most other countries in Europe, strongly

reject the key element of the demand-centered policy framework: the assumption

of a stable rate of unemployment above which demand expansion is
                                       —3-


 non—inflationary. This threshhold rate, long christened the NAIRU (for

 non—accelerating inflation rate of unemployment), has been anything but stable

 in the past decade. The movements of actual unemployment rates relative to

historical averages, therefore, provide little direct evidence as to whether a

demand expansion is warranted or is likely to be inflationary. As voluminous

recent research has shown, the scope for demand expansion can be determined

only after a careful analysis of the supply conditions of the economy in

question.

     I attempt two things in this paper. In the first section of the paper,

I review the recent proliferation of supply-side models that say interesting

things about why the NAIRU has increased so substantially in Europe. In the

second section of the paper, I explore the design of aggregate demand

management policies in response to transitory and permanent supply shocks,

especially those shocks that cause a persistent rise in the NAIRU. Also, I

discuss some policy implications of the increasingly popular hypothesis that

the NAIRU itself is influenced by the time path of actual unemployment. Many

analysts have recently suggested that when economies are run at very slack

levels, the NAIRU itself is likely to rise. Unemployed workers lose the

skills required to reenter the job market; old factories are scrapped rather

than re—opened; new factories are not built. Eventually, it becomes difficult

to move down from the high unemployment levels because the opportunities for

re-absorbing the old job losers are no longer available. The high level of

slack becomes the new inflation threshhold.

     If this "hysteresis't (i.e. path—dependency) effect is in fact powerful,

it would have subtle implications for demand management. Some have argued
                                                 -4-


that such a possibility would provide a strong case of "going for growth",

since the NAIRU could be sharply lowered by several years of high employment

policies. The model below is not particularly supportive of this view,

however. With a high NAIRU, going for growth implies going for inflation,

even if the NAIRU will ultimately move down in response to strong demand

conditions. The model does suggest, on the other hand, that even one-time

blips in domestic inflation can cause permanent increases in the NAIRU and in

the actual unemployment rate, since optimizing policymakers will want to

absorb some of the inflation shock in the form of higher short-run

unemployment, which in turn will cause a persistent rise in the NAIRU.



I.     The Rise in the NAIRU in Europe:
       Empirical Evidence and Theoretical Explanations

       The cornerstone of the analysis that follows is a Phillips curve equation

that links current inflation, ,            to   the actual unemployment rate U, the

NAIRU, U*., and lagged or expected inflation itt_i:


       (1)   ir. =   - (U   -
                                U)   +


In   wage-contracting models, and in most empirical inflation equations,

      measures past inflation or built—in wage and price inertia. In rational

expectations models,             should be interpreted as the (t-1)st period expecta-

tion of inflation in period t. From (1), ir., exceeds past inflation (or past

expectations of inflation)               if and only if actual unemployment U.

is less than the NAIRU U. Assuming that demand management is feasible,

so that the policymakers can select the level of actual unemployment

Ut, inflation will tend to fall as long as Ut exceeds U, and inflation

will tend to rise in the opposite case. In rational expectations models in
                                          —5—


which systematic demand policies are ineffective in controlling
                                                                  Ut,

the actual unemployment rate must necessarily equal the NAIRU in expectation,

since E(1r) =      so that E(Ut) =
                                     U.
     Neither the standard Keynesian models nor the standard rational

expectations models have much to say about the determinants of U. In

Friedman's famous (1968) description of the natural rate of unemployment,
                                                                             U
is simply the level of unemployment that "would be ground out of the Wairasian

system of general equilibrium equations." In Keynesian models, U is taken as a

datum, as it has been in almost all rational expectations models. In both cases

the focus has been on the determinants of the gap of Ut and U arid rather than

on the level of U itself.

     The neglect of U, or the association of U with frictional unemployment,

was a pragmatic choice in the 1960's and early 1970's when the NAIRU seemed to

be reasonably constant. However, since the early 1970's, policymakers and

economic theorists and econometricians have had to confront the overwhelming

evidence of a steep rise in U in most of the major economies of Europe. In

1979, Bruno and I argued that the scope for demand expansion in Europe was

very limited. In Sachs (1979) I suggested that the differing nature of wage

setting in the U.S. and Europe helped to explain why the U.S. had been able

to reduce unemployment after the first OPEC oil shock. More recently, Grubb,

Layard and Symons (1984) have put it this way:

         The main reason unemployment is high is that governments fear the
    effects on inflation if unemployment were lower. . .This is not of course
    the same as saying that governments have chosen to produce the exact
    levels of unemployment which we currently have. But governments do
    constantly say they cannot reflate without abandoning their inflation
    targets. We pass no judgement on whether their inflation targets are
    right, but we do offer support for the view that it would be impossible
    to ref late without a worse inflation performance (unless one had more
    effective incomes policies). (p.57)
                                         -6-


     A great deal of recent econometric work backs up this conclusion. Grubb,

Jackman, and Layard (1982,1983) have made estimates of the changes in the

NAIRU for several countries; Layard, Basevi, et. al. (1984) update these

results; Coe and Gagliardi (1985) at the OECD have also offered estimates

through 1983. The results uniformally show a rise over time in the rate of

unemployment consistent with steady inflation. For the EC countries as a

group, Layard, Basevi, et. al. have found the following:



                        Actual Unemployment (EC)    Estimated NAIRU


        1966—70              2.4                       2.6

        1971—75              3.2                       5.3

        1976—80              5.4                       5.3

        1981-83              8.8                       7.6


        Source: Layard, Basevi, et. al. (1984), p.18


The data are interesting for two reasons. First, of course, is the sharp

upward trend in the NAIRU. According to these estimates, of the 6.4 (8.8-2.4)

percentage point rise in average unemployment from 1966-70 to 1981-83, fully

5.0 (7.6 —   2.6)   percentage points are attributable to a rise in the natural

rate, and only 1.4 percentage points are therefore attributable to an

increasing gap of U. and U. Cumulatively, unemployment is wholly

attributable to the NAIRU, in the sense that the cumulative sums of actual and

NAIRU unemployment rates are both 19.8 percentage points over the period

1966-83. On average, actual unemployment has equalled the inflation-threshhold
                                        —7—


 unemployment. The excess of recent unemployment above the NAIRU is merely

 serving to reduce the inflation built into the EC economies during the episode

of 1971-75 when actual unemployment was far below the NAIRU.

      There are two interpretations as to why the actual and the NAIRU rates

have moved rather closely together. Most obviously, policymakers have kept

actual Ut near to the rising U in order to keep inflation from rising even

more than it did in the 1970s. Alternatively, the causality could be in the

reverse direction, with the sharp increases in actual unemployment raising the

NAIRU, as the hysteresis hypothesis suggests. Causality is difficult to

establish; it is reasonable to believe that both effects have played a role.

     Individual country estimates show a rather similar pattern. The

estimates of Coe and Gagliardi, and of Layard, Basevi, et al., are reproduced

in Table 1.    In Germany, France, the U.K. and the Netherlands, there is

evidence in both studies of sizable upward shifts in the NAIRU, and of close

movements through time of the actual unemployment rates and the NAIRU rates.

Interestingly, there is little apparent rise in the NAIRU in the U.S., Italy,

and Austria.

     In view of the traditional link of U with "frictional" unemployment,

it might seem fruitful to try to explain the rise in U with variables that

can shift the frictional rate. Such candidates include: (1) a demographic

shift in the labor force, such a rising proportion of young workers, who have

high rates of unemployment even when the aggregate unemployment rate is low;

or (2) job mismatch, as evidenced by an outward shift in the Beveridge curve,

that links vacancies and unemployment rates. A large number of studies have

now tracked down these possible culprits, and the results have been negative
              Table 1. Estimates of the NAIRU in Europe and the U.S.

                                     Average
                                   Unemployment              NAIRU Estimates
                 Time Period           Rate            (1)                     (2)



Germany           1967—1970            1.0             0.7                     1.3
                  1971—1975            1.8             3.3                     1.2
                  1976—1980            3.6             2.4                 3.5
                  1981- 1983           6.3             3.6                 6.2

France            1966- 1970           2.1                                 2.2
                  1971—1975            2.7             4.5                 3.3
                  197 6—1980           5.2             4.8                 5.2
                  1981—1983            8.3             7.7                 6.9

United Kingdom    1967- 1970           2.2             7.1                 2.4
                  1971—1975            3.0             4.2                 4.0
                  1976-1980            5.4             7.6                 4.7
                  1981—1983           10.6             9.4                 9.2

Italy             1966—1970            5.5             7.5                 7.8
                  1971—1975            5.8             5.4                 6.6
                  1976—1980            7.1             5.2                 6.5
                  1981-1983            9.1             5.4                 7.5

Austria           1969—1973            1.4             1.1
                  1974—1979            1.8             1.4                 NA
                  1980-1983            3.0             2.4

Netherlands       1969—1973            2.5             3.0
                  1974—1979            5.2             4.5                 NA
                  1980-1983            9.3             8.7

United States     1961-1963            4.7                                 59
                  1967—1969           3.6              5.4                 5.9
                  1970-1981            5.4             5.4                 5.8
                  1974—1981           6.9              6.5                 7.1
                  1982-1983           9.7              6.1                 6.8



   Source: Coe and Gagliardi (1985, Table 11) -

              (1) NAIRU estimates given in Column (1) are those shown
                   as column (a2) in Coe and Gagliardi.

              (2) For the United States the source is Braun (1984),
                   "Productivity and the NAIRU (and other Phillips Curve
                   Issues)," Working Paper No. 34, Board of Governors
                   of the Federal Reserve System. For the other countries
                   the source is Layard, et al. (1984) as cited in Coe and
                   Gagl iardi.
                                       -8-


on the whole. Simple tests by Layard, Basevi, et al. actually showed a

declining trend of mismatch (by occupation, by region, and by both together)

in the U.K., and no strong trends in the rest of Europe. Several recent

country studies presented at an L.S.E. Conference on the Rise in Unemployment

(May, 1985), concurred in that negative finding. On the whole, the European

economies adapted well to structural and occupational change in the 1960s, and

there is no strong evidence that the pace of change has accelerated in the

1970s.

     A second obvious culprit is a change the unemployment benefits system in

the direction of greater subsidization of unemployment and job search. Here

too, the evidence is not strongly supportive. To summarize a complex record

across countries, there is indeed evidence that unemployment systems are

extremely generous in many countries, with benefits replacing a high fraction

of net—of-tax earnings of job losers, and with the benefits lasting for

several years. However, in most countries there has not been a notable rise

in the benefits ratio since the early 1970's, so that the change in NAIRU can

not be easily correlated with a change in the benefits system. Moreover, in

the case of the U.K., extensive cross-sectional work has been undertaken to

measure the responsiveness of unemployment durations, and hence aggregate

unemployment rates, to changes in the benefits ratio. While such

responsiveness is clearly evident, the magnitudes seem to be too small to

account for much of the U.K.'s large rise in the NAIRU.

     The inability of standard frictional variables to account for much of the

increase in the NAIRU in Europe has led to a significant re-thinking of the

macroeconomic model in the European context. The frictional variables all
                                      -9—


stress the traditional emphasis of labor economics and macroeconomics on the

"representative household" making labor supply decisions on the basis of a

labor-leisure tradeoff. However, only a small fraction of employment

relations in Europe involve labor contracts directly between an employer and

an individual. The labor-leisure choice is almost everywhere mediated through

trade unions or through labor-market regulations set by the government. The

crucial realization of the new literature is that even when workers want to

supply labor inelastically at whatever wage is available in the labor market,

the trade unions properly representing the interests of those workers will

not choose to offer labor -inelastically at the market-clearing wage. Rather,

optimizing unions may choose to respond to adverse shifts in labor demand by

protecting real wages at the expense of higher unemployment, even though each

-individual worker would desire to work at a lower wage. Corden has dubbed the

basic situation as household-involuntary, union-voluntary unemployment.

     This new approach stresses the following three conditions in European

labor markets in the 1970s. First, a large number of factors conspired to

shift the labor demand schedule inward throughout the past decade. That is,

the amount of labor that firms would like to hire at any given real wage has

not been rising as rapidly as -in the 1950s and 1960s. Factors which have

shifted the labor demand schedule adversely include the oil price increases,

which may be likened to negative productivity shocks (see Bruno and Sachs,

1985, ch. 2, for the formal analogy); a sharp, and largely unexplained,

slowdown -in technical productivity growth; and a rise in indirect and labor

taxes, which drive a wedge between the labor costs to the firm and the

workers' real take-home pay. Second, the response of optimizing trade unions
                                        -10-


is to accept the adverse labor-demand shifts partly in the form of lower

employment, and only partly in the form of lower real wages. And third, the

responsiveness of the economy in absorbing unemployed workers (either the

union job losers, or non—union new entrants to the labor market) is extremely

slow, in part due to restrictive legislation that prevents active competition

of non—union firms with union firms. An example of such restrictions is the

German practice of "extension' of the union wage to cover all workers, whether

union or non—union, in a given sector. Under such conditions, it is virtually

impossible for new, non-union firms to provide jobs for the unemployed.

     We now turn to the theoretical models, and then to the empirical evidence

in their support.


     A. Models of Union Wage Setting

     A typical model of union wage setting is provided by MacDonald and Solow

(1981). Consider a monopoly union with N members, negotiating wages with a

competitive industry that produces output      using capital K and labor input L,

(with L   N). The production function of the sector is given as Q = AF(K,L)

with K fixed in the short run. The variable A is a productivity shift

variable, which can represent pure technical change, or changes in real prices

of other inputs, such as oil. The union is assumed to set the wage W, at which

level the firm may freely hire its desired input of workers. Short-run profit

maximization requires that W be equated with PAFL(K,L). As is well known,

this relation yields a local log-linear approximation of the form:


     (2) 1 = — (w — p   -
                            a) + k
                                                    -
                                where   =   aa/(1       a)
                                       —11—


where a=log(A), l=log(L), w=log(W), etc. Here, a is the share of labor in

value added at the point of linearization, and a is the (local) elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor. If the underlying production relation

 is Cobb—Douglas, then equation (2) holds at all points, with cr=1 and with a

equal to a constant share of labor in total value added.

     Using equation (2) we can determine the level of real wages (w -   p)   that

is consistent with full employment in the sector. Denote this level as

Inverting (2) we find that w equals (k -         + a.   The percentage deviation

of the actual real wage from the full-employment real wage is termed the "wage

gap" in the literature. Later, I will discuss empirical estimates of the wage

gap for several countries in Europe.

     Now suppose that the union selects a wage W in order to maximize the

expected utility of a representative worker, calculated as follows. Suppose,

for simplicity, that employment is distributed randomly among the union

members, with each having the probability L/N of receiving employment, and

(N-L)/N of not receiving employment. If the worker is employed, the utility

of the labor income is given by U(W/P). If the worker does not receive a job

-in the sector, it is assumed that his utility is given by a value U0 which

reflects the combination of real unemployment benefits, the real wage levels

in other sectors where jobs might be available, leisure time, search costs,

etc. Evidently, the representative member's expected utility is:


     (3) EU = (L/N) U(W/P) +    [(N—L)/N] U0


By the institutional assumption that the union selects the wage while the firm

then selects the level of employment based on (2), MacDonald and Solow state
                                                       —12—


the union's problem as maximizing EU subject to (2). At the optimum, of

course, d [E(U)]/d W =                 0, which upon straightforward differentiation yields
the following optimum condition for the union:


     (4) -               —
                  13(U       U0)
                                   +    (W/P)[dU/d(W/P)] =    0


In the case that the utility function is logarithmic, condition (4) reduces

simply to:


     (4') U -
                    U0
                         =    1/         or    W/P =
                                                       exp[U0 + 1/a]


Like a good monopolist, the union sets the wage as a markup over U0, with the

markup depending on the elasticity of labor demand, .                       A high elasticity

leads to a low W/P, a low elasticity leads to a high W/P.

     The interesting question for European unemployment is how such a union is

likely to respond to adverse labor demand shocks, proxied here by a downward

shifts in A or K. In general, one can trace out the response of W/P to shifts

in these variables, and calculate a wage-offer function, of the form W/P =

W/P (A,K). By substituting this wage offer function into the labor demand

equation, we can also calculate the implied labor supply of the union as a

function of A and K. Denote this function as LS =                      LS(A,K).   Consider one

important special case first. Suppose that the elasticity of demand for

labor, ,     is    a constant (as in the Cobb-Douglas case, and nearly so f or CES

production functions with a close to 1.) Then, remarkably, the

first-order conditions in (4) can be solved for WIP independently of A and K.

In other words, the union will set a fixed real wage W/P no matter what the
                                               —13--



 level of labor demand is at that wage level! All adverse shocks to labor

demand are absorbed through employment reductions, and not at all through real

wage cuts! This case is depicted in Figure la. More generally, the optimum

conditions induce a wage - employment locus that is upward or downward

sloping, so that adverse demand shifts affect both L and W/P, as is depicted

in Figure Lb.

     Many other authors have elaborated similar models. In some cases, the

union is assumed to care about the representative member's utility EU, but

also about the magnitude of total employment, so that the union maximizes a

function V = V( EU, L). Grossman (1984) and others have allowed for

seniority rules and internal union politics to affect probabilities that

particular members will or will not have jobs in the event of workforce

reductions. Still others have allowed for more complicated bargaining models,

in which the union does not unilaterally set W/P, but must extract a wage

settlement based on bargaining power vis-a-vis the employers. In general,

such models all deliver the key result that adverse shocks should be absorbed

partially or fully by a decline in employment, and only partially (if at all),

by a real wage reduction.

     In a recent paper, Lawrence and Lawrence (1985) use the same framework to

show that adverse shocks might plausibly be met by real wage increases rather

than decreases, so that the proportionate drop in employment can even exceed the

initial inward shift of the labor demand schedule! Their reasoning is as

follows. In a dynamic model, the firm's investment decisions will be a

function of the real wage levels that the union sets today and is anticipated

to set in the future. The factor price frontier suggests that the (log)
      Figure 1. Shifts in Labor Demand



                   (a)                         (b)


w/P                                      W/P
                  Ld                                 LS




                                   L                 L
                                             —14—


quasi-rents to capital are a decreasing function of real wage and an

increasing function of the productivity shift variable, a: r =         -b(w-p)   +   y   a

(see Bruno and Sachs, ch. 2-3, for a thorough discussion of the factor price

frontier, and its implication for investment behavior). Most models of

firm-level investment link changes in K to the level of r relative to the cost

of capital. In general, a rise in (w - p) should be expected to reduce r and

thereby reduce investment. Lawrence and Lawrence point out, however, that in

very depressed sectors, for which r is already extremely low, firms may

already be in the position of making no gross investment. For such depressed

industries, the elasticity of response of investment to the wage will be zero.

     Now consider the implications of these observations for optimal union

wage policy. To introduce investment but keep the model static, let us write

the size of the capital stock k as a function of r. Moreover, assume that the

capital stock is variable for r above a minimum r, but that for r below r, the

capital stock is fixed:


     (5)    k = —ö(r-r)       +
                                  k0
                                        for r >     r
                 =
                       k0               for rr
            r = -b(w-p)      +    a

By subsituting (5) into (2), we see that the overall elasticity of employment

with respect to the real wage includes both the direct effect of wages on 2,

given k, and the indirect effect on k as well. The overall elasticity equals

 + äb when r >    r,   and the overall elasticity equals     for r <   r.
    Now to the punch line. Suppose that an adverse shock deals a sharp blow

to a sector that initially has r >      r.    With productivity declining, and wages

rigid, the firm enters the region in which investment is no longer profitable.

At that point, the elasticity of demand for labor falls from           + öb to just ,
                                      —15—


since the capital stock becomes insensitive to the real wage level. But we

have already noted that the union's optimal wage demand depends inversly on

the elasticity of demand for labor. Once the adverse shock pushes the sector

into the region of no gross investment, the union should optimally respond by

raising the real wage! The simple point is that in a declining sector,

quasi-rents to capital become pure rents and therefore an attractive bundle of

resources to be grabbed by a union that no longer has to worry about

disincentives to future investment policy.

     Lawrence and Lawrence apply this story to the U.S. steel sector, where a

decade of supply shocks and intense foreign competition has been met by

constantly increases in real wages that have outpaced almost every other

sector. Not surprisingly, steel industry employment has plummeted. As Solow

stated in his discussion of the Lawrence and Lawrence model, their

interpretation is an effective explanation of what must otherwise be written

off as a death—wish of the United Steel Workers union. Application of the

model to European industries has not yet been attempted, but my hunch is that

it will prove an effective vehicle of explanation.

     The union wage model helps to explain a shift in employment in response

to adverse supply shocks. A small extension can transform it into a model of

the Phillips relationship in (1). Almost all authors have taken the position

that the union wage model describe the target level of employment of the

unions, LS, rather than the actual level of employment period to period.

Slippage between LS and actual L can come from lags in wage contracting,

mistakes in inflation expectations, the unwillingness of firms to turn away

customers at prices which are posted before the exact level of demand is
                                                                 -16-


known, etc. The union is therefore assumed to adopt an error-correction

mechanism in its wage setting, with real wages rising when actual employment

exceeds desired emp1oyment. Specifically, let L now represent total

employment (aggregated over all sectors), and N represent the total labor

force. Log(L/N) equals -U. Define Log(LS/N) as -U*. Now assume that

nominal wages are changed as a function of expected or lagged inflat-lon,

and the percentage gap of actual over desired employment,

Log(L/LS). Since Log(L/LS) equals U* - U, we can write:



        (6)            =    - 4(U   -
                                        U*) +

          w   =         -
Here,             wt

From (2), we can write current price change, ir as a function of current
            w
wage change, ' current employment change, and current changes in technical

technical productivity and the capital stock, which I will summarize by a

parameter t4i.         Thus,            =        —          —           —
                                                                            q.1
                                            7r       O(U,       Ut1)              Substituting this

expression into (6), we get a standard Phillips curve of the

form:

        (7) ir =            - (U    -
                                            U)
                                                 -
                                                     9(Ut
                                                            —
                                                                Ut_1)
                                                                        -     +
                                                                                  ir1
This equation differs from the one at the beginning of this section only by

allowing for productivity change to affect inflation (the qi term), and by

allowing changes in unemployment to affect ir. The crucial fact from our

point of view is that supply shocks which cause LS, and therefore U*, to

change, will cause shifts in the Phillips curve of the sort that have been

observed in the past decade.
                                      —17--



     The models so far fill in a large part of the explanation of the rise in

the NAIRU in Europe. They reconcile two apparently contradictory notions: the

cross-sectional evidence that household labor supply (especially of prime—age

males) is fairly inelastic, so that households should in principle be willing

to accept real wage cuts in order to protect employment; and the macroeconomic

evidence that real wage reductions only occur slowly, if at all. However, a

more complete explanation must also consider why union workers who lose their

jobs, and non-union workers who can't get union jobs, are not absorbed in

non-union sectors. Various ideas are circulating as to how to close the model.

Minford (1983), for example, has argued that a competitive non-union sector in

fact exists and could absorb the unemployed, but that the ratio of unemployment

benefits to non-union wages are simply too high to make those job prospects

attractive. Nickell (1984) has disputed this interpretation, by arguing that

even with respect to non-union wages there has not been a significant increase

in the unemployment benefits ratio. Other authors, particularly in Germany,

have argued that the non-union sector is itself so hampered by regulation that

it cannot be a vigourous absorber of the unemployed. Two types of restrictions

are stressed. In the non-union parts of the industrial sectors, union wage

levels generally apply to the non-union firms. The employers confederations

that bargain with the unions find it in their interest to police the extension

of union wages to non-union firms. According to some analysts, non-union

firms that attempt to shirk, by paying below union scale, can find themselves

blacklisted by their suppliers, who do pay union wages. In the

non—industrial, service industries, various guild-type regulations allegedly

hamper the possibility of a rapid expansion. Finally, in France (until very
                                       -18—


 recently) and some other countries, the pressure for general wage increases

 came not only through unions, but also through an active public sector wages

 policies, which acted to maintain an across-the-board increase in real incomes

 for those individuals lucky enough to have jobs (in France, the minimum wage,

known as the SMIC, has been an important instrument of that wage policy).


     B. Empirical Evidence on the Union-Wage Model

     Testing of the union-wage framework has developed along three lines.

First, various investigators have examined the real wage-employment link in

(2), which is a crucial aspect of the model. Second, various studies have

examined wage determination, to see whether real wages decline sufficiently in

the face of supply disturbances, or whether, as in the model, real wages

remain high (above full employment levels) when supply shocks occur. Third,

direct econometric estimates of the Phillips curve have included supply-side

variables, to see whether the observed shifts in the Phillips curve can indeed

be linked up with variables that are identified as important in the union-wage

model.


     (1) The Real Wage - Unemployment Link

     After decades of work on the cyclical behavior of real wages in the

United States, a consensus had emerged in the early 1970s that contrary to the

implications of neoclassical labor demand equations, high unemployment is

associated with low rather than high real wages. It has turned out, however,

that those results were specific to the U.S. A great deal of recent work,

with carefully specified labor demand functions, has found that real wages are

a significant determinant of labor demand, at least in the manufacturing
                                      —19—


sector, for which most of the analysis has been made.

     Examples of such findings are Bruno and Sachs (1985), Ch. 8, where it    is
shown that in 8 of the 9 OECO economies that we examined (all countries tested

except the U.S.), the real product wage in manufacturing has a strong and

significant negative effect on manhours in the manufacturing sector. The

average elasticity of demand for manhours with respect to the real wage in the

short run is estimated to be about -0.50, and to be about —1.0 to —1.5 in the

long term. Several other recent studies have also estimated neoclassical labor

demand schedules, again with successful results. Symons and Layard (1984),

Grubb, Layard and Symons (1984), and Newell and Symons (1985) have made

careful cross-country comparisons of the labor demand equation. In the Newell

and Symons study of 16 OECD economies, the real wage is negatively signed 13

of 16 times, with an average t-statistic of 1.7. On average, the estimated

long—run elasticity of labor demand is found to be about -0.9, slightly lower

in absolute value than in Bruno and Sachs.   Several recent studies for the

U.K. all find a highly significant real wage effects. Such studies include

Nickell and Andrews (1983), Symons (1985), Beenstock, Warburton, Lewington,

and Macromatis (1983) and Layard and Nickell (1984). All of these studies

find a statistically significant long-run real wage elasticity of employment

in the neighborhood of -1.0. Unfortunately, similarly detailed studies have

not yet been carried out for most of the other European economies.

    The fact that high product wages (or at least product wages that are high

relative to a slowing trend of productivity) can track the decline in labor

inputs in the OECD economies in the 1970s is consistent with (indeed, nearly

the same as) the finding in a large number of studies of a continuing real
                                      -20-


wage gap in the European economies. Remember from the earlier discussion that

the real wage gap attempts to measure the deviation of actual real wages from

the level of real wages that would be consistent with labor demand equalling

full-employment labor supply. Essentially, the comparison is between the

actual level of real wages and the level of the marginal product of labor when

measured at full—employment levels. Bruno and Sachs (1985, Ch. 9) offer

several measures of wage gaps, and a detailed discussion of the difficulties

in calculating the wage gap. Some wage gap measures based on the procedures

in Bruno and Sachs (1985) are shown in Table 2. They suggest that the wage gap

remains high in most European economies.

     A more powerful procedure is to estimate the relevant production

functions from which the labor demand equation can be derived. Knowledge of

the production function permits a direct estimation of the marginal product of

labor at any given level of employment. Artus (1984) provides the single

study to date that applies this ambitious methodology. His findings offer

strong support to the view that real wages continue to be above market

clearing levels in the major European economies. Indeed the magnitudes of the

estimated gaps are very close to those found by Bruno and Sachs.

    One area of controversy in this literature is whether demand variables in

addition to supply variables show up in the labor demand equation. In other

words, controlling for real wages, the capital stock, and the real prices of

other variable inputs, is labor demand also a function of the state of

aggregate demand? The Keynesian approach would predict yes (indeed, it often

ignores the role of the supply variables), while a thoroughgoing neoclassical

approach would predict no. Unfortunately the evidence is split. In Sachs
          Table 2. Adjusted Wage Gaps, 12 OECD Countries, 1965-1983

                                                                (1964-69     0.0)


                1965      1970    1973      1976    1979     1981     1982          1983


U.S.             0.2       0.1     6.0       2.9     6.8      8.1      8.6           8.4
Canada          —1.9       1.9    —0.5       3.3     0.8      2.2      2.9           3.5

Europe

UK.             -2.0       2.2     4.6      11.0    16.4     24.1     25.0          26.4

Belgium          2.1      —0.8    13.6      30.2    37.2     40.7     35.2            -

Denmark         —2.3      2.5      8.1      13.0    17.6     16.4     13.7           9.2

France           0.0      —3.4    -0.4       7.9    10.7     14.3     17.4            -
Germany          2.0      1.5      7.2      13.0    15.3     19.1     15.9          12.9

Italy            2.3      6.4     15.4      19.5    11.8      9.1      7.6           5.9

Norway          —2.5     —4.3    —1.3       13.9    17.3      7.7      6.4           6.2

Sweden           2.7     —1.1     —5.2       3.7    —1.6     —4.0     —7.1          —9.6




  Source: Bruno (1985). Note that I      do not report the results for the
          Netherlands   because of a severe data problem regarding the
          value added deflator used by Bruno in his original calculations.
                                      —21—


(1983a), Bruno and Sachs (1985), and Bruno (1985), we have found that monetary

variables, and occassionally fiscal variables, can help to explain labor demand

in addition to the supply variables. Similar results have been found by

Grubb, Layard, and Symons (1984), and by Layard and Nickell (1984). On the

other hand, Newell and Symons (1985) have been unable to find a significant

added role for demand variables, except in France and the United States. It

is not easy at this point to account for these discrepancies.


     (b) Real Wage Determination

     The second leg of the union-wage model is the presumption that adverse

supply shocks get absorbed in lower employment as well as in reductions in the

real wage. Most of the econometric studies have examined short-run wage

behavior in response to various supply shocks; a few, particularly Newell and

Symon (1985), address the difficult econometric issue of whether the failure of

downward real wage adjustment is a short-run phenomenon or a long-run

phenomenon. This question is important, for it determines whether a one—time

shift in labor demand (say a rise in oil prices) is likely to cause a transitory

rise in unemployment, or a permanent increase in the NAIRU.

     Supply shocks may be defined broadly as anything which shifts the demand

for labor in equation (2). Here we must be particularly careful about the

definitions of W and P. Presumably worker utility in (1) depends upon

net-of-tax nominal wages, deflated by a consumer price index, or W(1_t)/Pc

Labor demand in (2) depends on the nominal wage inclusive of labor taxes (e.g.

payroll taxes for social security), deflated by the value added deflator, or

W(1+T)/P. Anything which alters the ratio of the real consumption wage to
                                        —22—


the real employer costs is like a supply shock, in that it shifts a properly

specified labor demand schedule in (2). Many authors have christened the

ratio of these two measures as "the wedge", the log of which can be

approximated as:


       (8) log(wedge) =   T + t +   -



In   sum, the relevant supply shocks to examine are: increases in payroll taxes

(T), increases -in employee labor taxes t, relative price shocks (such as the

OPEC shocks) which affect cv' shifts in technical change (the parameter a

in (2)), and shifts in the capital stock. In principal, any adverse change in

these measures must be balanced, at full employment, by a reduction in the

real take-home consumption wage. A rise in the wedge, for example, requires

an equiproport-ional drop in real take-home pay.

      Almost all studies confirm that downward real wage adjustments -in most

economies are not rapid enough to prevent a rise in the wage gap following an

adverse supply disturbance. What is less clear from the evidence is whether

the increase in the wage gap is a permanent response to a supply shock, or -is

rather a transient blip in real labor costs that -is reduced over time.

In the former case, the NAIRU can be expected to rise in the "long run" (i.e.

until the next shock occurs) while in the latter case, the increase in the

measured NAIRU will be reversed over time, even in the absence of new

disturbances. In any case, it appears that the relevant adjustments are very

slow. Note that the union wage model predicts a permanent rise in the NAIRU.

      Empirically, the major supply shocks appear to be tax and productivity

changes, rather than the oil shocks on which I and many others have focussed.
                                         -23-


Knoester (1983) and Knoester and Van der Windt (1985) provide powerful

evidence that tax increases do not lead to the necessary reductions in

W(1-t)/P, as they must in order to stay at full employment, but rather get

shifted forward onto capital (and thus unto employment). Knoester and Van der

Windt examine real consumption wage growth in ten OECD economies, and in every

case, a rise in labor taxes leads to an increase in pre-tax real wage growth.

The implication -is that a rise in either t or -r causes an increase in the

employer's real labor costs W(1+T)/Pv, as predicted in the union-wage model.

In their study of wage setting in the U.K., Layard and Nickell similarly find

that labor tax increases are absorbed largely by the firm, rather than by

reductions in the workers net-of-tax take home pay. Indeed, their equations

allow them to measure the unemployment effects of tax increases in various

periods. They find (Table 9, p.74) that increases in taxes (including

employer and employee labor taxes, income taxes, and indirect taxes)

contributed 1.2 percentage points to the rise in unemployment in 1967-74

relative to 1956-66; 1.3 percentage points to a further rise during 1975—79;

and 0.9 percentage points more during 1980-83. Over the sixteen years

1967-83, therefore, the total increase in unemployment due to tax increases is

estimated to be 3.4 percentage points.

     Interestingly, many authors have found that the rapid wage increases in

the early 1970's are hard to explain even after accounting for increased

taxes, productivity growth, etc. Perry (1975), Gordon (1977), Sachs (1979),

and more recently Layard and Nickell (1984), Bruno and Sachs (1985), and

Newell and Symons (1985) have all stressed the empirical importance and

essential puzzle of the wage explosion during 1968-73. Layard and N-ickell
                                                         -24-


allow for a change in union "strength", measured by a change in the union to

non-union markup, to enter the aggregate wage equation. This variable helps

to account for the real wage boom of the early 1970's. The union effect is

calculated to account for about 1.2 percentage points in the overall rise in

unemployment. Newell and Symons find an even more important role for a

niilitancy dummy variable in their equations for 16 OECD economies. Indeed,

for the E.C. as a whole, they attribute approximately one half of the 3.7

percent increase in unemployment during 1977—81 relative to 1963—67 to their

wage-explosion variable, and relatively little to the tax and other wedge

variables.


        (c) Reduced—form Estimates of the Phillips Curve

     We have already discussed in the Introduction several studies which have

shown a significant rise in the estimated NAIRU in the European economies.

Some studies, such as Grubb, Jackman, and Layard (1983) and Bruno and Sachs

(1985), have combined the labor demand and wage equations to come up with

reduced form Phillips curve equations in which the supply variables are

allowed to enter freely.                   In one set of estimates in Bruno and Sachs (Tables

10.2 and 10.3), the wage gap                    is entered as a shift variable in the

Phillips curve equation, as a proxy for shifts in U*. The estimated equation

is of the form:



                   =        +              +         +                +
        (9)            a0       a11r   1       a2w       a3ir + a4i       a5U

where         is consumer price -inflation,                 is   annual productivity change,

and ir -is import price inflation. The results for the European economies in

the sample are shown in Table 3, below. The first column shows the estimated

coefficient on w, the second shows the measured wage gap as of 1981, and the
                 Table 3. The Wage Gap and the Phillips Curve

                                                                Increase in U
                        Estimated                  in             Needed to
Country                Value of a2              1981            Counteract



Belgium                   104a                  29.3                5.3
                          (3.5)

Denmark                   19.0                   7.0                3.7
                          (1.6)

France                    10.9                   1.9               -0.3
                          (0.9)

Germany                   42.1                  12.2                4.3
                          (7.9)

United Kingdom            71.3                  19.3                9.6
                          (3.9)




     aNumbers in parentheses are t-statistics

    Source: Column 3 is calculated as -
                                        a2w9/a5, using the estimates from
             Bruno and Sachs (1985), Table 10.2. All other data are from
             Tables 10.2 and 10.3.
                                                   —25—


third column shows how much the unemployment rate would have to rise in order to

eliminate the inflationary effects of the wage gap, using the coefficients

estimated in (9). Note that all of the countries except France demonstrate a

marked shift in the Phillips curve associated with the rise in the wage gap.

For France, we suspect, measurement problems plagued our estimates of the wage

gap.

       A different approach -is attempted in Sachs and Wyplosz (1985), where

shifts in the French NAIRU are studied. The "wedge" and productivity shift

variables are put directly in the Phillips curve, as determinants of shifts in

U*. A provisional estimate of a modified Phillips curve for France is as

follows (the numbers in parentheses are t-statist-ics):


       (10)       =            — 4.66         0.93 (Ut-Ut_i) +   0.09 (1ri_1rti)
                                         Ut
                                 (4.5)        (0.78)             (1.70)
                  -   49.79 {log(productivity) — log(wedge)]
                       (3.80)
                                                                               2 =
              +       3.18     time                                        R         0.69
                      (4.25)                                                    = —0.78
                                                                                     (5.01)
The regression is a standard Phillips curve, except for the inclusion of a

NAIRU shift variable, which is given as the log of trend labor productivity

minus the log of the wedge (I explain this variable in a moment). Otherwise,

current inflation ir. is written as a function of lagged inflation,                           the

level and change in U, import price inflation ir_1 relative to domestic price

inflation             (i.e. relative import price shocks), and a time trend. The

(log) productivity variable is measured as a +             (k—)/,         which we saw from

equation (2) gives the "warranted" product wage (i.e., the product wage

consistent with full employment) based on underlying labor productivity. When
                                                 -26-


                                —
we calculate a +     (k-9)/13        log(wedge), we have a measure of the warranted
real take-home pay as a function of technology, taxes and shifts in relative

input prices.

       The estimated NAIRU is found by solving for Ut in (10) assuming

   =           = 7T_, and U =                Thus,



       (10 )   u1 -— 3.18
                     4.66
                                    time —    49.79 {log(productivity) -
                                               4.66
                                                                           log(wedge)]

Since the time trend increases by 1 each year, the equation suggests that

productivity net of the wedge (i.e. the warranted take—home pay) must grow by

(3.18/49.79) =     0.064, or 6.4 percent per year, in order for the NAIRU to
remain constant. The post—'73 rise of the wedge in France and an accompanying

slowdown in productivity growth have both reduced the growth of the warranted

wage well below 6.4 percent per year. Accordingly, the NAIRU has risen

sharply since 1973, by about 5 percentage points, to a rate of about 8 percent

(alternative regression estimates put the range at 7.5 to 9 percent). The

increase during the period 1963-72 was only about 1 percentage point, both

because underlying productivity growth was faster and the wedge increased at a

much slower pace. For further details, see Sachs and Wyplosz (1985).



II. Demand Management Policies and the Shifting NAIRU


       Supply shocks that deliver increases in the NAIRU are naturally best

handled by supply-side measures. Incomes policies, social contracts between

governments and unions, supply-side tax cuts, etc. are possible devices for

handling such disturbances.           Having noted that, however, it is still
                                       —27—


important to focus attention on the appropriate role for demand management

policies, particularly in the case that supply-side measures are politically

or institutionally difficult to implement (see Caimfors (1984) for a very

innovative and largely successful attempt to show how political organization

and union organization in the Northern European economies can shape the scope

for supply-side measures). The question of demand management becomes even

trickier in the case that actual demand management policies can affect the

evolution of the NAIRU, according to the "hysteresis" hypothesis, to which I

now turn. The decade-long bout with high and rising unemployment in Europe

has provoked enormous frustration, and urgings from some analysts for a

significant reflation (see, for example, Layard, Basevi et al. (1984), and

Blanchard    i. (1985);   see also the discussion by Gordon (1985) in his paper

for this conference). One argument for expansion is that the current levels

of unemployment clearly exceed the current NAIRU, and that on the margin,

employment gains are more important than further gains against inflation. A

second and increasingly popular argument is that even if the NAIRU is high,

demand expansion is justified on the grounds that continued slack would itself

contribute to yet further increases in the NAIRU. The argument, as broached

in the Introduction, holds that the NAIRU depends not just on supply factors

such as the "wedge", but also on the actual levels of unemployment in the

economy.

     Blanchard et al. (1985) offer two interesting empirical arguments in

support of this proposition. Hargraves Heap (1980) offers several more

theoretical arguments. The simplest argument is that the NAIRU depends on the

capital stock (remember from Section I that a decline in K is like a supply
                                      -28-


shock), and that the evolution of the capital stock depends not just on factor

prices but also on the state of demand in the economy. Hence, by running the

economy at unemployment rates below the NAIRU, new investment is spurred,

which will eventually reduce the NAIRU. The empirical basis of this case is

outlined in Blanchard et al. The second empirical argument is that the NAIRU

drifts up over time when U > U* because the long—term unemployed eventually

become unemployable. Once this occurs, they stop contributing to the downward

pressure on inflation. An extremely interesting regression analysis shows

that only the unemployment rate for the short-term unemployed (those

unemployed less than six months) contributes significantly to the Phillips

curve equation. As the authors put it: "Many of the long-term unemployed in

total unemployment have in effect ceased looking for work and, as a result,

may be inefficient draftees in the fight against high real wages and

inflation." (p.30) This same effect has led Newell and Symons (1985) to enter

U in their Phillips curve equation as Ut_O.5Ut_2 under the assumption that the

current NAIRU is raised by O.5Ut_2.

     Given the plausibility and popularity of the hysteresis argument, it is

unfortunate that the policy implications of hysteresis have not yet been

worked out. Does the existence of hysteresis mean that the economy should be

run at very low unemployment rates, so that the NAIRU is reduced to very low

levels? Does it mean that supply shocks should not be fought with

unemployment, because that merely contributes to longer-term structural

problems? The answers are not yet known.

     I now offer a brief, and simple, analysis of this issue, to see whether

hysteresis provides a strong case for a European expansion in the absence of
                                                —29-


independent improvements in the NAIRU (everybody is for expansion if

demand-expanding measures can be combined with wage restraint, or other supply

expanding policies!) To model this case, I assume that changes in the NAIRU

are determined by deviations of actual unemployment from the contemporaneous

NAIRU:



                 =          -           f > 0
     (11)            f(Ut        U)
A similar formulation of the hysteresis hypothesis -is   found in Hargraves Heap
(1981). The standard case, without hysteresis is given by f = 0.     We will

study that special case along with the case in which f > 0.

     The rest of the model will rely on a standard Phillips curve approach,

stated in continuous time. Letting 7r be the instantaneous inflation rate,

I assume that changes in the inflation rate are induced by deviations of Ut

and U

             =               -
     (12)
                     1(Ut         U)
It is assumed that the Phillips curve in (12) represents the partial

adjustment mechanism outlined earlier. Also because of the implied lags in

nominal wage change in responding to price changes, it is assumed that

policy-makers can influence the level of unemployment at each instant, through

standard demand management tools.

     Policymakers are assumed to minimize an intertemporal social loss

function, of the form:



     (13) V0 =
                     r e —öt
                                 v(7r,U)dt

v(1r,U) is the instantanous level of social loss (negative welfare). Of

course the loss v is increasing in both arguments. Moreover, I assume that
                                             —30—


the function is convex, so that the marginal costs of inflation or

unemployment rise as the levels of inflation or unemployment increase, 6 is

the pure rate of social time discount, and intertemporal social loss is the

disounted integral of the instantaneous loss levels. As a specific, and

easily tractable example, I assume now that instantaneous social loss is

quadratic in its arguments, so that (13) is re-written as:



     (13') V0 =    f   eôt{U/2    +
                                      air/21dt

Importantly, bliss is defined as a zero level of inflation and unemployment.

In reality, the bliss point should allow for a positive frictional level of

unemployment. In our context however, all that is important is that the bliss

level of unemployment is below the initial level of the NAIRU; introduction of

non-zero target level for U would not change any results as long as that

target level is below U.

     The policy problem is given as:


     (14) max V0 with respect to the time path of U, subject to

                  (11) and (12)


Technically, the problem requires a straightforward application of optimal

control techniques. There is no issue of time inconsistency of the optimal

plan in this case because the agents in the private sector are not modelled as

forward looking. To solve the problem, we simply set up the Hamiltonian H,

and take first-order conditions (hereafter, time subscripts will be dropped

when not necessary). A and y are the costate variables associated with the

Phillips curve equation and hysteresis equation, respectively.
                                                             —31—



      (15) H =         et[U2/2       +   air2/2    -
                                                       A4(U       -
                                                                       U*) + )'f(U     —
                                                                                           U*)]
             (a) aiau = 0 =>              U    = A1 -


             (b)       3H/air =   -d/dt[etA]            =>    air = ox        -


             (c)             -d/dt[e5ty]
                        ai-i/au* =                           =>       A4 - yf = O-y -
             (d)       =-4(U-U*)
             (e) O*         = f(U    -
                                         U*)
In order to best understand the implications of these first-order conditions,

it is useful to begin with the standard policy case -in which f =                                 0.

     A. Optimal policy in the absence of hysteresis

     Once f is set equal to zero, we can ignore '                                 (y   is the costate variable

associated with U*, which is now considered fixed). The first order

conditions then simplify to:


             (a)

     (15')
             (b)            =OX-air
By differentiating the equation linking U to A, and substituting -in                                   the
equation for A, and combining the results with the Phillips curve equation in

(12), we can write the system in U and iT,                            in    the following way:




     (16)
             [Ol
                   (
                        =
                             ro
                             I
                                         a     I
                                                   [Ui
                                                   I    I
                                                              +
                                                                        [0
                                                                        I
             LirJ            [-          °    j    LJ                   L u*
A graphical analysis of this system is shown in Figure 2. Note that the phase

arrows indicate the saddlepoint stability of the system, a standard feature of

dynamic optmization problems. The optimal dynamic path for the system must
    Figure 2. Unemployment and Inflation Dynamics with
              Optimal Demand Management




U




                                                  1J=o

                     4?
                               A
                                                    *= 0




                                   1'
                              5U*/a
                                         —32—


lie on the saddlepoint stable manifold shown by the dotted line.

      In the steady-state, at point A, the actual unemployment rate equals the

NAIRU, U* (assumed constant), and inflation is positive, at the rate it =

8U*/q,a.   It is interesting that the optimizing policymaker should choose to

remain fixed at U* and positive inflation in the long run, even though a

better steady state point (U* and zero inflation) is clearly available. The

reason that the economy converges to a positive inflation rate is that were

the economy to be at U = U* and it = 0 it would be advantageous to have a

temporary expansion at the cost of a higher permanent inflation! Why?

Because at U=U* and it =   0, the instanteous marginal costs of higher inflation
are zero and the instantaneous marginal benefits of reduced inflation are

positive (this is because inflation is at the bliss point, while unemployment

is not). As long as the time discount rate is positive, it always pays to

undertake at least some expansion relative to the zero-inflation equilibrium.

The result is positive steady-state inflation. Note that the steady state

inflation rate is higher the lower is the weight on inflation in the welfare

function (a), and the higher is the rate of social time discount (6).

     Using the system in Figure 2 we can investigate the consequences of two

types of disturbances. First, in Figure 3a consider the implications of a

blip in the inflation rate at t = 0, due to some factor (e.g. a temporary oil

price shock) that does not raise the long-run NAIRU. In that case, the

initial inflation rate moves from the level at point A to the level at point

B. The system must adjust along the saddlepoint path, so that unemployment

(which is the policy variable), also jumps up at time 0, to the level shown at

point B. Over time, both inflation and unemployment return (along the
Figure 3. Dynamics following (a) Transitory and (b) Permanent
         Supply Shocks




                    (a)                                (b)


                                          U




                                                        C

          A
                                   r= 0                              0




                A         B
           Tr                 lT                                Tr
                                      —33--



saddlepoint path) to the long—run equilibrium at A. Thus, a one-time price

shock that does not raise U leads to a stagflationary period in which

inflation temporarily exceeds its long-run level and unemployment is

temporarily greater than U*.

     Perhaps more interesting is the case in Figure 3b. Assume now that the

inflation shock also raises the NAIRU, along the lines of the union-wage

model. Then, the new long-term equilibrium shifts to a point like C.

Importantly, the rise in the NAIRU leads to a higher long—run inflation rate

as well as a higher long-run unemployment rate, even with optimal

policymaking. When U* rises, the gap between the optimum and the equilibrium

unemployment rate increases. Policymakers are no longer willing to stop

expanding at the previous steady-state inflation rate, since at that point,

the marginal discounted benefits of a temporary expansion exceed the marginal

costs. This model therefore provides a positive analysis as to why the rise

in the NAIRU in Europe was also associated with a significant rise in

inflation over the past decade. The answer is not simply bad demand management.

Rather, with the NAIRU so high, it has paid for policy makers to try to

eke out even a temporary demand expansion for the purposes of keeping U

temporarily below U*.

     In summary, in the absence of hysteresis, a temporary price shock leads

to a temporary stagflationary episode, with prices and unemployment eventually

returning to their initial level. A price shock that also raises the NAIRU

leads to a stagflationary episode in which both unemployment and inflation

remain higher in the steady state.
                                                 —34-


      B. Optimal Policy in the Presence of Hysteresis

      Now we return to the major theme of this section: the effects of

 hysteresis on the optimal policy path of U. Returning to the first—order

conditions in (15), differentiate (15)(a), and substitute (15)(b) and (15)(c),

and then use (15)(d) and (15)(e), to get the following three dimensional

autonomous system (note that U* is now a state variable, by assumption):




      (17)
              FT1
                     =
                                  -° 01
              LoJ                      0
                                           _fj     U*

Once again this system is saddlepoint stable, as may be checked by the fact

that there is exactly one positive eigenvalue in the transition matrix in

(17).2 There is also one negative eigenvalue and one eigenvalue equal to zero.

The zero root means technically that the system will display hysteresis, so

that U, U*, and iT   will   not have the tendency to return to an initial steady

state even after a transitory perturbation.

     To analyze this system I adopt a method suggested first by Dixit (1980).

Let the vector (1        c12, c13) be the normalized left eigenvalue associated

with the positive (unstable) real root in (17). Let r1 denote that positive

real root (r1 > 0 by assumption). Then, it is easy to prove that the actual

unemployment rate along the optimal path must equal:


     (18) U         -c12ir -
                               c13U*

To find the specific values for c12 and c13, note that the left eigenvector

must satisfy the following equation:
                                               —35-


      (1 )    (1    c12 c13
                              )   rf     —qa
                                          0
                                                   0
                                                                =
                                                                     (r1 r1c12 r1c13)
                                    f     0        —f

Therefore, we can easily find that c12 =               -(a/r1), and        that c13 =

Substituting       into (18), we come up with the equation for optimal unemployment

policy along the adjustment path. Note that c12, c13 <                      0.
      To see the implications of this optimal policy, substitute (18) back into

(17), to find a two-dimensional system in U* and ir.                     This system is as

follows




      (20)
              [ill
                        =   r4c12       q(1+c13)
              1.1           I                          'I   I

              [u*J                                              U*
                            L_fci2      —f(li-c13)j         [
Note that given the equation for r1, it is possible to prove that c13 >                      — i.3
Also, C12 < 0 and c13 < 0.

     The system in (20) is shown graphically in Figure 4. The loci for O* = 0

and it =   0 are the same, as can be verified by direct inspection of (20). The

fact that the loci are identical is the implication of having a zero

eigenvalue in the original autonomous system. With only one locus defining

the equilibrium for both U* and ir, it is easy to see that any point on the

locus is a stationary point! In this sense, unemployment and inflation will

be path dependent. The stationary positions of U* and ir, and in fact of U

since U=U* in the steady state, are determined by the specific path along

which the economy arrives on the stable locus.

     Consider, for example, the one-time inflation shock that we analyzed in

Figure 3a. Starting from an equilibrium point A in Figure 5a, the economy

jumps to point B.       In view of the optimal unemployment policy rule given by
Figure 4. Dynamics of the NAIRU and Inflation in the
          Case of Hysteresis




                                             !•j*=o, •ft=o




                                              Tr
     Figure 5. Supply shocks in the Case of Hysteresis




                     (a)                                     (b)



U*                                          •13*




                                        0                              *=o, ij=o
                                                                   C
                           C

                 A                                       A
                               B




                                                                       TF
                                       -36-


 (20), the inflation shock prompts a jump in the unemployment rate. According

to the hysteresis assumption, U* begins to rise. The system follows the phase

arrows from point B, and arrives at the stable locus at point C. The result

 is striking: in the present of hysteresis and optimal demand management, a

one-time jump in the inflation rate leads to a permanent rise in U*, U and    it.


Even with optimal policy, the result is a long-run increase -in both inflation

and unemployment!

     In Figure 5b we analyze the case in which the supply shock raises both    it


and U* on impact. The conclusion is the same, only more so. Again, the shock

leads to a permanent increase in unemployment and inflation.

     We are now in a position to answer the questions at the beginning of this

section. The existence of hysteresis does not necessarily mean that an

economy with high inflation and unemployment should necessarily expand. If at

the initial condition the inflation rate is high and the unemployment rate is

moderate, as in point B in Figure 6, then the optimal path involves rising

unemployment and falling inflation. If, on the other hand the initial

position is one of low inflation and high U*, as in point C, then an expansion

is warranted. Given the inflationary costs of expansion when the initial

NAIRU is high, there is no general case for an expansion in the presence of

hysteresis. With respect to policy responses to 5'Ji thcck, it is clear

from the analysis of Figure 5 that unemployment indeed should be used in

response to an inflationary shock (of course, if supply-side measures are

available they should be used instead), even though the result of the

temporary rise in U is a permanent rise in U.
Figure 6. Conditions for Danand Expansion or Contraction in
          the Case of Hysteresis




             (a)                                       (b)


                                       U*




                                ir=O
                                                                   Tr=O

                                               C




                                                              Tr
                                       —37—


 III. Conclusions


      High unemployment is the major policy problem confronting the

macroeconomic authorities in Europe. The major reason that policymakers in

Europe eschew demand expansion in the face of such high unemployment rates is

not the belief that a policy expansion would be ineffective in reducing the

unemployment rate, but rather the fear that an expansion would rekindle

inflation. In the context of standard demand-side models, such fears look

foolish. On the other hand, a great deal of recent theoretical and empirical

work has shown that the non-inflationary threshold unemployment rate (i.e. the

NAIRU) has been rising steadily since the early 1970's. The policymakers are

right about demand management: even at today's high unemployment rates, a

demand expansion could well re-ignite inflation in many countries. A

country-by--country analysis of aggregate supply conditions is necessary in

order to determine the scope for a demand expansion.

     The theoretical work described in this paper helps us to understand the

some of the reasons that the NAIRU has increased. The major theoretical

puzzle has always centered on the fact that on the household level, labor

supply seems to be fairly inelastic. Household labor market behavior suggests

that adverse supply shocks should be willingly absorbed by labor through the

mechanism of real wage reductions. However, on the aggregate level, real wage

reductions seem to be anything but smooth. The model of union wage

determination in the paper emphasizes the point that when individuals (with

inelastic labor supplies) bargain for wages through a monopoly union, it is

possible, if not likely, that adverse supply shocks will be absorbed in the
                                      -38-


form of reductions in employment, rather than reductions in the real wage.

The union-wage models do not, of course, account for the failure of the

non-union sector to absorb smoothly the workers laid off from the union

sector. Various regulations may well block the adjustment of the non-union

sector. The failure of the non-union sector to grow strongly in most European

countries, in contrast to its rapid growth in the United States, should be a

prime area of future empirical research.

     The empirical work reviewed here has demonstrated several important

points in addition to the major finding of a sharp increase in the NAIRU in

most European countries. First, the level of unemployment has been

importantly affected by movements of the real wage, as is stressed in the

union-wage model. This finding is established both in econometric labor

demand equations and in estimates of the wage gap. Second, wage setters

adjust the real wage only partially, if at all, in response to various supply

disturbances, with the implication that the real product wage facing firms is

likely to increase when labor taxes or oil prices increase. In this sense,

the econometric wage equations confirm that adverse supply shocks tend to open

up wage gaps. Third, econometric Phillips curve equations tend to confirm the

fact that supply shock variables are in part or in whole responsible for the

shifts in the NAIRU in the past decade.

     The second section of the paper discusses the implications for demand

management of different forms of supply shocks. The major novelty in this

section is the study of the hypothesis of hysteresis, in which the NAIRU

itself rises endogenously in response to continued slack in the economy. Some

have argued that the presence of hysteresis would argue in favor of a demand
                                      -.39—



expansion, because of the secondary benefits of reducing the NAIRU over time.

In fact, the existence of hysteresis has subtle implications for demand

management. The formal model shows a case in which the optimal demand

response to a price shock is to absorb some of the price increase in the form

of a recession, even if that results in a permanent increase in the NAIRU.
                                                                 4O—

                                                           Footnotes




1.            Specifically, from (2),                  =
                                                                + [(a+k/)             -
                                                                                              (a1     +
                                                                                                          ki/)]    +


Now, let the change in a +                       k/   be denoted by t,, and approximate

by -9(U-Uti) for an appropriate 0.
2.            The characteristic equation of (17) reduces to r(r2-or-q2a-f2—of) = 0.

The three roots of this equation are


              r1 =   [0   +   (52+42a+rf2+45f)hI'2)/2            >    0


              r2 =   [5   -
                              (52+442a+4f2+45f)L"2]/2            <    0


                  = 0


3.            We want to show that 1 +
                                                    c13
                                                           > 0 or c13 >         -1.           To do this, note that

C13 =                              and c12 =                    Combining these expressions, we have
              4c12/(f+r1)                         -4a/r1.
                                              Thus, 1 + c13 =                         —                             Since
c13 =          —L/[r1(f+r1)].                                        [r1(f-i-r1)              q2ct]/[r1(f+r1)].
r1,
          f   >   0, we see that sign(1+c13) = sign[r1(f+r1)                              -
                                                                                              42a].       To show that

[r1(f+r1) -             q2a] < 0,          we show first that r >           q2a. This               in turn implies

[r1(f-i-r1) —           q2a} > 0           and therefore 1 +     C13 > 0.          To prove r >              2a, consider
again the characteristic equation of (17), in footnote 3. We see that

      satisfies the equation r - Or1                        -        — f2   -    Of       =    0, so that
      —   q2a = Or1           +   f2   +    Of > 0 (the inequality follows from the fact that r1, ,

f > 0).           This is what we needed to demonstrate.
                                         —41-


                                   References



Artus, J.R. (1984), "The Disequilibrium Real Wage Hypothesis — An Empirical

     Evaluation", IMF Staff Papers 31, 249.

Beenstock, M., P. Warburton, P. Lewington, T. Macromatis (1983), "A Medium

     Term Macroeconometric Model of the U.K. Economy 1950-82", City

     University, mimeo.

Blanchard, 0. et al. (1985), "Employment and Growth in Europe: A Two-Handed

     Approach", Centre for European Policy Studies Paper.

Black, S.W. (1984), "Learning from Adversity -    Policy   responses to two Shock

     in Oil Prices", Lurcy Inaugural Lecture.

Bruno, M. and J.D. Sachs (1981), "Supply Vs. Demand Approaches to the Problem

     of Stagflation," in Macroeconomic Policies for Growth and Stability, ed.

     H. Giersch, Mohr, Tübingen.

Bruno, M. (1985), "Aggregate Supply and Demand Factors in OECD Unemployment:

     An Update," Paper presented at the Conference on the Rise in

     Unemployment, Sussex (revised August '85).

Bruno, M. and J.D. Sachs (1985), Economics of Worldwide Stagflation, Harvard

     University Press.

Calmfors, L. (1984), "The Roles of Stabilization Policy and Wage Setting for

     the Achievement of Macroeconomic Targets", Paper presented at the Second

     Colloquium of the EEA, Frankfurt.

Coe, 0., F. Gagliardi (1985), "Nominal Wage Determination in Ten OECO

     Economies", OECD Working Paper no. 19.

Dixit, A. (1980), "A Solution Technique for Rational Expectations Models with
                                      -42—


     Applications to Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Determination,"

     unpublished, Princeton University.

Friedman, M. (1968), "The Roles of Monetary Policy," American Economic

     Review 58(1), 1-17.

Gordon, R. (1977), "World Inflation and the Sources of Monetary Accommodation:

     A Study of Eight Countries," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 8(2),

     409-468.

Gordon, R.J. (1985), "Wage Price Dynamics and the Manufacturing Output Gap -in

     Europe, Japan and North America", Paper for presentation at the

     Conference on Unemployment, Yxtahoim, Sweden.

Grossman, 0. (1984), "International Competition and the Unionized Sector,"

     Canadian Journal of Economics 17(3), August.

Grubb, D., R. Jackman, R. Layard (1982), "Causes of Current Stagflation",

     Review of Economic Studies, 49, 707.

Grubb, 0., R. Jackman, R. Layard (1983), "Wage Rigidity and Unemployment in

     OECD Countries", European Economic Review, 21, 11.

Grubb, D., R. Layard, J. Symons (1984), "Wages, Unemployment and Incomes

     Policy", in M. Emerson, ed., Europe's Stagflation, Oxford University

     Press.

Hargraves Heap, S.P. (1980), "Choosing the Wrong 'Natural' Rate: Accelerating

     Inflation or Decelerating Employment and Growth?" The Economic Journal 90.

Knoester, A. (1983), "Stagnation and the Inverted Haavelmo Effect: Some

     International Evidence", De Economist, 131, 548.

Knoester, A., N. van der Windt (1985), "Real Wages and Taxation in Ten OECD

    Countries", Erasmus University Discussion Paper 8501/GM.
                                          —43-


Lawrence, C. and R. Lawrence (1985), "Manufacturing Wage Dispersion: An End

     Game Interpretation," BrookinQs Papers on Economic Activity 1, 47—116.

Layard, R., G. Basevi, et al. (1984), "Europe: The Case for Unsustainable

     Growth," Centre for European Policy Studies Paper No. 8/9.

Layard, R., S. Nickell (1984), "The Causes of British Unemployment", LSE

     Working Paper no.642.

McDonald, I.M. and R. Solow (1981), "Wage Bargaining and Employment,"

     American Economic Review, December.

Minford, P. (1983), Unemployment: Cause and Cure, Martin Robertson, Oxford.

Newell, A., J. Symons (1985), "Wages and Unemployment in the OECD Countries",

     LSE Discussion Paper no.215.

Nickell, S. (1984), "A Review of 'Unemployment: Cause asnd Cure, by

     P. Minford," Economic Journal, December.

Nickell, 5., M. Andrews (1983), "Unions, Real Wages and Employment in Britain

     1951 -   79",   Oxford Economic Papers, Nov.

Perry, G. (1975), "Determinants of Wage Inflation Around the World," Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity 6(2), 403-435.

Sachs, J.D. (1979), "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A

     Comparative Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1979:2, 269.

Sachs, J.O. (1983a), "Real Wages and Unemployment in the OECD Countries,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1983:1.

Sachs, J.D. (1983b), "Comment: The Economic Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher

     (Buiter and Miller)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1983:2.

Sachs, J. and C. Wyplosz (1985), "Mitterand's Economic Policies," presented

    at the Economic Policy Conference, November 1985, and forthcoming in
                                      -44--



     Economic Policy, 1986.

Symons, J. (1985), "Relative Prices and the Demand for Labour in British

     Manufacturing," Economica, February.

Symons, J. and R. Layard (1984), "Neo-Classical Demand for Labour Functions

     for Six Major Economies," Economic Journal, December.

Tobin, J. (1984), "Unemployment -in the 1980s: Macroeconomic Diagnosis and

     Prescription," -in Andrew J. Pierre, ed., Unemployment and Growth in the

    Western Economies, Council on Foreign Relations, New York.
