NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISKS FOR THE LONG RUN:
ESTIMATION WITH TIME AGGREGATION
Ravi Bansal
Dana Kiku
Amir Yaron
Working Paper 18305
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18305

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We thank Andy Abel, George Constantinides, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Tom Sargent, Martin Schneider,
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, seminar participants at Boston University, Copenhagen School of Business,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Duke University, Harvard University, LBS, LSE, Norwegian School
of Management, NYU, Stockholm School of Economics, Tel-Aviv University, University of California-Berkeley,
University of Chicago, University of Texas-Austin, University of Washington-St. Louis, University
of Wisconsin, Wharton, Yale, and conference participants at the Summer Econometric Society Meetings,
the NBER Asset-Pricing meeting, Nemmers Prize Conference, Frontiers of Monetary policy—St.
Louis FRB, and CIRANO Financial Econometrics Conference in Montreal for useful comments. Yaron
thanks support from the Rodney White Center at the Wharton School. This paper builds on our earlier
working paper, Risks for the Long Run: Estimation and Inference. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Risks For the Long Run: Estimation with Time Aggregation
Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron
NBER Working Paper No. 18305
August 2012
JEL No. E2,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
The long-run risks (LRR) asset pricing model emphasizes the role of low-frequency movements in
expected growth and economic uncertainty, along with investor preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty, as an important economic-channel that determines asset prices. In this paper, we estimate
the LRR model. To accomplish this we develop a method that allows us to estimate models with recursive
preferences, latent state variables, and time-aggregated data. Time-aggregation makes the decision
interval of the agent an important parameter to estimate. We find that time-aggregation can significantly
affect parameter estimates and statistical inference. Imposing the pricing restrictions and explicitly
accounting for time-aggregation, we show that the estimated LRR model can account for the joint
dynamics of aggregate consumption, asset cash flows and prices, including the equity premia, risk-free
rate and volatility puzzles.

Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Dana Kiku
Finance Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
kiku@wharton.upenn.edu

Amir Yaron
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2256 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
yaron@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The long-run risks (LRR) model developed by Bansal and Yaron (2004) has received
signiﬁcant attention in the macroeconomics and ﬁnance literatures. The model captures
the intuition that risks embodied in low-frequency movements in the expected growth and
conditional volatility of consumption are important for understanding asset prices. In this
paper, we use macro and ﬁnancial data to estimate and empirically evaluate the LRR
model. Estimation of the model has to confront three challenges. First, the return on the
aggregate consumption asset, a key input of the LRR model based on Epstein and Zin (1989)
preferences, is not observable. A second challenge is in extracting low-frequency expected
growth and volatility movements in the observed consumption data. A third challenge is
dealing with time-aggregation that emanates from a potential mismatch between the decision
interval of the agent and the sampling frequency of the data, which could distort inference
and parameter estimates.
We develop an estimation method that addresses the aforementioned challenges. To
make estimation of the model feasible, we exploit consumption dynamics and the model
pricing restrictions to derive the unobservable return on the consumption claim in terms of
the state variables and underlying parameters. We show how the decision interval of the
agent, a parameter we estimate (modeled in number of days), inﬂuences the dynamics of
time-aggregated data and the model’s implications for asset prices. We extract the latent
state variables – the long-run growth component and conditional volatility of consumption
growth – from the observed price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate by imposing the modelimplied cross-equation restrictions. Incorporating all these pieces together, we estimate the
model using a GMM framework along the lines of Hansen (1982) by exploiting a set of
moment restrictions of the joint dynamics of time-aggregated consumption, dividends and
asset prices.
Overall, our empirical ﬁndings provide considerable support for the LRR model. Our
estimation results, which utilize the longest available sample of annual data from 1930
till 2009, suggest that: (i) investors have a preference for early resolution of uncertainty,
(ii) shocks to the expected growth component of consumption have a long-run eﬀect that
persists beyond typical business cycle frequencies, (iii) although variation in consumption
volatility is relatively small, the eﬀect of volatility shocks is long-lasting, (iv) agents’ decision
interval corresponds to a period of about 33 days, and accounting for temporal aggregation
has important quantitative eﬀects on estimation (v) the model is not rejected by the

1

overidentifying restrictions and can account for the observed risk premia and volatility of
equity returns, the risk-free rate dynamics and other stylized features of macro and asset
market data.
The estimated values of risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES)
in the benchmark LRR model are 7.4 and 2.1 respectively. Both estimates have relatively
tight standard errors – 1.6 for risk aversion and 0.8 for the IES. We ﬁnd that the long-run
growth and volatility components of consumption are highly persistent, with implied annual
autocorrelations of 0.80 and 0.98, respectively.1 These estimates underscore the long-run
nature of expected growth and volatility shocks that manifest into high equity premia and
high volatility of asset prices. The estimated model implies a market risk premium of 6.4%
and a 19.6% volatility of stock market returns, and generates a low risk-free rate of about
1.1%. The estimated number of decision periods within a year is 11 which translates to a
decision interval of approximately 33 days. Importantly, the benchmark LRR speciﬁcation
is not rejected by the overidentifying moments of the joint dynamics of consumption, market
dividends and returns – the p-value associated with the J-test statistic is 13%.
We also examine a speciﬁcation of the LRR model in which the stochastic volatility
component is shut down. Many of the structural parameters are similar to those estimated
under the benchmark LRR model although with larger standard standard errors. Moreover,
the model is formally rejected by the overidentifying restrictions. The larger standard errors
and model rejection are largely driven by predictability moments such as the correlations
between future returns (consumption growth) and current price-dividend ratio.

Such

moments naturally require time variation in fundamentals which in the model emanate from
stochastic volatility. In all our analysis shows that stochastic volatility in consumption and
dividend growth is important for confronting the model with asset pricing data.
A prominent feature of our analysis is time-aggregation. To analyze the eﬀect of timeaggregation, we also estimate an annual version of the LRR model, that assumes that
the decision interval of the agent and the data sampling frequency are both annual and,
therefore, ignores restrictions of temporal aggregation. We ﬁnd this model speciﬁcation to
be strongly rejected in the data. Similar to the benchmark LRR case, the estimates of the
the annual model imply high persistence in the expected consumption growth. However, the
contribution of long-run risks to the volatility of consumption growth in the two speciﬁcations
is very diﬀerent – it is much higher in the benchmark model than in the annual speciﬁcation.
1

Annual persistence is computed by raising the estimate of monthly autocorrelation to the 12-th power.

2

These diﬀerences are driven by time-aggregation eﬀects. In the annual speciﬁcation, the
entire shock to annual consumption growth is identiﬁed as a short-run risk, while under the
null of the benchmark model, a portion of this shock comes from long-run risk ﬂuctuations.
Thus, the annual model is misspeciﬁed, which leads to distortions in parameter estimates
and, in particular, a much larger estimate of risk aversion of about 19. Using simulations, we
further document that when time-aggregation of monthly dynamics is ignored, the model is
overly rejected, the risk aversion estimate rises, and the contribution of long-run growth risks
diminishes, all of which is consistent with our empirical ﬁndings. Our evidence suggests that
when the restrictions of time-aggregation are not imposed in the estimation, a sizable portion
of the low-frequency growth shock tends to be attributed to the short-run shock, which lowers
the role of long-run risks and makes it hard for the model to match the volatility of asset
returns and prices. Overall, our evidence suggests that accounting for temporal aggregation
in estimating the model and measuring the contribution of diﬀerent risk sources is extremely
important, particularly in the presence of low-frequency ﬂuctuations in consumption.
In addition to time-series dynamics, we evaluate the cross-sectional implications of our
benchmark LRR model for size and book-to-market sorted portfolios. We show that assets
with large mean returns, such as value and small market capitalization, are more sensitive
to long-run. Similar to the implications for the market portfolio, we ﬁnd that low-frequency
growth risks are the key source of risk premia in the cross section. Importantly, we show
that the LRR model is also able to replicate the failure of the CAPM — our benchmark LRR
speciﬁcation generates low market betas and high CAPM alphas of the value-minus-growth
and small-minus-large strategies, of the same magnitudes as in the data.
Earlier work by Epstein and Zin (1989) relies on the GMM of Hansen and Singleton
(1982) to estimate a recursive preference based model. However, they replace the return on
the consumption asset with the value-weighted market return. Our approach, as discussed
above, allows us to infer the dynamics of the wealth return from the observed data and
obviates the need to substitute it with the stock market return. More recently, a series
of papers explore the ability of long-run growth risks to account for asset market data.
Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) show that long-run
risks in cash ﬂows are important in understanding cross-sectional variation in risk premia.
Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2005), Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007), Kiku (2006),
Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009), Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), Parker
and Julliard (2005), Jagannathan and Wang (2010), and Constantinides and Gosh (2008)
exploit features of the recursive preferences and/or of long-run risks to account for various

3

features of asset returns. Distinct from these papers, we estimate and evaluate the LRR
model in the GMM framework while imposing the model restrictions on the joint dynamics
of consumption, dividends, and prices that appropriately account for temporal aggregation.
The paper continues as follows. Section 2 presents the model and its testable restrictions.
Section 3 provides details of our estimation methodology. Section 4 describes the data. We
report and discuss results of our empirical analysis in Section 5. Section 6 provides concluding
remarks.

2

Model

In this section we specify the long-run risks model based on Bansal and Yaron (2004). The
underlying environment is one with complete markets and a representative agent that has
Epstein and Zin (1989) type preferences, which allow for a separation of risk aversion and
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Speciﬁcally, the agent maximizes her life-time
utility, which is deﬁned recursively as,
[

1−γ
θ

Vt = (1 − δ)Ct

] θ
[ 1−γ ]) θ1 1−γ
+ δ Et Vt+1
,
(

(1)

where Ct is consumption at time t, 0 < δ < 1 reﬂects the agent’s time preferences, γ is the
coeﬃcient of risk aversion, θ =

1−γ
1
1− ψ

, and ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

(IES). Utility maximization is subject to the budget constraint,
Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct )Rc,t+1 ,

(2)

where Wt is the wealth of the agent, and Rc,t is the return on all invested wealth.
Consumption growth has the following dynamics:
∆ct+1 = µc + xt + σt ηt+1
xt+1 = ρxt + φe σt et+1

(3)

2
σt+1
= σ02 + ν(σt2 − σ02 ) + σw wt+1 ,

where ∆ct+1 is the growth rate of log consumption, and the three shocks, η, e, and w are
assumed to be i.i.d Normal and uncorrelated. The conditional expectation of consumption

4

growth is given by µc + xt , where xt is a small but persistent component that captures
long-run risks in consumption growth. The parameter ρ determines the persistence in the
conditional mean of consumption growth. For parsimony, as in Bansal and Yaron (2004),
we have a common time-varying volatility in consumption, which, as shown in their paper,
leads to time-varying risk premia. The unconditional variance of consumption is σ02 and ν
governs the persistence of the volatility process.

2.1

The Long-Run Risks Model’s IMRS

For these preferences, the log of the IMRS, mt+1 = log(Mt+1 ), is
mt+1 = θ log δ −

θ
∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ,
ψ

(4)

where rc,t+1 is the continuous return on the consumption asset, which is endogenous to the
model. Thus, in order to characterize the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, one
needs to solve for the unobservable return on the consumption claim. To solve for rc,t+1 ,
we use the dynamics of the consumption growth and the log-linear approximation of the
continuous return, namely,
rc,t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zt+1 + ∆ct+1 − zt ,

(5)

where zt = log(Pt /Ct ) is the log price-consumption ratio (i.e., the valuation ratio
corresponding to a claim that pays aggregate consumption), and κ’s are constants of loglinearization,
κ1 =

exp(z̄)
1 + exp(z̄)

κ0 = log(1 + exp(z̄)) − κ1 z̄ ,

(6)
(7)

where z̄ denotes the mean of the log price-consumption ratio.
To derive the time series for rc,t+1 , we require a solution for log price-consumption ratio,
which we conjecture follows,
zt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 σt2 .

(8)

The solution coeﬃcients A’s depend on all the preference parameters and the parameters

5

that govern the dynamics of consumption growth. For notational ease, let zt = A′ Yt , where
Yt′ = [1 xt σt2 ] is the vector of state variables, and A′ = [A0 A1 A2 ], which is given by
[
′

A = A0

1
1− ψ

1−κ1 ρ

−

1
(γ−1)(1− ψ
)

2 (1−κ1 ν)

[
1+

(

κ1 φe
1−κ1 ρ

]
)2 ]

(9)

be the corresponding vector of price-consumption elasticities.2 As discussed in Bansal and
Yaron (2004), the elasticities of the price-consumption ratio with respect to the expected
growth component, xt , and volatility, σt , depend on the preference conﬁguration.

In

particular, for the elasticity A1 to be positive, the IES parameter has to be greater than
one. Moreover, for the price-consumption ratio to exhibit a negative response to an increase
in economic uncertainty, the IES again has to be larger than one, given that risk aversion is
greater than one.
Note that the derived solutions depend on the approximating constants, κ0 and κ1 , which,
in turn, depend on the endogenous mean of the price-consumption ratio, z̄. In order to solve
for z̄, we ﬁrst substitute expressions for κ’s (equations (6) and (7)) into the expressions
for A’s and solve for the mean of the price-consumption ratio. Speciﬁcally, z̄ can be found
numerically by solving a ﬁxed-point problem,
z̄ = A(z̄)′ Ȳ ,

(10)

where the dependence of the A’s on z̄ is given above, and Ȳ is the mean of the state vector
Y . This is quite easy to implement in practice.
Given the solution for zt , the IMRS can be stated in terms of the state variables and
innovations,
mt+1 = Γ′ Yt − Λ′ ζt+1 ,

(11)

where the three sources of risks are
[
]
′
= σt ηt+1 σt et+1 σw wt+1 ,
ζt+1

(12)

and the three dimensional vectors Γ and Λ are given by,
[
′

Γ = Γ0

− ψ1

−(γ − 1)(γ −

1 1
)
ψ 2

2

]
[
]
κ1 φe 2
,
1 + ( 1−κ1 ρ )

(13)

The expressions for A0 and Γ0 in equation (13) below, as well as the derivations of all other expressions,
are given in Appendix A.1.

6

[
′

Λ = γ

(γ −

1 κ1 φe
)
ψ 1−κ1 ρ

]
]
[
κ
φ
κ1
1 e
−(γ − 1)(γ − ψ1 ) 2 (1−κ
1 + ( 1−κ
)2 .
1 ν)
1ρ

(14)

Note that the stochastic discount factor in equation (11) is exact up to an approximation error
emanating from the linearization around the theoretical value of average price-consumption
ratio. We ﬁnd that this approximation error is quite small and does not materially aﬀect our
empirical results that follow. Appendix A.5 provides a detailed discussion of the magnitude
of the approximation error and a comparison of the above log-linear solution with a solution
based on numerical methods.
Other assets can easily be priced using the IMRS given in equation (11). We assume
that the dividend dynamics for any other asset j follow
∆dj,t+1 = µj + ϕj xt + φj σt uj,t+1

(15)

where ϕj and φj determine asset j’s exposure to the long-run and volatility risks, respectively.
Exposure to short-run consumption risks is determined by the correlation between dividend
and consumption innovations, uj,t+1 and ηt+1 , which we denote by ϱj . We let ∆dt+1 denote
the dividend growth rate of the aggregate market portfolio, and reserve d-subscript for various
quantities of the stock market index. Speciﬁcally, we use µd , ϕd , and ϱd for the aggregate
market dividend and let zd,t and rd,t+1 denote the price-dividend ratio and the return on the
aggregate market portfolio.
The ﬁrst-order condition yields the following asset pricing Euler condition,
Et [exp (mt+1 + rj,t+1 )] = 1 ,

(16)

where rj,t+1 is the log of the gross return on asset j. Similar to the claim to consumption,
the price-dividend ratio for any asset j, zj,t = A′j Yt , with the solutions given in Appendix
A.2. Furthermore, given the expression for the IMRS, it follows that the risk premium on
asset j is,
2
Et [rj,t+1 − rf,t + 0.5σt,r
] = βη,j λη σt2 + βe,j λe σt2 + βw,j λw σw2 ,
j

(17)

where βi,j is the return beta for asset j with respect to the ith risk source where i = {η, e, w},
and λi is the corresponding entry of the vector of market prices of risks, Λ. Under the
structure of the model, the return β’s and market price of risks λ’s will be functions of
the preference parameters and the underlying parameters of consumption and dividend
dynamics, details of which are given in Appendix A.2. Finally, it is easy to verify that

7

the risk free rate can be represented as,
rf,t = F0 + F1 xt + F2 σt2 = F′ Yt

(18)

where the loading coeﬃcients are given in Appendix A.3.
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution is a critical parameter in the LRR model. Work
by Giovannini and Weil (1989), Tallarini (2000), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), and Hansen
and Sargent (2006) considers the special case where the IES parameter is one. Our estimation
methodology nests this special case in a continuous fashion (details are given in Appendix
A.4). Namely, the IMRS components as given in equation (11) adjust in a continuous way
as one takes the limit of the IES parameter at one.3 That is,
lim κ1 = δ

ψ→1

lim Γ′ = Γ′ (ψ = 1, κ1 = δ)

ψ→1

lim Λ′ = Λ′ (ψ = 1, κ1 = δ) .

ψ→1

(19)

The discussion above highlights the fact that the generalized pricing kernel (11) does not
conﬁne an econometrician to a prespeciﬁed value of the IES. That is, in estimation the IES
is a free parameter.

3

Estimation Method

The key point of this paper is to evaluate and test the LRR model’s ability to jointly match
consumption, dividend, and asset price dynamics. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in the
estimates of the model’s parameters, Θ = {γ, ψ, δ, µc , ρ, φe , σ02 , ν, σw , µd , ϕd , φd , ϱd }, as well as
the estimated decision interval of the agent – an issue we discuss further below. Economically,
we are interested in knowing whether at these estimates the model can account for aggregate
macro and asset price data. This would provide direct evidence about the importance
and magnitude of long-run growth and volatility risks in consumption and dividends, and
the magnitude of preference parameters (IES and risk aversion). Our empirical results, as
discussed below, shed light on the broader questions regarding the role of long-run versus
shorter horizon risks (e.g., business cycle risks), the duration of long-run shocks, and the
interaction of these dynamics with preferences in understanding risks that drive ﬁnancial
markets.
3

Evaluating the pricing kernel (11) under the above restrictions gives exactly the same solution as in
Giovannini and Weil (1989), Tallarini (2000), and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008).

8

Our estimation strategy is a moment-based, GMM approach. We provide analytical
expressions for moments of consumption and dividend dynamics, asset prices, and joint
dynamics between consumption and asset prices. More speciﬁcally, we recover the statevariables xt and σt2 from the observed data, then provide analytical expressions for the
conditional moments in terms of the state-variables, and then derive unconditional moments
purely in terms of the parameters of interest, Θ.
Since time-aggregation is of considerable importance in the LRR model, the
aforementioned estimation procedure also includes estimation of the decision interval. Our
estimation therefore searches jointly for the best parameter Θ and decision frequency that
ﬁts the data. The longest and best quality (in the sense of measurement error) observed
data is annual. However, it is natural to assume the agent’s decision interval is shorter. We
account for this potential time-aggregation and are still able to provide analytical moments
in terms of the parameters of interest, Θ. Earlier papers that account for time-aggregation in
estimation in an asset-pricing context include Hansen and Sargent (1983) and Heaton (1995).
We show that time-aggregation has important eﬀects on model estimation and inference. In
the presence of time-aggregation, the shocks in IMRS (equation(11)) cannot be recovered and
hence the standard Euler Equation-based estimation approach, as in Hansen and Singleton
(1982), cannot be used.4 Our moments-based approach allows for estimation even when the
shocks and the IMRS are not available to the econometrician.

3.1

Recovering the state variables

To recover the state variables xt and σt2 , we use the fact that the price dividend ratio and the
risk free rate are aﬃne in these state variables. That is, equations (8) and (18) constitute,
for each date t, the following system
[
St (Θ) =
4

zd,t

]

rf,t

[
−

Ad (Θ)′
F(Θ)′

]

[

]
Yt

.

(20)

Using equation (11), the log of the h-period time-aggregated IMRS follows:
mt+h,h ≡

h
∑
j=1

mt+j = Γ̃′ Yt −

h [
∑

]
λη σt+j−1 ηt+j + λe σt+j−1 et+j + λw σw wt+j

j=1

It is easily shown that long-run and volatility shocks, et and wt , can be extracted from the available
high-frequency ﬁnancial data. However, short-run consumption innovations, ηt , cannot be recovered unless
consumption data are observed at a ﬁne (monthly) frequency.

9

Given the observed ﬁnancial variables, the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate, it is
possible to recover xt and σt . In practice we solve, for each date t and given Θ, the pair
of state variables that minimizes the system given in (20) above, while ensuring positivity
of the variance. This has the added virtue of minimizing any measurement errors in the
observed price-dividend ratio and the ex-ante real risk-free rate. It is worth noting that
we utilize here the monthly price-dividend ratio and risk free rate on an annual frequency
corresponding to the appropriate beginning of year information. Moreover, it is important
to recognize that this extraction step of state variables is ultimately done simultaneously
with the overall GMM estimation of the moment conditions characterizing asset prices—see
further discussion on the estimation below.

3.2

Time Aggregation

Given the state variables, we focus on moments that capture several key features of the
consumption, dividend, and asset data. First, we focus on the consumption and dividend
growth transition moments which ensures that the consumption and dividend dynamics
are consistent with the data. The second set of moments focuses on the level of returns,
and the third set of moments focuses on predictability of asset returns and consumption.
More speciﬁcally, the list of moments we use for consumption and dividend growth are
their respective volatility, autocorrelation, and joint correlations. In terms of return-based
moments, we utilize the level of equity and risk-free rates, and the price-dividend ratio. In
addition, we use the volatility of the market return, which exposes our estimation to both the
asset return level puzzles as well as the volatility puzzles. To account for predictability, we
use as moments the correlations of the price-dividend ratio with future consumption growth
and the market return respectively. We also use the contemporaneous correlation between
the price-dividend ratio and consumption volatility as a moment capturing their negative
relationship. Finally, we impose the model implications for the orthogonality between annual
consumption growth innovations and x – the expected consumption growth state, as well as
the orthogonality between the innovation to the squared consumption growth innovation and
the volatility state σ 2 as two additional moments. A detailed description of all the moment
conditions is given in Table III, under the consumption & dividend moments, asset return
moments, and predictability moments respectively. Our estimation approach, which uses
ﬁrst and second moments, allows us to impose model-restrictions and goes beyond the mean
return restrictions that follow from using only E(Mt+1 Rt+1 ) = 1. This is important as the
second moment restrictions (such as the volatility puzzles) contain considerable information

10

about model parameters of interest.5
To derive the unconditional moments, we ﬁrst provide an analytical expression for the
conditional moments based on the state-variables. We can express these moments for general
frequencies of time aggregation. We let τ denote the time index for the econometrician’s
sampling frequency – in our baseline conﬁguration the data is observed annually and therefore
τ accumulates in annual increments. We let h denote the agent’s (integer) number of decision
periods within a sampling period. For example, if the econometrician uses annual data and
the decision interval is monthly (weekly), τ increments annually while h = 12(52). Similarly,
if τ increments at quarterly frequency, and h = 3 the available data is assumed to be
quarterly and the decision interval is monthly. We let calender time, t, accumulate at the
same frequency as the agent’s decision interval; it follows that at a point in time, calender
time, which moves at the decision frequency is related to the sampling frequency by t = τ · h.
The available sample for observable data is given by τ = 1, 2, ...T . We assume consumption,
Ct , is unobserved and the only observable consumption is total consumption over the year,
∑
namely, hi=1 Ct−h+i . Based on the notation above, we denote ∆caτ , as observed log annual
consumption growth, which is shown (see Appendix B) to be well approximated as
∑h

∆caτ

≡ log

Ct−h+i
∑hi=1
i=1 Ct−2h+i

≈

h
∑
j−1
j=2

h

∆ct−2h+j +

h
∑
h−j+1
j=1

h

∆ct−h+j ∀t = τ · h (21)

where the superscript on the left-hand side indicates observed aggregated data which for
example if available annual as in our case would imply τ increments at yearly frequency.
To better understand the way the estimation method accounts for time-aggregation it is
instructive to present several moment conditions explicitly. To do so for the consumption
growth moments, it is ﬁrst useful to write the annual consumption growth rate in terms of
the state variables available at the beginning month of the base year as well as a sequence
of innovations which are mean zero conditional on that information set,
∑
∑
ρ(1 − ρh )2
= hµc +
x
+
a
φ
σ
e
+
bj φe σt−1−j et−j
t−2h
j
e
t−2h−1+j
t−2h+j
h(1 − ρ)2
j=1
j=1
h−1

∆caτ

+

h−1
∑
j+1
j=0

h

σt−1−j ηt−j +

h

h−2
∑
h−j−1

h

j=0

5

σt−h−1−j ηt−h−j ∀t = τ · h

(22)

E.g., with an i.i.d growth model, the price-dividend ratio is constant and has zero variance, which is
clearly at odds with the data.

11

where aj =

3.3

h
1
[( 1−ρ
)
hρj−1
1−ρ

−

j−1
1
( 1−ρ
1−ρ
1−ρ

− (j − 1)ρj−1 )] and bj =

1
[j
hρj−1

j

− ρ 1−ρ
].
1−ρ

Moments

The relevant state variables for computing any conditional moment of consumption growth
2
. Using equation (22)) it follows the conditional
(and other variables) are xt−2h and σt−2h
h 2

)
mean of consumption growth is hµc + ρ(1−ρ
x
, and consequently the unconditional mean
h(1−ρ)2 t−2h

and variance of observed annual consumption growth follows:
E[∆caτ ] = hµc ∀t = τ · h
(23)
]
[
h 2 2
ρ(1 − ρ )
var(xt−2h )
V ar[∆caτ ] =
h(1 − ρ)2
]
]
h−1 [
h [
∑
h−j 2 2 ∑
j 2 2
2
2
+
) σ0 +
(bj φe ) + ( ) σ0 . ∀t = τ · h
(aj φe ) + (
h
h
j=1
j=1
In the case of annual data and a monthly decision interval, hµc is equal to 12µc and
µc is interpreted as a monthly quantity. In the case of an annual sampling frequency and
an annual decision interval this simply reduces to µc , since h = 1 and τ moves at annual
increments.
The k-th autocovariance of annual consumption growth can be readily computed in
analogous fashion. In the estimation, we utilize the ﬁrst two autocorrelations of consumption
growth as moments. Appendix B provides more details for derivations of the moments used
in our estimation. The dynamics for annual dividend growth can be written in a similar
fashion as those given in equation (22) for consumption growth (that is dividend growth can
2
be represented in terms of xt−2h and σt−2h
and a sequence of shocks orthogonal to time t − 2h

information). Hence, the variance, the ﬁrst autocorrelation of dividend growth, as well as
the covariation between annual dividend and consumption growth also serve as moments in
our estimation.
Turning to moments that include asset prices, it is useful to consider ﬁrst the annual
a
price-dividend ratio zd,τ
≡ log ∑h−1PtD
j=0

deﬁned as the log of the end of year price over
t−j

the twelve-month trailing sum of dividends. Recall that the solution to the monthly pricedividend ratio takes the form, zd,t = A0,d + A1,d xt + A2,d σt2 with the solutions for Ad s given
in Appendix A.2. Using the deﬁnition of the annual price dividend ratio, it can be shown

12

that its dynamics follow,
a
zd,τ
= A0,d + A2,d σ02 (1 − ν h ) − log(h) + 0.5µd (h − 1)
2
[π + A1,d ρ]xt−h + A2,d ν h σt−h
+

h
∑

(24)

[qj + A1,d ρj ]φe σt−h−1+j et−h+j

j=1
h−1
∑
j=1

h−j
φd σt−j ut−j+1 +
h

h
∑

A2,d σw ν h−j wt−h+j

j=1

where π and qj are given in Appendix B. It follows that the mean and variance of the annual
price-dividend ratio are,
a
E[zd,τ
] = A0,d + A2,d σ02 − log(h) − 0.5µd (h − 1) ∀t = τ · h
a
V ar[zd,τ
] = [π + A1,d ρh ]2 var(xt ) + [A2,d ν h ]2 var(σt2 ) +

h
∑

(25)

[qj + A1,d ρh−j ]2 (φe σ0 )2

j=1

+

h−1
∑
j=1

[

h−j 2 2
φd ] σ0 +
h

h
∑

[A2,d σw ν h−j ]2 . ∀t = τ · h

j=1

The k-th order autocovariance of the price-dividend growth can be computed similarly
(see details in Appendix B), and in the estimation we make use of the ﬁrst and second
autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio.
The remaining moments involve the risk free rate and the market return. Given that both
have a known representation in terms of Θ and the state variables (e.g., see equation (18) for
the risk free rate), we utilize the same methodology to compute their respective unconditional
means as well as the volatility of the market return. Finally, these representation allow us
also to compute the covariations between the price-dividend ratio and the market return,
consumption growth, and consumption volatility respectively, which serve as our last set of
moments.

3.4

Estimation

Let M(Θ; h, {Data}) denote the diﬀerence between the model based moment conditions
(evaluated at Θ) and their data counterpart when there are h decision periods within a
sampling interval. That is, an element in this vector is one of the moments described above
minus the same moment based purely on the data. We choose the parameter vector Θ

13

by evaluating the annual based moment conditions M(Θ; h, {Data}) while simultaneously
choosing h, and the state variables xt and σt2 as described above. The parameter vector ΘT
is estimated by minimizing the standard GMM criteria,
{Θ; h} = argminΘ;h M(Θ; h, {Dataτ })′ W (Θ; h)M(Θ; h, {Dataτ })

(26)

where Dataτ pertains to observed annual data used in evaluating the moment conditions.6
The weighting matrix W (Θ; h) used in estimation is the diagonal inverse of the variancecovariance matrix of the moment conditions and is updated continuously, motivated by
Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron (1996). To construct the chi-squared test for over-identifying
restrictions, we compute J-statistic using Lemma 4.2 in Hansen (1982) which holds for a
general weighting matrix. The variance-covariance matrix is computed using the Newey and
West (1987) estimator.

4

Data

We use data on consumption and asset prices for the time period from 1930 till 2009. We
take the view that this sample better represents the overall variation in asset and macro
economic data. Importantly, the long span of the data helps in achieving more reliable
statistical inference. We work with the data sampled on an annual frequency as they are less
prone to errors that arise from seasonalities and other measurement problems highlighted in
Wilcox (1992).
To estimate the model, we exploit the dynamics of the observed aggregate consumption,
the stock market portfolio, and the risk-free rate. Consumption data represent per-capita
series of real consumption expenditure on non-durables and services from the NIPA tables
6

In the estimation of (26), and for each candidate decision interval h, the extraction of state variables xt
and σt2 follows by choosing a pair of state variables for each date t by minimizing a weighted sum of squared
errors, of
{xt , σt2 } = argmin St (Θ)WT St (Θ), for ∀ t,
where WT is a diagonal matrix of second moments of the observed price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate.
To guarantee positivity of the variance component, we solve the minimization problem by searching over a
two-dimensional grid in the {xt , σt2 }-space. We allow for a grid of 4,000 possible pairs, and make sure that the
permissible space is wide enough to ensure that solutions lie in the interior region. We ﬁnd that reﬁning the
grid further or expanding the boundary of the state space does not aﬀect the implied state dynamics and our
GMM estimates. Note that, alternatively, one could extract the states by using a constrained least-squares
solver that has the advantage of allowing for a continuum of values for x and σ 2 . Given that our grid is
quite ﬁne, our estimation yields almost identical results as the one based on the standard constrained OLS.

14

available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Aggregate stock market data consist of
annual observations of returns, dividends, and prices of the CRSP value-weighted portfolio
of all stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Price and dividend series are
constructed on the per-share basis as in Campbell and Shiller (1988), Bansal, Dittmar,
and Lundblad (2005), and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008). Market data are converted to
real using the consumer price index (CPI) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Growth
rates of consumption and dividends are constructed by taking the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the
corresponding log series. Finally, the ex-ante real risk-free rate is constructed as a ﬁtted
value from a projection of the ex-post real rate on the current nominal yield and inﬂation
over the previous year. To run the predictive regression, we use monthly observations on the
three-month nominal yield from the CRSP Fama Risk Free Rate tapes and CPI series. The
annual real risk-free rate is deﬁned as the annualized predicted value as of the beginning of
year. Table I provides key sample statistics for aggregate consumption growth, the stock
market index, and the risk-free rate. As well known, the data feature a sizable equity
premium of about 7%, high volatility of equity returns and low and relatively stable interest
rates.
To explore the cross-sectional implications of the model, we employ portfolios with
opposite size and book-to-market characteristics that are known to have provided investors
with quite diﬀerent premia over the years. The construction of portfolios is standard (see
Fama and French (1993)). In particular, for the size sort, we allocate individual ﬁrms into
5 portfolios according to their market capitalization at the end of June of each year. Bookto-market quintiles are likewise re-sorted at the end of June by ranking all the ﬁrms based
on their book-to-market ratios, deﬁned as book equity at the last ﬁscal year end of the
prior calendar year divided by market equity at the end of December of the previous year.
NYSE breakpoints are used in both sorts. For each portfolio, we construct value-weighted
monthly returns, as well as per-share price and dividend series. Monthly data are then
time-aggregated to an annual frequency and converted to real using the consumer price
index. Over the sample period, small stocks have outperformed large ﬁrms by about 7% and
the spread in returns on value and growth ﬁrms has averaged almost 6% (see Table VII).
Heterogeneity in risk premia across size and book-to-market portfolios is known to present
a challenge for the standard CAPM since the market betas show almost no cross-sectional
variation. Below, we will evaluate the ability of the LRR model to account for the observed
size and value premia as well as the failure of the CAPM betas.

15

5

Empirical Findings

In this section, we present the estimates of the LRR model and discuss its implications for
the joint dynamics of aggregate consumption, dividends and prices of the market portfolio.
We also highlight the eﬀect of time-aggregation on parameter estimates and inference, and
evaluate the cross-sectional predictions of the model.

5.1

Estimation Evidence

Using the methodology outlined above, we estimate two model speciﬁcations: the LRR
model and a nested speciﬁcation, labeled “No-Vol”, that restricts the conditional volatility
process to be constant. The “No-Vol” speciﬁcation is estimated by exploiting the same
set of moments as in the LRR case, except for the conditional moment of the volatility
dynamics, which is not deﬁned when time-variation in the conditional second moment is
ruled out. We use data sampled on the annual frequency and take into account potential
time-aggregation eﬀects by estimating the decision frequency (h) along with the structural
parameters for preferences and the dynamics of consumption and dividends. Table II presents
GMM estimates of the two models, their standard errors and the χ2 -test of overidentifying
restrictions. The sample moments, their model-implied counterparts and the t-statistics for
the diﬀerence between the two are provided in Table III.7
The parameter estimates of the LRR model, reported in the right panel of Table II,
provide strong evidence of (i) time-aggregation, and (ii) a persistent predictable component in
growth rates and persistent time-varying uncertainty. The estimate of the decision frequency
(ĥ) is 11 which corresponds to a decision interval of approximately 33 days (365/11). Note
that the estimate of h is signiﬁcantly greater that one, i.e., the decision interval is much
shorter than a year. We show below that time-aggregation consequent to a discrepancy
between the (true) decision frequency and the sampling frequency of the data, and if ignored,
may lead to signiﬁcant biases in the estimates of the key model parameters and distorted
inference.
The estimate of ρ, which governs the autocorrelation of the conditional mean of
consumption growth, is 0.98 and is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The magnitude of long7

Small diﬀerences in the sample statistics reported in Tables I and III are due to the loss of few initial
observations in constructing GMM moment conditions.

16

run risks is quite small, φ̂e = 0.031 (SE = 0.016), suggesting that the predictable growth
component contributes relatively little to the overall variation of consumption growth. These
parameter values illustrate the diﬃculty in detecting long-run risks solely from the available
consumption data. The estimated long-run risk component, along with realized values of
annual consumption growth, are illustrated in Figure 1.8 The conditional volatility process
is also highly persistent, ν̂ = 0.998 (SE = 0.002), but is driven by quantitatively small
shocks. The extracted volatility component exhibits a pronounced variation across time and
a considerable decline in the 90’s. Consistent with the model, the volatility component is
a strong predictor of future returns. The regression of 5-year ahead excess returns of the
market portfolio on the extracted variance yields an R2 of 12%. As further shown in Table
II, dividends of the market portfolio are signiﬁcantly exposed to long-run consumption risks
with ϕ̂d = 4.45 (SE = 1.6). The short-run correlation between consumption and dividend
growth rates, on the other hand, is not estimated precisely, with the point estimate and
standard error of 0.49 and 0.33, respectively.
The estimate of risk aversion in the LRR speciﬁcation is about 7.4, which is relatively
low from the perspective of the asset pricing literature. The IES estimate is above one
(ψ̂ = 2.05, SE = 0.84), which is essential for a negative price of volatility risks and a positive
relationship between the price-consumption ratio and expected growth.9 Our estimate of the
IES is driven by the negative correlation between the price-dividend ratio and consumption
volatility, as well as by low level of the real risk-free rate, an observation also underscored
in Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008). Hall (1988) and Beeler and Campbell (2012) report a
smaller magnitude of the IES, but they do not impose a broad set of equilibrium asset pricing
restrictions in their estimation of the IES parameter.10
The estimates of the parameters governing the dynamics of expected consumption growth
and volatility capture the economic mechanism highlighted in the LRR literature, ﬁrst
discussed in Bansal and Yaron (2004). Because the extracted expected growth and volatility
shocks are long-lasting, they have an economically signiﬁcant impact on growth expectations
and future uncertainty, and therefore on assets’ valuations. As Table III shows, the LRR
model is indeed able to account for the level and volatility of the market returns, while
8

For expositional purposes, the two series are plotted on diﬀerent scales.
It is worth noting that the parameter estimates presented in Table II, including the estimate of the
decision frequency, are largely within one standard error of the values commonly used in calibrations of the
LRR model and, in particular, are close to those in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012).
10
Moreover, Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) show that the approach of
estimating the IES solely based on the risk free rate (e.g., Hall (1988)) can yield sizably downward biased
estimates when the underlying shocks exhibit stochastic volatility as is the case in the LRR framework.
9

17

matching the low mean of the observed risk-free rate. Consistent with the data, the model
generates a persistent and volatile price-dividend ratio with a ﬁrst-order autocorrelation
of 0.92 and a standard deviation of 0.45. As argued above, the magnitude of the longrun consumption risks is relatively small, which allows the model to match the time-series
dynamics of consumption growth. The standard deviation and the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation
of annual consumption growth at the point estimates are 2.3% and 0.45, respectively. As
further shown in the table, the model is successful in explaining other key moments of the
joint distribution of consumption, dividends and asset returns. This success manifests itself
formally through the χ2 -test of overidentifying restrictions that indicates that the LRR model
is not rejected at the conventional 5% signiﬁcance level.
In contrast to the LRR model, the restricted “No-Vol” speciﬁcation is strongly rejected.
The estimation results for the constant-volatility speciﬁcation are presented in the left
panel of Table II. Overall, the estimates of the (unrestricted) parameters of the “NoVol” speciﬁcation are similar in magnitude to the corresponding estimates of the fully
speciﬁed LRR model. The estimate of the decision frequency is 10 (SE = 1.97), which
is still statistically diﬀerent from one; the estimates of risk aversion and IES are 7.1 and 2.3,
respectively. Notice, however, that the preference parameters in this case are estimated less
precisely, especially the time-discount factor and the IES. The large standard errors point
out diﬃculties in separately identifying the rate of time preferences and IES when timevariation in risk premia is ruled out. The “No-Vol” speciﬁcation conﬁrms the presence of a
small persistent component in consumption growth. Moreover, since volatility risks are now
shut oﬀ, the contribution of long-run (and short-run) consumption risks under the “No-Vol”
speciﬁcation is ampliﬁed relative to the estimated dynamics of the LRR model. This allows
the constant-volatility set-up to generate a sizable equity premium and high variation in
asset returns. However, as Table III shows, the “No-Vol” speciﬁcation fails to match several
empirical moments and, in particular, evidence on predictability of consumption growth
rates and returns. With no variation in uncertainty, the price-dividend ratio is driven solely
by the long-run risk component generating excessive predictability of future growth rates.
This speciﬁcation is also unable to account for predictability of asset returns as it implies
a constant risk premium. The rejection of the constant-volatility speciﬁcation reveals the
importance of time-variation in consumption volatility and the ensuing variation in risk
premia.
One essential feature of the LRR framework is predictability of consumption growth
rates. Our benchmark estimation incorporated the correlations between the price-dividend

18

ratio and consumption growth and market return at a one year horizon.

Beeler and

Campbell (2012) argue that the LRR model may imply high (low) long-horizon predictability
of consumption growth (return) relative to the data. Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012)
document that these data-features are very imprecisely estimated, and therefore not likely
to receive signiﬁcant weight in estimation. Nevertheless to account for the predictability of
consumption and return carefully, we also consider an augmented set of moment conditions
which includes predictability moments at the three-year horizon for both consumption growth
rates and market returns. The parameter estimates based on the extended set of moments
and the model ﬁt are presented in Table VIII. As the table shows, the estimates and
the model implications are robust to the inclusion of the additional moment restrictions,
indicating that indeed the longer horizon predictability moments do not alter the parameter
estimates. Consistent with our benchmark estimation, we ﬁnd strong evidence of persistent
variations in the conditional mean and volatility of consumption and dividend growth rates.
It is worth noting that a broader perspective on consumption growth predictability
provides strong evidence for consumption predictability. The Beeler and Campbell (2012)
claim for consumption predictability is based on using only the price-dividend ratio as
a predictor of future consumption growth. Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) show that
in the data the R2 ’s for consumption growth implied by a ﬁrst-order VAR that includes
consumption growth, the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate are 23%, 15% and 13%
at horizons of one, ﬁve and ten years, respectively. These results are statistically signiﬁcant
both at short and long horizons. That is multi-variable based prediction of consumption
does imply signiﬁcant long-horizon predictability. Our estimated model is also consistent
with this multi-variable based long horizon predictability.
To evaluate the role of recursive preferences, we also estimate a speciﬁcation based on the
same dynamics as in the LRR model but with time-separable (CRRA) preferences. That
is, we impose the restriction that risk aversion and the IES parameter are reciprocals of
each other, γ = 1/ψ. To save space, we discuss this estimation evidence without showing
detailed output (which is available upon request). The estimates of risk aversion and IES
in the power-utility speciﬁcation are 3.1 and 0.32, respectively. Consequently, the CRRA
speciﬁcation implies a high level of the risk-free rate with a mean of 3%, an essentially
zero risk premia, and low volatilities of the market return and price-dividend ratio of only
8.9% and 0.07, respectively. As all of these implications are sharply inconsistent with the
data, the power-utility speciﬁcation is overwhelmingly rejected with a p-value of the χ2 -test
statistic of virtually zero. This evidence highlights the importance of recursive preferences

19

in transmitting persistent risks in cash ﬂows into asset prices.

5.2

The Eﬀect of Time-Aggregation

Our GMM estimates of the LRR model presented above suggest that the frequency of the
model dynamics (roughly monthly) is signiﬁcantly shorter than the sampling frequency of the
data (annual). It has been recognized in the time-series literature that temporal aggregation
may cause a substantial loss of information about the underlying dynamics and, if not
appropriately taken into account, may systematically bias inference (e.g., Working (1960),
Hansen and Sargent (1983), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Marshall (1991), Marcet (1991),
Drost and Nijman (1993), Heaton (1995)). This issue may be particularly relevant in the
context of the LRR model, in which the conditional distribution of consumption and cashﬂow growth rates is time-varying and is driven by small persistent risks.
To assess biases resulting from a misspeciﬁcation of the model’s frequency, we re-estimate
the model imposing the restriction that the decision interval is annual. In our notation,
we set h = 1, and run estimation using the same set of annual data, now with no need
to account for temporal aggregation. In other words, we consider an econometrician who
is entirely ignorant of the issue of time-aggregation and assumes that the frequency of the
model dynamics coincides with the frequency of the data. The left panel of Table IV provides
the parameter estimates of this “Annual” speciﬁcation along with their standard errors and
the χ2 -test statistic. The most apparent diﬀerence between the estimates of the “Annual”
speciﬁcation and those of the LRR model, presented in Table II, is in the estimate of risk
aversion. Ignoring time-aggregation due to the misspeciﬁcation of the decision frequency
results in a substantially higher estimate of risk aversion of about 14, which is almost twice
that of the time-aggregated LRR model. Importantly, Table IV shows that the “Annual”
speciﬁcation is strongly rejected by the data.
To understand the rejection of this speciﬁcation, in Table V we report population
moments of the joint distribution of consumption, dividends and asset prices implied by
the “Annual” estimates and the corresponding statistics in the data. As the table shows,
the rejection of the “Annual” speciﬁcation comes primarily from its failure to account for
the dynamics of equity prices and returns. It signiﬁcantly underestimates variation in the
price-dividend ratio, generates only 11% volatility in equity returns, and despite the large
estimate of risk aversion, is unable to explain the high level of risk premia.

20

The failure of the “Annual” speciﬁcation is driven by its inability to identify the
magnitude and the contribution of persistent, long-run and volatility, risks. Conceptually, if
the true decision interval of the agent is shorter than annual, the “Annual”-based moment
restrictions that ignore time-aggregation are severely misspeciﬁed. This misspeciﬁcation
shifts the emphasis of the model from long-run risks to short-run innovations in consumption.
To highlight the intuition, we refer to equation (22) that describes the dynamics of the timeaggregated consumption growth. For concreteness, assume that the true model is monthly
while the data are sampled annually. Note that the innovation in annual consumption
growth is a mixture of the underlying long- and short-run monthly shocks. While the
LRR model appropriately accounts for this composite innovation structure by allowing for
temporal aggregation in estimation, the restricted “Annual” speciﬁcation has no means
to separate out the two shocks and tends to attribute the whole innovation to short-run
ﬂuctuations in consumption growth. In other words, the “Annual” speciﬁcation ampliﬁes the
contribution of short-run risks at the expense of low-frequency movements in consumption.
Consequently, the misspeciﬁed “Annual” set-up appear similar to a speciﬁcation based on the
i.i.d. dynamics. Quantitatively, the variance decomposition of annual consumption growth
reveals that the contribution of long-run risks implied by the estimates of the LRR model is
around 27%, whereas under the “Annual” speciﬁcation, long-run risks account for only 14%
of the overall variation of consumption growth. Further, consistent with Drost and Nijman
(1993), we ﬁnd that it is much harder to detect time-variation in the conditional volatility of
growth rates using low-frequency data and disregarding restrictions of temporal aggregation.
To corroborate the above argument, we compare impulse responses of consumption
growth and its conditional variance implied by the LRR model and the “Annual”
speciﬁcation. The impulse response functions are constructed by ﬁtting an ARMA model
to the data simulated at the point estimates of the two speciﬁcations.11 To make the model
comparison meaningful, we use annual consumption growth rates, and variance observations
sampled at the end of each simulation year. Note that for the LRR model, we simulate
consumption at a frequency of 33 days (i.e., 11 decision periods per year), then aggregate it
to the annual frequency by summing-up consumption levels within a year, and compute
annual growth rates. The cumulative response of annual consumption growth for each
speciﬁcation is presented in Figure 2. While the contemporaneous responses in the two cases
are the same, the subsequent response of consumption growth in the “Annual” speciﬁcation
11

To highlight diﬀerences in population, we simulate a long sample of data for each speciﬁcation. We use
eight autoregressive and eight moving-average terms for both consumption growth and its variance. The
impulse responses are robust to changes in the ARMA speciﬁcation as long as there are enough terms to
account for predictable variations.

21

is much lower than that in the LRR model. In the limit, a one-percent ARMA-shock
raises the level of annual consumption by 2.5% in the LRR model and by only 1.9% in
the “Annual” speciﬁcation. The implications of the two speciﬁcations for the variance
dynamics are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent as well. Figure 3 reveals that variance risks in the
“Annual” speciﬁcation, although persistent, taper oﬀ much more rapidly than those in the
LRR model. These diﬀerences allow us to better understand the limitations of the “Annual”
speciﬁcation and its ultimate rejection in the data. To be able to ﬁt the dynamics of observed
consumption and dividends when temporal aggregation is ruled out, this speciﬁcation has to
suppress the contribution of low-frequency and volatility risks and, instead, magnify shortrun ﬂuctuations in cash-ﬂow growth rates. However, short-run risk provide little help in
explaining the dynamics of asset prices.
To further highlight the consequences of ignoring time-aggregation eﬀects, we simulate
the LRR model using the parameter estimates reported in Table II. We aggregate the
simulated data to construct annual consumption, dividends and prices and use those to
estimate the “Annual” speciﬁcation. This experiment is designed to illustrate what happens
if the true model frequency is shorter than annual but an econometrician, equipped with
annual data, assumes a yearly decision interval and, therefore, ignores restrictions of temporal
aggregation. The output of this simulation exercise is reported in the right panel of Table
IV. We present ﬁnite-sample distributions of the parameter estimates as well as population
values computed using a long sample of simulated data. Overall, we ﬁnd that the estimated
parameters in these simulations are quite close to the “Annual” estimates based on the
observed data.

In particular, the misspeciﬁcation of the model frequency results in a

considerably weaker contribution of long-run and volatility risks, and consequently, in a
signiﬁcantly biased estimate of risk aversion. Note that the estimate of risk aversion under
the “Annual” speciﬁcation almost doubles (from its true value of 7.4 to about 14.1, on
average) and this bias, although reduced, does not vanish asymptotically. In simulations,
as in the data, the “Annual” speciﬁcation fails to account for high volatility of prices and
returns. This evidence conﬁrms diﬃculties in detecting long-run and volatility risks if one
neglects temporal aggregation and ignores how the underlying model dynamics are integrated
to lower-frequency data employed in estimation.
In Table VI, we vary the time-aggregation parameter h to show how diﬀerent assumptions
about the length of the decision interval aﬀect the model’s estimates and inference. In
addition to the already discussed “Annual” set-up, we consider three speciﬁcations: “Biweekly” (with h = 26), “Monthly” (h = 12), and “Quarterly” (h = 4). Note that the

22

farther the decision frequency deviates from its optimal value of 11, the more the model ﬁt
deteriorates. At the monthly frequency, both the estimates and the pricing implications are
quite similar to those of the unrestricted LRR model, and the p-value of the overidentifying
restrictions test is borderline signiﬁcant. The “Bi-weekly” speciﬁcation features a further
decline in the p-value, and is rejected largely by the risk-free rate and return predictability
moments. As the frequency declines to quarterly, the model loses its ability to account for the
level and variation in asset returns and prices, and is strongly rejected. These implications,
including the increase in the estimate of risk aversion, are similar to the predictions of
the “Annual” speciﬁcation and follow from the failure to properly identify long-run and
volatility risks. These results underscore the importance of incorporating the restrictions
of temporal aggregation for drawing inferences about the underlying risk dynamics and
investors’ preferences.

5.3

Cross-Sectional Implications

One of the important dimensions of ﬁnancial data is the cross-sectional heterogeneity in mean
returns, in particular along size and book-to-market dimensions. Table VII shows that the
average return of the high book-to-market portfolio is higher than that of the low book-tomarket portfolio by 5.6% per annum. This is the well-known value premium. Similarly, the
portfolio of small market-capitalization ﬁrms outperforms the large-ﬁrm portfolio by about
7%, on average. The observed dispersion in mean returns on size and book-to-market sorted
portfolios is known to present a challenge for the standard CAPM. In the data, the market
betas for the value-minus-growth and small-minus-large portfolios are quite small, while the
market-adjusted returns (i.e., CAPM α’s) are large and signiﬁcant.
In this section, we evaluate the implications of the LRR model for the cross-section of
size and book-to-market portfolios. We estimate the dynamics of dividend growth rates
of the four portfolios: small, large, value and growth, and assess the ability of the LRR
model to simultaneously account for the value and size premia, and the magnitudes on the
CAPM betas and alphas. To keep the estimation problem manageable, the cross-sectional
parameters are estimated using the state variables extracted in our benchmark estimation of
the model, and holding preferences, consumption, and market-dividend parameters ﬁxed
at the point estimates reported in Table II.

For each portfolio, we use the following

set of moment conditions to estimate its dynamics: the mean and volatility of dividend
growth rates, their correlation with consumption growth, the risk premium, the volatility

23

of returns, the mean and volatility of the price-dividend ratio, and the market beta. The
cross-sectional moments are evaluated using annual data and incorporating restrictions of
temporal aggregation.
Panel A of Table VII presents the cross-sectional estimates and, in particular, dividends’
exposure to consumption risks for the four portfolios. Consistent with empirical evidence in
Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), we ﬁnd that the
value portfolio feature much higher exposure to low-frequency risks in consumption relative
to the growth portfolio (8.2 versus 4.3). Similarly, long-run risk exposure of the small-size
portfolio exceeds that of the large portfolio (7.9 versus 4.5). Small and value portfolios are
also characterized by a higher short-run correlation of their dividends with consumption
relative to portfolios with opposite size and book-to-market characteristics, although shortrun risk dynamics are estimated with large standard errors. The estimate of φj , which
governs dividend exposure to volatility risks, is higher for the small portfolio compared to the
large portfolio, and is almost uniform across book-to-market sorted portfolios. The bottom
line of Panel A presents the model-implied risk premium for each of the four portfolios.
Comparable to the premia observed in the data, the model predicts a sizable value premium
of about 5% and a large size premium of 6.5%. The risk-premium decomposition reveals
that, across portfolios, about 60-65% of the premium comes as a compensation for long-run
risks, about 25-30% is accounted for by volatility risks, and the remaining fraction is due to
asset exposure to short-run consumption risks.
Panel B of Table VII shows the CAPM implications of the long-run risk model. It
presents the implied market betas and alphas for the small-minus-large and value-minusgrowth portfolios. As in the data, the model-implied CAPM betas of the spread portfolios
are quite low: 0.7 and 0.6 for the small–large and value–growth strategies, respectively.
Consequently, the LRR model is able to replicate the failure of the CAPM by generating
quantitatively sizable alphas of the arbitrage portfolios. The model-implied alphas of the
small–large and value–growth portfolios are about 2% and 1.4%, respectively. The ability of
the LRR model to account for a signiﬁcant portion of the value- and size-premium puzzles
comes from the fact that in the model, the market beta is not a suﬃcient risk statistics
(i.e., the market return is not perfectly correlated with the SDF). In particular, the market
exposure to long-run risks is signiﬁcantly lower than that of the underlying pricing kernel.
Therefore, the model features high market-adjusted alphas of the small–large and value–
growth portfolios as those are highly exposed to long-run risks in consumption.

24

6

Conclusions

This paper develops a method for estimating asset pricing models with recursive preferences
and generalized consumption and cash-ﬂow dynamics while accounting for time-aggregation
in the observed data. Speciﬁcally, we estimate the long-run risks model as well as the decision
interval of the agent which accounts for the observed time-aggregated data. The paper
shows how to estimate the short-run, long-run and volatility risk components in aggregate
consumption and utilize these to construct the unobservable return on aggregate wealth - a
key input in estimating models with Kreps and Porteus (1978), Epstein and Zin (1989)-Weil
(1989) preferences.
Empirically we ﬁnd that the long-run risks model is able to successfully capture the
time-series and cross-sectional variation in returns. The estimation identiﬁes a persistent
long run risk growth and volatility component in the consumption and dividend data. The
model is not rejected by the over-identifying restrictions test. We provide evidence that timeaggregation can result in substantially biased estimates for risk aversion and that ignoring
time-aggregation leads to false rejections of the model and to large estimates of risk aversion.
Remarkably, we ﬁnd that the best estimate for the investor’s decision interval is nearly a
month (33 days).
At the estimated values for the preference parameters, and the decision interval, the
long run growth risks and volatility contribute about the same amount to the risk premia.
Overall, the model accounts for the low risk free rate, and the level of the market, value,
and size premia, as well as the volatility of the market return, the risk free rate, and the
price-dividend ratio. In all, this evidence provides empirical support for the economic risk
channels highlighted by the LRR model.

25

Appendix
A.1

Consumption Claim

To derive asset prices we use the IMRS together with consumption and dividend dynamics
given in (3) and (15). The Euler condition in equation (16) implies that any asset j in this
economy should satisfy the following pricing restriction,
[
(
)]
θ
Et exp θ ln δ − ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 + rj,t+1 = 1 ,
ψ

(A-1)

where rj,t+1 ≡ log(Rj,t+1 ) and rc,t+1 is the log return on wealth. Notice that the solution to
(A-1) depends on time-series properties of the unobservable return rc . Therefore, we ﬁrst
substitute rj,t+1 = rc,t+1 and solve for the return on the aggregate consumption claim; after
that, we present the solution for the return on a dividend-paying asset.
We start by conjecturing that the logarithm of the price to consumption ratio follows,
zt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 σt2 . Armed with the endogenous variable zt , we plug the approximation
rc,t+1 = κ0 + ∆ct+1 + κ1 zt+1 − zt into the Euler equation above. The solution coeﬃcients,
A’s, can now be easily derived by collecting the terms on the corresponding state variables.
In particular,
A0

[
)2 ]
(
θ(
1)
1
2
µc + κ1 A2 (1 − ν)σ0 +
κ1 A2 σw
log δ + κ0 + 1 −
=
1 − κ1
ψ
2

A1 =

1−

1
ψ

(A-2)

1 − κ1 ρ

A2 = −

(γ − 1)(1 − ψ1 )
2 (1 − κ1 ν)

[

( κ φ )2 ]
1 e
1+
1 − κ1 ρ

For more details, see the the appendix in Bansal and Yaron (2004).
Notice that the derived solutions depend on the approximating constants, κ0 and κ1 ,
which, in their turn, depend on the unknown mean of the price to consumption ratio, z̄. In
order to solve for the price of the consumption asset, we ﬁrst substitute expressions for κ’s
(equations (6) and (7)) into the expressions for A’s and solve for the mean of the price to

26

consumption ratio. Speciﬁcally, z̄ can be found by numerically solving a ﬁxed-point problem:
z̄ = A0 (z̄) + A2 (z̄)σ02 ,
where the dependence of A’s on z̄ is given above.
The solution for the price-consumption ratio, zt , allows us to write the pricing kernel as
a function of the state variables and the model parameters,
mt+1 = Γ0 + Γ1 xt + Γ2 σt2 − λη σt ηt+1 − λe σt et+1 − λw σw wt+1 ,
where
Γ0 = log δ −
Γ1 = −

(A-3)

)2
(
1
µc − 0.5 θ(θ − 1) κ1 A2 σw
ψ

1
ψ

(A-4)

Γ2 = (θ − 1)(κ1 ν − 1)A2
and
λη = γ
(
1 ) κ1 φ e
λe = (1 − θ)κ1 A1 φe = γ −
ψ 1 − κ1 ρ
( κ φ )2 ]
(
1 ) 0.5 κ1 [
1 e
λw = (1 − θ)κ1 A2 = −(γ − 1) γ −
1+
ψ 1 − κ1 ν
1 − κ1 ρ

(A-5)

Note that λ’s represent market prices of transient (ηt+1 ), long-run (et+1 ) and volatility (wt+1 )
risks respectively. For more detailed discussion see Bansal and Yaron (2004).

A.2

Dividend Paying Assets

The solution coeﬃcients for the valuation ratio of a dividend-paying asset j can be derived
in a similar fashion as for the consumption asset. In particular, the price-dividend ratio for

27

a claim to dividends dynamics, given in (15), zj,t = A0,j + A1,j xt + A2,j σt2 , where
A0,j

[
)2 ]
1(
1
2
=
Γ0 + κ0,j + µj + κ1,j A2,j (1 − ν)σ0 +
κ1,j A2,j − λw σw2
1 − κ1,j
2

A1,j =
A2,j

ϕj −

1
ψ

(A-6)

1 − κ1,j ρ

[
)]
1
1( 2
2
2
φ + λη − 2ϱj φj λη + (κ1,j A1,j φe − λe )
=
Γ2 +
1 − κ1,j ν
2 j

It follows then that the innovation into the asset return is given by,
rj,t+1 − Et [rj,t+1 ] = βu,j σt uj,t+1 + βe,j σt et+1 + βw,j σw wt+1 ,

(A-7)

where the asset’s betas are deﬁned as,
βu,j = φj ,

βe,j = κ1,j A1,j φe ,

βw,j = κ1,j A2,j

The risk premium for any asset is determined by the covariation of the return innovation
with the innovation into the pricing kernel. Thus, the risk premium for rj,t+1 is equal to the
product of the asset’s exposures to systematic risks and the corresponding risk prices,
Et [rj,t+1 − rf,t ] +

2
0.5σt,r
j

(

)
= −Covt mt+1 − Et (mt+1 ), rj,t+1 − Et (rj,t+1 )
= λη σt2 βη,j + λe σt2 βe,j + λw σw2 βw,j ,

where the exposure of asset j return to short-run consumption innovation is βη,j = φj ϱj .

28

A.3

Risk Free Rate

The solution coeﬃcients for the risk-free dynamics follow directly from the staterepresentation of the SDF. In particular,
[
]2
F0 = −Γ0 − 0.5 λw σw )
F1 = −Γ1
F2

A.4

(A-8)

[
]
= −Γ2 − 0.5 λ2η + λ2e

IES=1

When ψ = 1, the log of the IMRS is given in terms of the value function normalized by
consumption, vct = log(Vt /Ct ),
mt+1 = log δ − γ∆ct+1 + (1 − γ)vct+1 −

1−γ
vct
δ

Conjecturing that vct = Ã0 + Ã1 xt + Ã2 σt2 and using the evolution of vct :
vct =

]
[
δ
log Et exp{(1 − γ)(vct+1 + ∆ct+1 } ,
1−γ

the solution coeﬃcients are given by,
Ã0

[
]
δ
1
2
2
=
µc + Ã2 (1 − ν)σ0 + (1 − γ)(Ã2 σw )
1−δ
2

Ã1 =

Ã2

δ
1 − δρ

(A-9)

[
( δφ )2 ]
0.5 δ
e
= −(γ − 1)
1+
1 − δν
1 − δρ

As above, the pricing kernel can be expressed in terms of underlying preference
parameters, state variables and systematic shocks,
mt+1 = Γ0 + Γ1 xt + Γ2 σt2 − λη σt ηt+1 − λe σt et+1 − λw σw wt+1

29

(A-10)

where:
Γ0 = log δ − µc − 0.5 (1 − γ)2 (Ã2 σw )2
Γ1 = −1
Γ2

(A-11)

[
( δφ )2 ]
(γ − 1)2
e
= −
1+
2
1 − δρ

and
λη = γ

(A-12)

λe = (γ − 1)

λw

δφe
1 − δρ

[
( δφ )2 ]
0.5 δ
e
= −(γ − 1)
1+
1 − δν
1 − δρ
2

(A-13)

Finally, note that in the IES=1 case, the wealth to consumption ratio is constant,
namely,

Wt
Ct

=

1
.
1−δ

The price to consumption ratio, therefore, is equal

Pt
Ct

= exp(z̄) =

δ
.
1−δ

Consequently, the parameter of the log-approximation of the log-wealth return,
δ

κ1

exp(z̄)
=
= 1−δ δ = δ.
1 + exp(z̄)
1 + 1−δ

Plugging κ1 = δ and ψ = 1 into equations (A-3), (A-4) and (A-5), yields exactly equation
(A-10), (A-11) and (A-12). It then follows that
lim κ1 = δ

ψ→1

A.5

lim Γ′ = Γ′ (ψ = 1, κ1 = δ)

ψ→1

lim Λ′ = Λ′ (ψ = 1, κ1 = δ)

ψ→1

(A-14)

Pricing Kernel Approximation Error

In our empirical work, we rely on the approximate analytical solutions of the model
presented above. In this section, we evaluate the accuracy of the log-linear approximation
by comparing the approximate analytical solution for the price to consumption ratio to
its numerical counterpart. The magnitude of the approximation error allows us to assess

30

the reliability of the log-linear solution for the stochastic discount factor, and consequently,
model implications based on the log-linear approximation.
Notice that the value function in the Epstein-Zin preferences is given by,
ψ

1

Vt = (1 − δ) ψ−1 Wt (Wt /Ct ) ψ−1 ,

(A-15)

i.e., the life-time utility of the agent, normalized by the level of either consumption or wealth,
is proportional to the wealth to consumption ratio. Hence, the solution to the wealthconsumption ratio (or, alternatively, price to consumption) based on the log-linearization of
the wealth return in equation (5) determines the dynamics of the value function. Recall also
that the evolution of the IMRS (see equation (4)), through the return on wealth, depends
on the valuation of the consumption claim. Thus, the log-linear solution for the IMRS, as
well, hinges on the accuracy of the log-linear approximation of the price-consumption ratio.
Our numerical solutions are based on the approach proposed by Tauchen and Hussey
(1991). This method relies on a discrete representation of the conditional density of the
state variables, x and σ 2 , which allows us to solve the pricing equation by approximating
the integral in (16) with a ﬁnite sum using the Gauss-Hermite quadrature. Note that the
resulting solutions are subject to a discretization error. In order to minimize the error and
ensure the high quality of the benchmark numerical solutions, we use a suﬃciently large
number of grid points in the quadrature rule.12 In addition, in this exercise we shut-oﬀ the
channel of time-varying consumption volatility. Aside from this restriction, we evaluate
and compare numerical and log-linear analytical solutions using the parametrization of
consumption growth dynamics given in caption of Table A.1. The table presents the mean
level of the price-consumption ratio and its volatility for various combinations of risk aversion
and IES; the time-discount preference parameter δ is set at 0.9989.
Overall, we ﬁnd approximate analytical and numerical solutions to be remarkably close
to each other. In particular, for risk aversion of 10 and IES of 2, the mean and the volatility
of the log price to consumption ratio implied by the log-linear approximation are 4.716 and
0.0321. Numerical solutions yield 4.724 and 0.0318, respectively.13 The approximation error,
expressed as a percentage of the corresponding numerical value, is about 0.17% for the mean
and 0.86% for the standard deviation of the log price-consumption ratio. As the elasticity of
12

Speciﬁcally, we discretize the dynamics of the expected growth component, xt , using a 100-point rule.
We ﬁnd that increasing the number of grid points leads to virtually identical numerical solutions.
13
All the numbers reported in this section are in monthly terms.

31

intertemporal substitution decreases to 0.5, the percentage error falls to about 0.02% for z̄
and 0.42% for σz . Although the accuracy of the log-linearization slightly deteriorates as the
magnitude of risk aversion increases, deviations between analytical and numerical solutions
remain relatively small. For example, holding IES at 2 and varying risk aversion between 5
and 15 results in 0.03%–0.51% error band for the mean and 0.17%–2.17% for the standard
deviation of the log price to consumption ratio.
As discussed above, the dynamics of the price to consumption ratio has a direct
bearing on the time-series properties of the IMRS. The fairly small approximation error
in the price-consumption ratio that we document guarantees the accuracy of the pricing
implications based on the log-linear solutions. Indeed, we ﬁnd that approximate analytical
and numerical solutions deliver very similar quantitative implications along all dimensions of
the model, including levels and variances of the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratios, returns
on consumption and dividend claims, and the pricing kernel.14 This evidence conﬁrms that
empirical ﬁndings presented in the paper are robust to the log-linearization of the model.

B

Time Aggregated Moments

The mean and variance for annual consumption growth are already given in the text. Based
again on equation (22), the ﬁrst and second autocovariances of annual consumption growth
can be written as,
[

]2
ρ(1 − ρh )2
AC1(∆ct+h,h ) = ρ
var(xt−2h )
h(1 − ρ)2
h−1
h−2
h
∑
∑
h−j j 2 ∑ j 2 2
2 2
+
aj bj φe σ0 +
[(
)( )]σ0 +
(ρ φe ) σ0
h
h
j=1
j=0
j=0
[
]
h 2 2
2h ρ(1 − ρ )
AC2(∆ct+h,h ) = ρ
var(xt−2h )
h(1 − ρ)2
h−1
h−2
h
∑
∑
h−j j 2 ∑ j 2 2
2 2
+
aj bj φe σ0 +
[(
)( )]σ0 +
(ρ φe ) σ0
h
h
j=0
j=1
j=0
h

Given the monthly dynamics for dividends, equation (15), the dynamics for annual
14

Available upon request, the detailed evidence is not reported here for brevity.

32

dividend growth can be written in a similar fashion as those for annual consumption growth,
∑
∑
ρ(1 − ρh )2
x
+
ϕ
a
φ
σ
e
+
ϕ
bj φe σt+h−1−j et+h−j
t−h
d
j e t−h−1+j t−h+j
d
h(1 − ρ)2
j=1
j=1
h−1

∆dt+h,h = hµd + ϕd

+φd

h−1
∑
j+1
j=0

h

σt+h−1−j ut+h−j + φd

h

h−2
∑
h−j−1
j=0

h

σt−1−j ut−j .

(A-16)

Hence, the mean, variance, and ﬁrst autocovariance of annual dividend growth are easily
computed as for consumption growth.

Finally, the unconditional covariation between

dividend and consumption growth is given by
]2
ρ(1 − ρh )2
ϕd var(xt−h )
(A-17)
cov(∆ct+h,h , ∆dt+h,h ) =
h(1 − ρ)2
]
]
h−1 [
h [
∑
h−j 2 2 ∑
j 2 2
2
2
+
) σ0 +
ϕd (aj φe ) + φd ϱd (
ϕd (bj φe ) + φd ϱd ( ) σ0
h
h
j=1
j=1
[

The volatility dynamics moments are based on equation (??).
The text discusses the ﬁrst and second moment of the log annualized price-dividend ratio
zd,t,h . Based on equation (25), the k-th autocovariance of zd,t,h is,
2
cov(zd,t+kh,h , zd,t,h ) = [(A21,d + π 2 )ρkh + A1,d πρk−1 (1 + ρ2h )]var(xt ) + A2,d
ν kh var(σt2 )

+

h−1
∑

qj (φe σ0 )2 [πρkh−j + A1,d ρ(k+1)h−j ]

(A-18)

j=1

where π =

h−1
ϕd
[ρ 1−ρ
h(1−ρ)
1−ρ

− (h − 1)ρh ] and qj =

h−1
ϕd
[ 1−ρ
hρj−1 (1−ρ)
1−ρ

j−1

− (h − 1)ρh−1 − 1−ρ
+ (j −
1−ρ

1)ρj−1 ].
To solve for the annualized return on the dividend paying asset and risk free rate, start
with the monthly dynamics for these assets,
rf,t = F0 + F1 xt + F2 σt2
rd,t+1 = B0,d + B1,d xt + B2,d σt2 + βe,d σt et+1 + βu,d σt ut+1 + βw,d σw wt+1
where F ’s are given in equations (A-9) and B’s follow directly from the solution for the
∑
price-dividend ratio. The moments for the annual risk free rate, rf,t,h ≡ h−1
j=0 rf,t+j , can

33

now be easily derived,
E[rf,t,h ] = h[F0 + F2 σ0 ]
1 − ρh 2
1 − νh 2
] var(xt ) + [F2
] var(σt2 )
var[rf,t,h ] = [F1
1−ρ
1−ν
h−1
h−1
∑
1 − ρh−j 2 2 ∑ 1 − ν h−j 2 2
+
[F1 φe
] σ0 +
[F2
] σw
1−ρ
1−ν
j=1
j=1
Similarly the market return, rd,t+h,h ≡

∑h−1
j=0

rd,t+1+j , can be written as,

E[rd,t+h,h ] = h[B0,d + B2,d σ02 ]
1 − ρh 2
1 − νh 2
var[rd,t+h,h ] = [B1,d
] var(xt ) + B2,d [
] var(σt2 )
1−ρ
1−ν
h
h
h−j
∑
∑
1 − ν h−j
1−ρ
2 2
2
+ βe,d ] σ0 +
[B2,d
+ βw,d ]2 σw2 + hβu,d
σ02
+
[B1,d φe
1−ρ
1−ν
j=1
j=1
Finally, using the formulae for the annual price-dividend ratio, consumption growth, and
the market return, the moments characterizing their covariation are,
h−1
∑
)
ρ(1 − ρh )2 (
h
cov(∆ct+h,h , zd,t+h,h ) =
π + A1,d ρ var(xt ) +
aj (φe σ0 )2 [qj + A1,d ρh−j ]
h(1 − ρ)2
j=1

∑ h−j
A1,d
1 − ρh
[h − ρ
](φe σ0 )2 +
[
]2 φd ϱd σ02
h(1 − ρ)
1−ρ
h
j=1
h−1

1 − ρh h
1 − ν h 2h
ρ (π + A1,d ρh )var(xt ) + B2,d A2,d
ν var(σt2 )
1−ρ
1−ν
h
h
∑
1 − ρh
1 − ν h 2 ∑ 2(h−j)
h−j
2
h−j
+
ρ B1,d
(φe σ0 ) [qj + A1,d ρ ] + A2,d B2,d
σw
ν
1
−
ρ
1
−
ν
j=1
j=1

cov(rd,t+h,h , zd,t+h,h ) = B1,d

34

References
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, dividends,
and the cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, Ravi, Ron Gallant, and George Tauchen, 2007, Rational Pessimism, Rational
Exuberance, and Asset Pricing Models, Review of Economic Studies 74(4), 1005–1033.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2012, An Empirical Evaluation of the Long Run
Risks Model for Asset Pricing, Critical Finance Review 1, 183–221.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Beeler, Jason, and John Campbell, 2012, The Long Run Risks Model and Aggegate Asset
Prices: An Empirical Evaluation, Critical Finance Review 1, 141–182.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Yuhang Xing, 2005, Risk, Uncertainty and Asset Prices,
Working paper, Columbia University.
Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661–676.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and David Marshall, 1991, The Permanent
Income Hypthoesis Revisited, Econometrica 59(2), 397–423.
Constantinides, George, and Anish Gosh, 2008, Asset Pricing Tests with Long-Run Risks in
Consumption Growth, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Drost, Feike C., and Theo Nijman, 1993, Temporal Aggregation of GARCH processes,
Econometrica 61, 909–927.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the
intertemporal behavior of consumption and asset returns:

A theoretical framework,

Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Giovannini, Alberto, and Philippe Weil, 1989, Risk Aversion and Intertemporal Substitution
in the Capital Asset Pricing Model, Working paper, NBER Working Paper No. 2824.

35

Hall, Robert, 1988, Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption, Journal of Political
Economy 96, 339–357.
Hansen, Lars, 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments
Estimators, Econometrica 50, 1209–1054.
Hansen, Lars, John Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, Consumption strikes back?, Journal of
Political Economy 116(2), 260–302.
Hansen, Lars, John Heaton, and Amir Yaron, 1996, Finite Sample Properties of Alternative
GMM Estimators, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 49, 531–560.
Hansen, Lars, and Thomas Sargent, 2006, Fragile Beliefs and the Price of Model Uncertainty,
Working paper, University of Chicago.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas Sargent, 1983, Aggregation Over Time and the Inverse
Optimal Predictor Problem for Adaptive Expectations in Continuous Time, International
Economic Review.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables
estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 63, 767–804.
Heaton, John, 1995, An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent
Preference Speciﬁcations, Econometrica 63, 681–717.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Yong Wang, 2010, Lazy Investors, Discretionary Consumption, and
the Cross-Section of Stock Returns, Working paper, Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Kiku, Dana, 2006, Long Run Risks and the Value Premium Puzzle, Working paper, The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Kreps, David, and Evan Porteus, 1978, Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
Choice Theory, Econometrica 46, 185–200.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2005, Euler Equation Errors, Working paper, New
York University.
Malloy, Christopher, Tobias Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, Long-Run
stockholder consumption risk and asset returns, Journal of Finance 64(6), 2427–2479.
Marcet, Albert, 1991, Time Aggregation of Economic Time Series Westview Press pp. 237–
281 Rational Expectations Econometrics, Lars P. Hansen and Thomas Sargent, editors.

36

Newey,

Whitney,

and Kenneth West,

1987,

A simple,

positive semi-deﬁnite,

heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,
703–708.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Christian Julliard, 2005, Consumption Risk and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns, Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 185–222.
Tallarini, Thomas, 2000, Risk Sensitive Real Business Cycles, Journal of Monetary
Economics 45(3), 507–532.
Tauchen, George, and Robert Hussey, 1991, Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining
Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models, Econometrica 59, 371–96.
Weil, Philippe, 1989, The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-free Rate Puzzle, Journal
of Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.
Wilcox, David, 1992, The construction of the U.S. consumption data: Some facts and their
implications for empirical work, American Economic Review 82, 922–941.
Working, Holbrook, 1960, Note on the Correlation of First Diﬀerences of Averages in a
Random Chain, Econometrica 28, 916–918.

37

Table I

Summary Statistics

Consumption Growth
Dividend Growth
Market Return
Log(P/D)
Risk-Free Rate

Mean

StdDev

0.019
0.009
0.079
3.369
0.005

0.022
0.113
0.020
0.453
0.029

Table I presents descriptive statistics for aggregate consumption growth, returns, dividend growth and the
logarithm of the price-dividend ratio of the stock market portfolio, and the risk-free rate. Returns are
value-weighted, dividends and price-dividend ratios are constructed on the per-share basis, growth rates
are measured by taking the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the logarithm of the corresponding series. All data are real,
sampled on an annual frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2009.

38

Table II

Model Estimates: Parameters
Parameters

No-Vol Model
Estimate
SE

LRR Model
Estimate
SE

Preferences
γ
ψ
δ

7.05
2.33
0.9986

1.85
3.11
0.0022

7.42
2.05
0.9989

1.55
0.84
0.0010

0.0016
0.9813
0.0392
0.0081

0.0008
0.0103
0.0229
0.0010

0.0024
4.34
4.96
0.42

0.0023
0.73
1.31
0.42

0.0012
0.9812
0.0306
0.0073
0.9983
2.62e-6
0.0020
4.45
5.00
0.49

0.0007
0.0086
0.0160
0.0015
0.0021
3.10e-6
0.0017
1.63
1.39
0.33

10

1.97

11

2.17

Cash Flows
µc
ρ
φe
σ0
ν
σw
µd
ϕd
φd
ϱd
Aggregation
h
χ2 -test
p-value

59.60
0.00

9.98
0.13

Table II presents parameter estimates and χ2 -test of overidentifying restrictions for two models. The “No-Vol
Model” allows for time-variation in conditional means but rules out variation in conditional second moments
of consumption and dividend growth rates. The “LRR Model” is the long-run risk model that incorporates
both persistent expected growth and time-varying volatility in cash ﬂows. The models are estimated via
GMM using annual data from 1930 till 2009 and taking into account the eﬀect of time-aggregation. The set
of moment conditions used in estimation is given in Table III.

39

Table III

Model Estimates: Moments
Moments

No-Vol Model
Sample Model t(diﬀ)

LRR Model
Sample Model t(diﬀ)

Consumption & Dividends
vol(∆caτ )
AC1(∆caτ )
AC2(∆caτ )
vol(∆daτ )
AC1(∆daτ )
corr(∆caτ , ∆daτ )
E(ητa )
E(uaτ )
E(ητa xτ−2 )
2
2
2 )
E([ητa −Eτ−2 ητa ]στ−2
2
a
vol(ητ )
2
AC1(ητa )

0.019
0.386
0.160
0.111
0.205
0.531
0.003
-0.018
-5.2e-5

0.026
0.484
0.272
0.125
0.445
0.614
0.000
0.000
0.000

-1.07
-0.45
-0.55
-0.34
-1.52
-0.27
0.66
-0.94
-3.54
2.45
1.57

0.019
0.386
0.160
0.111
0.205
0.531
0.001
-0.038
-2.8e-4
1.0e-6
0.010
0.593

0.023
0.424
0.199
0.112
0.396
0.620
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.173

-0.64
-0.17
-0.20
-0.03
-1.20
-0.29
0.09
-0.95
-2.00
1.18
1.08
0.81

0.001
0.240

0.000
0.082

3.390
0.419
0.832
0.086
0.178
0.003

3.367
0.330
0.803
0.069
0.220
0.012

0.29
0.85
0.12
0.88
-1.28
-2.12

3.390
0.419
0.832
0.086
0.178
0.003

3.369
0.455
0.920
0.064
0.196
0.011

0.26
-0.34
-0.38
1.18
-0.54
-1.78

-0.230
0.184

0.029
0.626

-2.41
-2.53

-0.230
0.184

-0.071
0.303

-1.48
-0.69

Asset Prices
a )
E(zd,τ
a )
vol(zd,τ
a )
AC1(zd,τ
a − Ra )
E(Rd,τ
f,τ
a )
vol(rd,τ
a )
E(rf,τ

Predictability
a , za
corr(rd,τ
d,τ −1 )
a
a
corr(∆cτ , zd,τ
−1 )

Table III presents sample- and model-based moments, computed at the parameter estimates reported in
Table II, and t-statistics for the diﬀerence between sample and model-implied moments. The “No-Vol
Model” allows for time-variation in conditional means but rules out variation in conditional second moments
of consumption and dividend growth rates. The “LRR Model” is the long-run risk model that incorporates
both persistent expected growth and time-varying volatility in cash ﬂows. E(·), vol(·), AC1(·), AC2(·),
corr(·, ·) denote the mean, standard deviation, ﬁrst- and second-order autocorrelations, and correlation
respectively. ∆caτ and ∆daτ denote time-aggregated annual consumption and dividend growth rates. ητa
and uaτ correspond to innovations into annual consumption and dividend growth, respectively. The annual
a
price-dividend ratio, zd,τ
, is deﬁned as the log of the end of year price over the twelve-month trailing sum
a
a
) is the continuously compounded annual return of the aggregate market, and
of dividends. rd,τ ≡ log(Rd,τ
a
a
rf,τ ≡ log(Rf,τ ) is the logarithm of the annual risk-free rate. xτ and στ are end of year-τ expected growth
and conditional volatility of consumption growth, respectively.

40

Table IV

No Time-Aggregation: Parameter Estimates of the Annual Speciﬁcation
Parameters

Empirical Data
Estimate
SE

Simulated Data
Population
5%
50%

95%

Preferences
γ
ψ
δ

14.00
1.10
0.9922

7.32
1.48
0.0320

12.76
1.15
0.9967

6.30
0.80
0.9872

14.10
1.18
0.9939

18.46
1.71
0.9967

0.0155
0.9097
0.1677
0.0242
0.9195
8.47e-6
0.0144
2.60
3.98
0.36

0.0080
0.1025
0.1355
0.0028
0.1637
1.32e-5
0.0165
2.00
0.86
0.30

0.0189
0.8917
0.2012
0.0197
0.7657
1.65e-5
0.0026
2.14
4.25
0.30

0.0141
0.6617
0.0566
0.0036
0.6729
8.92e-6
0.0000
1.87
3.73
0.19

0.0179
0.8927
0.1702
0.0200
0.8215
1.55e-5
0.0077
2.83
4.59
0.31

0.0244
0.9524
0.2415
0.0255
0.8904
2.06e-5
0.0171
4.04
6.54
0.48

18.94
0.000

105.04
0.000

676.98
0.008

Cash Flows
µc
ρ
φe
σ0
ν
σw
µd
ϕd
φd
ϱd
χ2 -test
p-value

100.66
0.000

Table IV presents the estimated parameters and the χ2 -test of overidentifying restrictions of the annual
speciﬁcation of the long-run risks model. The estimation does not account for time-aggregation of the data,
and both the sampling frequency and the decision interval are assumed to be annual. The ﬁrst set of columns,
under the heading “Empirical Data”, provides the 1930-2009 sample estimates and their standard errors.
The second set of columns reports the corresponding estimates in time-aggregated simulated data that have
been generated at the parameter estimates of the LRR model in Table II. Population estimates are based
on a long sample of simulated data, the 5, 50 and 95 percentiles characterize the ﬁnite-sample distribution
of annual estimates.

41

Table V

No Time-Aggregation: Moments of the Annual Speciﬁcation
Annual Specification
Sample Model t(diﬀ)

Moments

Consumption & Dividends
vol(∆caτ )
AC1(∆caτ )
AC2(∆caτ )
vol(∆daτ )
AC1(∆daτ )
corr(∆caτ , ∆daτ )
E(ητa )
E(uaτ )
E(ητa xτ−2 )
2
2
2 )
E([ητa −Eτ−2 ητa ]στ−2
2
a
vol(ητ )
2
AC1(ητa )

0.019
0.386
0.160
0.111
0.205
0.531
-0.001
-0.004
-0.002
1.0e-5
0.009
0.433

0.026
0.128
0.116
0.100
0.059
0.422
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.024
7.3e-7

-1.05
1.19
0.22
0.29
0.92
0.35
-0.08
-0.74
-2.22
1.11
-1.95
1.09

3.390
0.419
0.832
0.086
0.178
0.003

3.351
0.137
0.910
0.042
0.111
0.013

0.49
2.69
-0.34
2.35
2.09
-2.37

-0.230
0.184

0.079
0.374

-2.88
-1.09

Asset Prices
a )
E(zd,τ
a )
vol(zd,τ
a )
AC1(zd,τ
a
a )
E(Rd,τ − Rf,τ
a )
vol(rd,τ
a
E(rf,τ )

Predictability
a , za
corr(rd,τ
d,τ −1 )
a
corr(∆caτ , zd,τ
−1 )

Table V presents sample and population moments of the annual speciﬁcation, and t-statistics for their
diﬀerences. Population moments are computed at the parameter estimates reported in Table IV. The
estimation does not account for time-aggregation, and both the sampling frequency and the decision interval
are assumed to be annual. E(·), vol(·), AC1(·), AC2(·), corr(·, ·) denote the mean, standard deviation, ﬁrstand second-order autocorrelations, and correlation respectively. ∆caτ and ∆daτ denote annual consumption
and dividend growth rates. ητa and uaτ correspond to innovations into annual consumption and dividend
a
a
a
) is the continuously
≡ log(Rd,τ
is the log of the annual price-dividend ratio, rd,τ
growth, respectively. zd,τ
a
a
compounded annual return of the aggregate market, and rf,τ ≡ log(Rf,τ ) is the logarithm of the annual riskfree rate. xτ and στ are end of year-τ expected growth and conditional volatility of consumption growth,
respectively.

42

Table VI

Model Estimates with Fixed Decision Frequency
Parameters

Bi-weekly

Monthly

Quarterly

Annual

6.45
1.79
0.9995

7.13
2.08
0.9990

9.20
1.42
0.9967

14.00
1.10
0.9922

0.0008
0.9932
0.0124
0.0050
0.9994
6.15e-7
0.0008
3.97
4.63
0.48

0.0016
0.9822
0.0293
0.0073
0.9987
2.05e-6
0.0016
3.83
4.49
0.43

0.0044
0.9720
0.0460
0.0144
0.9870
3.64e-6
0.0040
3.10
4.98
0.43

0.0155
0.9097
0.1677
0.0242
0.9195
8.47e-6
0.0144
2.60
3.98
0.36

16.61
0.02

13.97
0.05

47.22
0.00

100.66
0.00

Preferences
γ
ψ
δ
Cash Flows
µc
ρ
φe
σ0
ν
σw
µd
ϕd
φd
ϱd
χ2 -test
p-value

Table VI presents parameter estimates and χ2 -test of overidentifying restrictions for alternative frequency
speciﬁcations of the long-run risks model. In “Bi-weekly”, “Monthly”, “Quarterly” and “Annual”
speciﬁcations the time-aggregation parameter, h, is set at 26, 12, 4 and 1 respectively. The model parameters
are estimated via GMM using annual data from 1930 till 2009 and, save for the annual speciﬁcation, taking
into account the eﬀect of time-aggregation.

43

Table VII

Model Implications for the Cross-Section of Returns
Panel A: Cross-Sectional Estimates and Risk Premia
Small
Parameters
µj (%)
ϕj
φj
ϱj

0.47
7.92
7.30
0.48

Risk Premia(%)
Data
Model

Large

(0.06)
(1.87)
(3.76)
(1.02)

13.83
11.77

0.12
4.45
3.88
0.22

(0.04)
(0.80)
(1.34)
(0.24)

Growth
0.18
4.25
5.58
0.21

6.92
5.29

(0.05)
(0.73)
(1.41)
(0.24)

6.74
5.41

Value
0.33
8.23
5.46
0.47

(0.05)
(2.40)
(5.89)
(1.34)

12.34
10.53

Panel B: CAPM Implications
Small–Large

Value–Growth

Data

Model

Data

Model

β CAP M

0.57

0.71

0.31

0.59

αCAP M (%)

2.67

1.96

3.28

1.35

Panel A of Table VII presents estimated parameters of dividend dynamics for the top and bottom quintile
portfolios sorted by size (large and small) and book-to-market characteristic (value and growth), and their
risk premia in the data and implied by the model. Panel B provides the CAPM betas and alphas for the
small-minus-large and value-minus-growth strategies.

44

Table VIII

LRR Model Estimates based on Extended Set of Moments

Panel A: Parameter Estimates
Parameters

Estimate

SE

Preferences
γ
ψ
δ

8.19
1.96
0.9991

3.58
0.77
0.0011

0.0010
0.9809
0.0283
0.0066
0.9986
2.49e-06
0.0014
4.25
4.76
0.47

0.0010
0.0154
0.0100
0.0022
0.0020
2.60e-06
0.0016
2.08
1.75
0.38

11

3.72

Aggregation
h
χ2 -test
p-value

Moments

Sample

Model

t(diﬀ)

0.019
0.386
0.160
0.111
0.205
0.531
0.000
-0.047
-2.6e-04
8.3e-07
0.009
0.610

0.020
0.403
0.175
0.095
0.378
0.590
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.213

-0.27
-0.08
-0.08
0.40
-1.09
-0.19
-0.03
-1.25
-2.11
1.19
1.09
0.75

3.390
0.419
0.832
0.086
0.178
0.003

3.367
0.446
0.943
0.055
0.165
0.008

0.29
-0.26
-0.48
1.67
0.43
-1.14

-0.230
0.184
-0.379
0.067

-0.096
0.230
-0.166
0.242

-1.24
-0.27
-1.30
-0.95

Consumption & Dividends

Cash Flows
µc
ρ
φe
σ0
ν
σw
µd
ϕd
φd
ϱd

Panel B: Moments

14.06
0.08

vol(∆caτ )
AC1(∆caτ )
AC2(∆caτ )
vol(∆daτ )
AC1(∆daτ )
corr(∆caτ , ∆daτ )
E(ητa )
E(uaτ )
E(ητa xτ−2 )
2
2
2 )
E([ητa −Eτ−2 ητa ]στ−2
2
vol(ητa )
2
AC1(ητa )

Asset Prices
a )
E(zd,τ
a )
vol(zd,τ
a )
AC1(zd,τ
a
a )
E(Rd,τ − Rf,τ
a )
vol(rd,τ
a )
E(rf,τ

Predictability
a , za
corr(rd,τ
d,τ −1 )
a
a
corr(∆cτ , zd,τ
−1 )
a
a
corr(rd,τ , zd,τ −3 )
a
corr(∆caτ , zd,τ
−3 )

Table VIII presents model estimates based on the moment restrictions augmented by long-run predictability
moments. The model is estimated via GMM using annual data from 1930 till 2009 and taking into account
the eﬀect of time-aggregation.

45

Table A.1

Approximation Error
Panel A: Approximate Analytical Solutions
Mean log(P/C)

Vol log(P/C)

IES

RA

IES

0.5

1.5

2

0.5

1.5

2

5

3.592

4.754

5.058

0.059

0.021

0.032

10

3.789

4.572

4.716

0.060

0.021

0.032

15

4.055

4.421

4.470

0.062

0.021

0.032

Panel B: Numerical Solutions
Mean log(P/C)

Vol log(P/C)

IES

RA

IES

0.5

1.5

2

0.5

1.5

2

5

3.594

4.755

5.060

0.059

0.021

0.032

10

3.788

4.576

4.724

0.060

0.021

0.032

15

4.033

4.436

4.493

0.061

0.021

0.031

Panel C: Approximation Error (as a % of numerical values)
Mean log(P/C)

Vol log(P/C)

IES

RA

IES

0.5

1.5

2

0.5

1.5

2

5

0.05

0.01

0.03

0.04

-0.16

-0.17

10

-0.02

0.10

0.17

-0.42

-0.83

-0.86

15

-0.54

0.32

0.51

-1.84

-2.16

-2.17

Table A.1 illustrates diﬀerences between analytical and numerical solutions for the log of the price to
consumption ratio for various conﬁgurations of risk aversion (RA) and intertemporal elasticity of substitution
(IES).

46

Table A.2

LRR Model Estimates using Quarterly Data: Parameters
Parameters

Estimate

SE

7.02
1.62
0.9989

6.59
0.66
0.0006

0.0016
0.9833
0.0470
0.0035
0.9963
3.38e-6
0.0018
3.95
5.43
0.08

0.0016
0.0139
0.0295
0.0008
0.0022
6.45e-6
0.0023
2.14
1.20
0.10

2

1.05

Preferences
γ
ψ
δ
Cash Flows
µc
ρ
φe
σ0
ν
σw
µd
ϕd
φd
ϱd
Aggregation
h
χ2 -test
p-value

13.94
0.03

Table A.2 presents parameter estimates and the χ2 -test of overidentifying restrictions of the long-run risk
model based on the post-war quarterly data. The model is estimated via GMM using quarterly data from
1948 till 2009 and taking into account the eﬀect of time-aggregation.

47

Consumption Growth 0.012

0.08

Long−Run Risk (x)

0.004

0

−0.004

−0.04

−0.012

−0.08

−0.02
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Long−Run Risk (x)

Consumption Growth

0.04

2000

Figure 1. Realized and Expected Growth of Consumption

Figure 1 plots time series of realized (solid line) and expected (dash line) growth in consumption.
Consumption is deﬁned as the per-capita expenditure on non-durables and services. The data are real,
sampled on an annual frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2009.

48

2.5

2

1.5

LRR Model (accounting for time−aggregation)
Annual Specification (no time−aggregation)

1
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 2. Cumulative Impulse Response of Consumption Growth

Figure 2 plots the cumulative impulse response of annual consumption growth to a unit shock constructed
by ﬁtting an ARMA model to a long sample of simulated annual data. The data are simulated at the point
estimates of the LRR model (solid line) and those of the annual speciﬁcation (dashed line).

49

LRR Model (accounting for time−aggregation)
Annual Specification (no time−aggregation)
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Figure 3. Impulse Response Function of the Variance of Consumption Growth

Figure 3 plots the impulse response of the conditional variance of consumption growth to a unit shock
constructed by ﬁtting an ARMA model to a long sample of simulated data. The variance of consumption
growth is simulated at the point estimates of the LRR model (solid line) and those of the annual speciﬁcation
(dashed line).

50

