NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM:
THE IRONIC HISTORY OF A GRAND POLICY EXPERIMENT
Richard Schmalensee
Robert Stavins
Working Paper 18306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18306
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Richard Schmalensee and Robert Stavins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The SO2 Allowance Trading System: The Ironic History of a Grand Policy Experiment
Richard Schmalensee and Robert Stavins
NBER Working Paper No. 18306
August 2012
JEL No. Q40,Q48,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
Two decades have passed since the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 launched a grand experiment
in market-based environmental policy: the SO2 cap-and-trade system. That system performed well
but created four striking ironies. First, this system was put in place to curb acid rain, but the main
source of benefits from it was unexpected. Second, a substantial source of this system’s cost-effectiveness
was an unanticipated consequence of earlier railroad deregulation. Third, it is ironic that cap-and-trade
has come to be demonized by conservative politicians in recent years, since this market-based, cost-effective
policy innovation was initially championed and implemented by Republican administrations. Fourth,
court decisions and subsequent regulatory responses have led to the collapse of the SO2 market, demonstrating
that what the government gives, the government can take away.
Richard Schmalensee
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-520
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rschmal@mit.edu
Robert Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu

The SO2 Allowance Trading System:
The Ironic History of a Grand Policy Experiment
Richard Schmalensee and Robert N. Stavins1
Two decades have passed since the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) were signed
into law, launching a grand experiment in market-based environmental policy. By the late 1980s, there
was growing concern in the United States and other countries that acid precipitation – the result of sulfur
dioxide (SO2) and, to a lesser extent, nitrogen oxides (NOx) reacting in the atmosphere to form sulfuric
and nitric acids – was damaging forests and aquatic ecosystems. In the United States, flue gas emissions
from coal-fired, electric generating plants were the primary source of SO2 emissions and a major source
of NOx emissions. In response to this and other concerns, the U.S. Congress passed and President George
H. W. Bush signed into law the CAAA, Title IV of which established the path-breaking SO2 allowance
trading program.
While the concept of cap-and-trade is now broadly familiar, in 1990 this market-based approach
to regulating the environment was quite novel. Some were hostile to the notion of trading “rights to
pollute”; others doubted its workability. Up until that time, nearly all pollution regulations took a much
more prescriptive, “command-and-control” approach, either by setting uniform emission rate limits on
classes of emitters or by specifying the type of pollution-control equipment to be installed. Such
requirements are relatively inflexible, imposing the same abatement path upon a range of generally
heterogeneous facilities and ignoring the fact that the costs of compliance might vary widely across
individual facilities depending on their age, technology characteristics, operating conditions, and
characteristics of fuel used.
By the close of the twentieth century, the SO2 allowance trading system had come to be seen as
both innovative and successful. It has become exceptionally influential, leading to a series of policy
innovations in the United States and abroad to address a range of environmental challenges, including the
threat of global climate change (Stavins 2003). Most prominent among these innovations has been the
European Union Emission Trading System, a carbon dioxide (CO2) cap-and-trade system adopted in 2003
that is by far the world’s largest environmental pricing regime (European Commission 2012).
The design and implementation of the landmark SO2 cap-and-trade system have led to four
striking ironies that are the focus of this essay. First, this ambitious – and successful – policy was enacted
to reduce SO2 emissions to curb acid rain, but subsequent research indicates that the main source of
benefits from it was unexpected. Second, although the program appears to have been successful on nearly
all dimensions, a substantial source of its cost-effectiveness was an unanticipated consequence of the
deregulation of railroad rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Third, it is ironic that cap-and-trade has
come to be demonized by conservative politicians in the last few years, since this market-based, costeffective policy innovation was championed and implemented by Republican administrations from that of
President Ronald Reagan to that of President George W. Bush. Fourth and finally, court decisions and
subsequent regulatory responses have led to the virtual collapse of the SO2 market, demonstrating that
what the government gives, the government can take away. In order to explain these four ironies, we first
briefly review highlights of the system’s design and performance.

1

Schmalensee is the Howard W. Johnson Professor of Economics and Management, Emeritus at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Stavins is the
Albert Pratt Professor of Business and Government at the Harvard Kennedy School, a University Fellow of
Resources for the Future, and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Their e-mail
addresses are rschmal@mit.edu, and robert_stavins@harvard.edu.

2

A fifth, long-recognized irony deserves brief mention. Acid rain itself was largely a consequence
of compliance with national ambient air quality standards set in the 1970s for SO2 and other localized
pollutants. In order to reduce local ambient concentrations, electric utilities built more than 400 tall
stacks, many greater than 500 feet in height (Regens and Rycroft 1988), which successfully dispersed the
stack gases, but did so by injecting them high enough into the atmosphere that they precipitated out tens
or hundreds of miles downwind as acidified rain, snow, or particles.

Design
The policy’s objective was to reduce total annual U.S. SO2 emissions by 10 million tons relative
to 1980. (This section draws on Chan et al. 2012; also see Ellerman et al. 2000.) Phase I (1995–1999)
required significant emissions reductions from the 263 most polluting coal-fired electric generating units,
almost all located east of the Mississippi River. Phase II, which began in 2000, placed an aggregate
national emissions cap of 8.95 million tons per year on approximately 3,200 electric generating units —
nearly the entire fleet of fossil-fueled plants in the continental United States (Ellerman et al. 2000). This
cap — affecting almost exclusively the power sector — represented a 50 percent reduction from 1980
levels.
The government gave permits to emit, called allowances, denominated in tons of SO2 emissions,
to power plants covered by the law. If annual emissions at a regulated facility exceeded the allowances
allocated to that facility, the owner could buy allowances or reduce emissions, whether by installing
pollution controls, changing the mix of fuels used to operate the facility, or by scaling back operations. If
emissions at a regulated facility were reduced below its allowance allocation, the facility owner could sell
the extra allowances or bank them for future use. These opportunities created incentives to find ways to
reduce emissions at the lowest cost and to take advantage of low-cost abatement options early.
While this policy is seen by many observers as one of the most successful applications of
economic thinking to environmental policy, the policy’s target was not chosen to maximize net economic
benefits. (This is true of most environmental policies, of course.) No credible estimates of economic
benefits at alternative target levels were available. Instead, the target was selected largely based on what
was believed to be the “elbow” of the abatement cost curve. Also, there was a political desire to choose a
target level of reductions that was big enough to gain the support of the environmental community and to
be seen as satisfying a campaign pledge of the new President. Thus the choice of the cap was consistent
with a positive political economy model of policy making whereby a politically acceptable target is
chosen with an eye toward avoiding regions of steep change in the policy’s impact on social welfare
(Baumol and Oates 1971).
After the target level of emissions, the second most important design feature of the system was its
allocation of allowances. Government auctioning of allowances would have generated revenue that could
have been used – in principle – to reduce distortionary taxes, thereby reducing the program’s social cost
(Goulder 1995). But this efficiency argument was not advanced at the time; affected utilities and their
customers’ representatives would have strongly opposed auctioning; and the political value of being able
to allocate free allowances to address distributional concerns was substantial (Joskow and Schmalensee
1998). Also, because cost-of-service regulation characterized the entire electric utility industry in 1990, it
was assumed that the value of free allowances would be passed on to consumers and not generate
windfall profits for providers. Given that a free allocation was utilized, the distribution could be defined
in such a way as to ensure the greatest political support, without fear that this would jeopardize the
system’s environmental performance or economic cost. Absent particularly problematic types of
transaction costs (Stavins 1995; Hahn and Stavins 2011), a cap-and-trade system’s equilibrium allocation
after trading is independent of the initial allocation (Coase 1960; Montgomery 1972).

3

Performance
Beginning in 1995 and over the subsequent decade, the SO2 allowance-trading program
performed exceptionally well along all relevant dimensions. (Early assessments of the system’s design
and performance were provided by Schmalensee et al 1998 and Stavins 1998.) The program was
environmentally effective, with SO2 emissions from electric power plants decreasing 36 percent – from
15.9 million to 10.2 million tons – between 1990 and 2004 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
2011b), even though electricity generation from coal-fired power plants increased 25 percent over the
same period (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2011). The program’s long-term goal of reducing
annual nationwide utility emissions to 8.95 million tons was achieved in 2007, and by 2010 emissions had
declined further, to 5.1 million tons. Overall, the program delivered emissions reductions more quickly
than expected, as utilities took advantage of the possibility of banking allowances. With its $2,000/ton
statutory fine for any emissions exceeding allowance holdings (and continuous emissions monitoring),
compliance was nearly 100 percent.
The costs of achieving these environmental objectives with cap-and-trade were significantly less
than they would have been with a command-and-control regulatory approach. Cost savings were at least
15 percent and perhaps as much as 90 percent, compared with counterfactual policies that specified the
means of regulation in various ways and for various portions of the program’s regulatory period (Carlson
et al. 2000; Ellerman et al. 2000; Keohane 2003). In addition to static cost effectiveness, there is
evidence that the program brought down abatement costs over time by providing incentives for innovation
in equipment and operating procedures that are generally much stronger than those provided by traditional
command-and-control regulation (Ellerman et al 2000, pp. 235-48; Popp 2003; Bellas and Lange 2011).
While the program was less costly than a conventional approach, the costs may not have been as
low as they could have been. Marginal abatement costs varied significantly across facilities, at least in the
program’s first two years (Carlson et al. 2000). On the other hand, there is evidence that the
intertemporal allocation of abatement cost (via allowance banking) was at least approximately efficient
(Ellerman and Montero 2007), and the pattern of voluntary compliance was consistent with cost-effective
compliance strategies (Montero 1999).
The following factors may have kept costs above the theoretical minimum, though the influence
of each has been debated: (1) provisions in the CAAA that encouraged early use of flue-gas
desulfurization (using devices called “scrubbers”) instead of switching to low-sulfur coal – in an effort to
limit impacts on high-sulfur coal producers (Ellerman et al 2000, pp. 301-2); (2) lack of information
about marginal abatement costs on the part of market participants, particularly in the early years; (3) state
regulation that, particularly in the early years of the program, had the effect of distorting or constraining
utilities’ responses to federal environmental regulation (Arimura 2002; Bohi and Burtraw 1992; Ellerman
et al 2000, pp. 190-5); (4) interactions between the SO2 program and other federal regulations, such as
New Source Review and New Source Performance Standards, which constrained the program’s
operation; and (5) policy uncertainty when regulators and policy makers subsequently considered further
reductions in the national SO2 cap, as we discuss later.
The program can also be evaluated based on the geographic distribution of impacts. Most coalfired power plants were located east of the Mississippi, and model-based analyses predicted that the
largest share of emissions reductions would come from the Midwest and East. There was some concern
that emissions would end up disproportionately concentrated, and that this, combined with prevailing
wind patterns, would result in “hot spots” of unacceptably high SO2 concentrations. Despite these
concerns, however, the program did not generate significant hot spots (Ellerman et al. 2000, pp. 130-1;
Swift 2004), though recent work (Muller and Mendelsohn 2009) suggests that the use of damage-based
trading ratios, rather than a single allowance price, could have been welfare-improving.

4

In sum, the SO2 allowance-trading system’s actual costs, even if they exceeded the cost-effective
ideal for a cap-and-trade system, were much lower than would have been incurred with a comparable
traditional regulatory approach, and the program’s goals were achieved with less litigation (and thus more
certainty) than is typical for traditional environmental programs. There is broad agreement that the SO2
allowance-trading system provided a compelling demonstration of the advantages of a market-based
approach to environmental protection. With this background on design and performance, we turn to four
significant ironies.

The Main Source of Benefits was Unexpected
In the years leading up to the enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, there was
great concern in the United States about acid rain, in particular about the acidification of forests and
aquatic ecosystems. Thus, the central purpose of the SO2 allowance-trading program was to reduce
precursor SO2 emissions in order to reduce acid rain, primarily in the northeastern United States (National
Acid Precipitation Assessment Program 1998). This was accomplished – SO2 emissions were
dramatically cut. However, it turns out that the ecological benefits of the program have been relatively
small – largely because it takes much longer than thought to reverse the acidification of ecosystems
(National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program 2005) – while other, completely unanticipated benefits
of the program have been massive.
Whereas some studies at the time of the program’s enactment predicted that its benefits would be
approximately equal to its costs (Portney 1990), more recent estimates have pegged annual benefits at
between $59 and $116 billion, compared with annual costs of $0.5 to 2 billion (Table 1). More than 95
percent of these benefits are associated not with ecological impacts (including acidification of aquatic
ecosystems), however, but with human health impacts of reduced levels of airborne fine sulfate particles
less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter (PM2.5) derived from SO2 emissions. Epidemiological evidence of
the harmful human health effects of these fine particulates mounted rapidly in the decade after the CAAA
was enacted (Chestnut and Mills 2005).
Estimates of these health benefits vary widely, but they appear to be on the order of $50 billion to
more than $100 billion per year (Burtraw et al. 1998; Burtraw 1999; Chestnut and Mills 2005; National
Acid Precipitation Assessment Program 2005; Shadbegian, Gray, and Morgan 2005; U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency 2011a). As Table 1 shows, strict ecosystem benefits are probably considerably less
than program costs, though at least one study (Banzhaf et al 2006) suggests that ecosystem benefits alone
have exceeded program costs. In any case, the unexpected human health benefits of the program are
estimated to have exceeded annual costs by a factor of more than fifty!

An Unanticipated Consequence of Deregulation
In addition to being less costly than traditional command-and-control policies would have been,
the realized costs of the SO2 allowance trading program were substantially less than ex ante forecasts
prior to implementation (National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program 2005).2 While part of this
discrepancy was due to technological innovation and the speed with which the allowance market matured,
a major factor in low realized compliance costs was the emergence of input substitution, from high to low
sulfur coal, as a cost-effective compliance strategy. And, interestingly, the attractiveness of switching to
low sulfur coal was increasing before the program even went into effect, due to a public policy change –
unrelated to the environment – initiated long before the CAAA of 1990.
2

A revolutionary aspect of the cap-and-trade approach was that for the first time regulators had instantaneous
information in a summary statistic (the allowance price) of the marginal cost of compliance, but the program’s
design did not allow for any response to that information, such as changing the cap.

5

Prior to 1976, the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) set rates for freight rail. Then, the
Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 and the Staggers Rail Act of 1980 gave rail
carriers the ability to set their own rates, and legalized private railroad-shipper contracts. The result was
that shipping rates for coal (and other products) declined dramatically (Winston 2005; U.S. Government
Accountability Office 2007). This brought with it a substantial fall in the cost of bringing coal from the
Powder River Basin in Wyoming and Montana to centers of high demand east of the Mississippi River,
relative to the costs of coal from the Midwest and Appalachia (Ellerman et al. 2000) – even though the
existence of only two major rail lines kept shipping costs above competitive levels (Busse and Keohane
2008).
The three major coal deposits in the United States are located in the Powder River Basin (PRB),
the Illinois Basin and Central Appalachia. Of these, PRB coal is cheapest to mine and has the lowest
sulfur content, though considerable low-sulfur coal was also produced in the East, particularly after the
acid rain program took effect. Hence, absent the use of any abatement technology, switching from highsulfur eastern coal to low-sulfur coal, particularly PRB coal, reduces power plant SO2 emissions per unit
of electricity generation.
The majority of coal-fired power plants in the United States are located along or east of the
Mississippi River, making PRB the most distant option for major sources of demand. As freight prices
fell with deregulation, liberalization gave freight carriers flexibility and incentive to contract with eastern
utilities, and these same utilities developed low-cost ways to modify their boilers (which were designed to
burn bituminous coal) to burn sub-bituminous PRB coal (Ellerman et al 2000, pp. 243-45). The average
sulfur content of coal burned at electric generating units began to fall. In fact, SO2 emissions at units
covered by the allowance-trading program were actually falling from 1985 to 1993, before the acid rain
program took effect (Ellerman and Montero 1998). The main source of this decline was the increased use
of PRB coal, with average rail rates of shipping PRB coal to Midwest generators falling by over 50
percent from 1979 to 1993 (Gerking and Hamilton 2008).
For some power plants, this made fuel-switching from high-sulfur to low-sulfur coal costeffective even in the absence of the acid rain legislation; and for many other eastern power plants, it made
fuel-switching less expensive than installing scrubbers in response to the legislation. Of the 263 units
regulated in the first phase of the allowance-trading program, 52 percent primarily pursued fuel switching
or blending low-sulfur coal with higher-sulfur coal, accounting for 59 percent of emissions reductions;
and scrubbers were installed at about 10 percent of the units, accounting for 28 percent of emissions
reduction (U.S. Energy Information Administration 1997).3 Overall, it appears that about one-third of
SO2 emissions reductions in the early years of the program were due to prior railroad deregulation and
two-thirds to the SO2 allowance trading program (Ellerman et al. 2000, p. 122).
It could be argued that because these reductions in delivered fuel costs would have occurred in
the absence of the SO2 allowance trading program — and would have reduced the costs of a commandand-control SO2 program as well — the cost savings attributed to the SO2 allowance-trading program
(relative to a command-and-control system) should be adjusted downward (Carlson et al. 2000). This is
valid, but it is also true that a prescriptive regulatory approach – such as a policy that required the
installation of scrubbers at all power plants – might have prevented electricity companies from taking
advantage of some of these alternative compliance options.

3

In addition, 32 percent of the units complied by obtaining additional allowances as well as switching to lowersulfur coal, accounting for 9 percent of emissions reductions; 3 percent of the units were retired, accounting for 2
percent of emissions reductions; and 3 percent of the units used other compliance methods, accounting for 2 percent
of emissions reductions (U.S. Energy Information Administration 1997).

6

In any event, it is clear that significant shares of the emissions reduction – about one-third in the
early years – and of the cost savings associated with the SO2 allowance trading system were actually an
unanticipated consequence of an earlier, unrelated public policy change.

Conservatives Demonize Their Own Innovation
Some two decades after the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 were signed into law by
President George H. W. Bush, the U.S. House of Representatives passed legislation – H.R. 2454, the
American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 or the Waxman-Markey bill – that included an
economy-wide cap-and-trade system to cut carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions linked with global climate
change. But, one year later, in July of 2010, the U.S. Senate abandoned its attempt to pass companion
legislation.
In the process of considering this legislation, conservative Republicans (and some coal-state
Democrats) attacked the cap-and-trade system as “cap-and-tax.’’ They may have been helped by
President Obama’s January 2009 budget message to Congress, which provided for revenues from an
auction of 100 percent of the allowances under such a scheme (Chan, Stavins, Stowe, and Sweeney 2012).
Regardless of what they thought about climate change, there was significant irony to this demonization of
market-based approaches to environmental protection, since these policies were innovations developed by
conservatives in the Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and George W. Bush administrations – and once
strongly condemned by liberals and environmentalists.
In the 1980s, President Ronald Reagan’s Environmental Protection Agency put in place a trading
program to phase out leaded gasoline. It produced a more rapid elimination of leaded gasoline from the
marketplace than had been anticipated, and at a savings of some $250 million per year, compared with a
conventional no-trade, command-and-control approach (Stavins 2003). Not only did President George H.
W. Bush successfully propose the use of cap-and-trade to cut U.S. SO2 emissions, his administration
advocated in international fora the use of emissions trading to cut global CO2 emissions, a proposal
initially resisted but ultimately adopted by the European Union. In 2005, President George W. Bush’s
EPA issued the Clean Air Interstate Rule, aimed at reducing SO2 emissions by a further 70 percent from
their 2003 levels. Cap-and-trade was again the policy instrument of choice in order to keep costs down
and achieve rapid reductions at minimum economic pain. (This rule was later invalidated by the courts, as
we discuss below.)
When the CAAA was being considered in the U.S. Congress, environmental and energy debates
typically broke along geographic lines (with key parameters being degree of urbanization and reliance on
specific fuel types, such as coal versus natural gas). Support and opposition were both largely bipartisan.
The CAAA passed the Senate in 1990 by a vote of 89-11 with 87 percent of Republican members and 91
percent of Democrats voting yea, and it passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 401-21 with 87
percent of Republicans and 96 percent of Democrats voting in support.
Such bipartisan voting patterns were typical for environmental issues in the 1970s through much
of the 1990s. But by the time climate change legislation received serious consideration in Washington in
2009-2010, environmental politics – and partisan politics more generally – had changed dramatically,
with Congressional voting on environmental legislation typically taking place along strictly partisan lines.
The Waxman-Markey legislation was passed by the House of Representatives in 2009 by a vote of 219212, with support from 83 percent of Democrats, but only 4 percent of Republicans.
This polarization between the two political parties on environmental issues (Shipan and Lowry
2001) was (and is) part of a gradual widening gulf between the parties on virtually all issues (Fleisher and
Bond 2004). The polarization has shown up in studies by political scientists employing a diverse set of
measures that place members of Congress on an ideological spectrum from extreme right to extreme left
7

based on their roll-call votes (Poole and Rosenthal 1997, 2007). Polarization – the gradual disappearance
of moderates – has been taking place for decades (Lowry and Shipan 2002; Theriault 2008). The rise of
the Tea Party movement within the Republican Party is only the most recent episode in a much longer
story.
Four structural factors have been considered as possible contributors to this trend. First, there has
been the increasing importance of the primary system, a consequence of the “democratization” of the
nomination process that began in the 1970s (Bartels 1988, Ansolabehere, Snyder, and Stewart 2001). A
small share of the electorate vote in primaries, namely those with the strongest political preferences: the
most conservative Republicans and the most liberal Democrats (Burden 2001). This self-selection favors
candidates from the extremes (King, Orlando, and Sparks 2011). Second, decades of redistricting have
produced more and more districts that are dominated by either Republican or Democratic voters (Carson,
Crespin, Finocchiaro, and Rohde 2007; Ansolabehere and Snyder 2002), which further increases the
importance of primary elections. Third, geographic sorting of like-minded households may have furthered
this trend. Fourth, the increasing cost of electoral campaigns greatly favors incumbents (Carson,
Engstrom, and Roberts 2007), with the ratio of average incumbent-to-challenger financing now exceeding
10-to-1. This tends to make districts relatively safe for the party that controls the seat, thereby further
increasing the importance of primaries.
These factors operate mainly when new members of Congress are elected (Theriault 2006). To a
lesser degree, polarization has also taken place through the adaptation of sitting members of Congress: in
order to discourage or survive primary challenges, Republican members shift rightward and Democratic
members shift leftward. A striking recent example of this shift is the evolution of Senator John McCain,
Republican of Arizona, from a moderate during his 2008 Presidential run to a solid conservative in 2010
in response to a primary challenge from a Tea Party candidate.
The Great Recession of the past several years, like the Great Depression of the 1930s, has
undoubtedly increased political polarization (McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 2006). The 1930s saw not
only the rise of American socialists and communists, but also the rise of American right-wing extremism.
It may be that better economic times will reduce the pace of political polarization. However, in the face
of the long-term structural factors noted above, it is difficult to be optimistic about the long-term
prognosis.
Many conservatives in the Congress undoubtedly opposed climate policies because of
disagreement about the threat of climate change or the costs of the policies, but instead of debating risks
and costs, they chose to launch an ultimately successful campaign to demonize and thereby tarnish capand-trade as an instrument of public policy, rendering it “collateral damage” in the wider climate policy
battle. This scorched-earth approach could come back to haunt conservatives if future environmental
initiatives with widespread support are enacted without making use of the power of the marketplace to
reduce compliance costs. It is ironic that conservatives chose to demonize their own market-based
creation. It is perhaps even more ironic that this tactic seems to have been effective despite their
creation’s excellent performance.

What the Government Gives, It Can Take Away
A major source of uncertainty about any government-created market is that the government can
undo what it created — possibly unintentionally. In essence, this is what has happened in the SO2
allowance market.
Prices for SO2 allowances were remarkably stable throughout the program’s first decade (Figure
1). But in 2004, prices began to rise, ultimately topping $1,200/ton in 2005. Why did this happen? It
was widely recognized by the late 1990s that SO2 reductions in excess of those resulting from the trading
8

program of Title IV would be required by other provisions in the Clean Air Act and would in any event be
warranted, given the significant adverse health effects of fine particulates associated with SO 2 emissions.
But Title IV did not give EPA authority to adjust the program, such as by tightening the overall cap, in
response to new information about the benefits (or costs) of emissions reductions. This led to a chain of
events that ultimately brought about the virtual collapse of the SO2 allowance trading program.
In early 2002, President George W. Bush proposed the Clear Skies Act, which would have greatly
tightened the SO2 cap. The lack of an initial allowance market reaction suggests it was no surprise when
this proposal died in March 2005, having failed to move out of committee. The Administration then
promulgated its Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) in May, 2005, with the same purpose of lowering the
cap on SO2 emissions (to 70 percent below the 2003 emissions level). CAIR did this in part by applying
more stringent emission requirements on states that were contributing to violations of EPA’s primary
ambient air quality standards for fine particulates in the eastern United States (Palmer and Evans 2009).
It required sources within those states to surrender two additional allowances for every ton of SO2
emissions, effectively reducing the cap by two-thirds. Because CAIR provided that firms could bank
their SO2 allowances for use in the new program, prices rose further in anticipation of CAIR’s more
stringent cap, with spot prices increasing from $273 per ton in EPA’s 2004 auction to $703 in the 2005
auction (Figure 1).4
After peaking in 2005 at more than $1,200 per ton, SO2 allowance prices dropped just as fast as
they had risen, aided by EPA’s announcement that it would re-examine CAIR (Samuelsohn 2005) and
speculation about impending legal challenges (Samuelsohn 2006a; Kruse 2009).5 The speculation was
proven to be correct on June 26, 2006, when North Carolina and other states and a number of utilities
sued EPA over CAIR (Samuelsohn 2006b). The states argued that the interstate trading allowed under
CAIR was inconsistent with a provision in the Clean Air Act that obliges each state to prevent emissions
that interfere with any other state’s attainment or maintenance of air quality standards.
Two years later, on July 11, 2008, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
responded to the lawsuit by vacating CAIR in its entirety, and thereby invalidating the core of prior SO2
regulation, the cap-and-trade system with unlimited trading across states, by asserting that under the
Clean Air Act EPA did not have authority to ignore the relationship between sources and receptors (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency 2011a). On that single day, the SO2 allowance price fell from $315 to
$115 (Figure 1) (Burtraw and Szambelan 2009). The Bush administration – and the subsequent Obama
administration – chose not to appeal that ruling. In December, the court allowed CAIR to remain in effect
while EPA devised a replacement that addressed its concerns, but it remained clear that unlimited
interstate trading was doomed. Expectations of a more stringent SO2 cap, which had fueled the run-up in
allowance prices, became less defensible, and prices continued to fall, returning to the range of their pre4

An array of other factors contributed to the run-up and eventual spike in SO2 allowance prices, including:
Hurricanes Katrina (August, 2005) and Rita (September 2005), which impaired petroleum refining and natural gas
capacity. In addition, delivery of low-sulfur coal from the Powder River Basin to Midwestern power plants was
disrupted by track failures (May, 2005) on both the Union Pacific and Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroads, which
caused low-sulfur coal prices in the Midwest to peak in December, 2005, at a level three times greater than a year
earlier. This led some power companies to switch to higher sulfur coal from the east, increasing demand for SO 2
allowances. A final factor was features of the allowance trading program’s design that interacted with the tax
system and utility regulation to restrict the number of allowances actually available for trading at any time (the
“float”), thus compounding the price impacts of the other factors (Parsons, Ellerman, and Feilhauer 2009).
5

Also contributing to the fall in allowances prices from their peak was a drop in natural gas prices, the restoration
of refining and gas capacity in the Gulf of Mexico following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, and the realization of a
likely adequate supply of allowances and installed scrubber capacity to comply with CAIR (Burtraw and Szambelan
2009). In addition, the expectation of an economy-wide CO2 cap-and-trade system, which all three major
Presidential candidates – John McCain, Hilary Clinton, and Barak Obama – in 2007 supported, would have led to an
exogenous, long-run decline in SO2 emissions as well, and hence to a decline in the value of banked allowances.

9

2004 levels. At EPA’s 2009 auction, spot allowances (which could be used in 2009 or later) sold for $70
per ton, compared with $390 a year earlier (Burtraw and Szambelan 2009).
In July, 2010, the Obama Administration proposed its Clean Air Transport Rule (CATR) to limit
annual SO2 (and NOx) emissions in 28 states, as a replacement for the CAIR. The proposed rule
established state-specific emissions caps for power plant SO2 emissions, limiting inter-state trading. The
rule was finalized in July, 2011, as the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR), allowing only intrastate
trading and limited trading between two groups of states. (Predictably, this rule has also been challenged
in court, by 27 states and 18 other parties, and in January 2012 the D.C. Circuit Court ordered EPA to
keep CAIR in force pending its review of CSAPR.)
The shift from CAIR to CSAPR was the death-knell for the SO2 allowance trading program,
though the program remains nominally in place, since it dramatically reduced the scope for cost-effective
interstate trades. The SO2 market collapsed, with allowance prices falling to record low levels. By the
time of EPA’s 2012 auction, market-clearing prices had fallen to $0.56 in the spot auction and $0.12 in
the seven-year advance auction.6
In essence, the imposition of state-level and source-specific prescriptive regulation has all but
eliminated the demand for allowances. States with binding caps under CSAPR have no alternative but to
reduce their emissions, whether by mandating the use of scrubbers, retiring coal-fired power plants, or
setting up intrastate trading. Either way, the demand for federal SO2 allowances has been virtually
eliminated.
While the SO2 allowance market functioned effectively, the broader regulatory environment
served to end its life prematurely. (One more irony: the program’s success may have weakened the case
for continuing the allowance market by reducing the heterogeneity of abatements costs across sources,
thus reducing potential gains from trade (Newell and Stavins 2003).) When the government creates a
market, it can also destroy it, possibly fostering a legacy of increased regulatory uncertainty and reduced
investor confidence in future cap-and-trade regimes, and hence reduced credibility of pollution markets
more broadly.

Conclusions
More than twenty years after the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990 launched the path-breaking
SO2 allowance trading system, the world’s first large-scale market-based environmental initiative, that
grand experiment in public policy continues to enjoy its reputation around the world as a great success.
Although it is true that the system performed at least as well as its optimistic advocates had anticipated
through its first decade of operation – reducing emissions cost-effectively – it is also true that reflecting
now on this performance yields a considerably more nuanced assessment.
Although the emissions-reduction cap was indeed achieved, the program had originally been
intended to reduce damages to forests and aquatic ecosystems caused by acid rain, and the system has
accomplished considerably less in that regard than had been anticipated. At the same time, however,
actual costs of compliance have been substantially less than originally expected. Even more striking is
that the real benefits of the program are both much greater than its costs and very different in kind from
those that were anticipated. Rather than providing significant ecological benefits, reductions in SO2
emissions under the allowance trading system have resulted in dramatic decreases in downwind
6

When new Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) affecting coal-fired power plants take effect – likely in
2015-2016 – they will likely be so stringent that SO2 constraints under CSAPR will be rendered non-binding in one
of the two SO2 trading zones. Further, the MATS explicitly do not allow trading, and so assuming these rules are
finalized and implemented as expected, there will be only a minimal market for SO2 (Burtraw, et al. 2012).

10

concentrations of small particulates, thereby producing great, unexpected benefits to human health,
particularly reductions in mortality.
Despite the worldwide celebration of the success of this cap-and-trade system, it now appears that
some part of that success in reducing SO2 emissions at low cost was due not to allowance trading but to
the earlier deregulation of U.S. railroads. This reduced the delivered cost of low-sulfur coal from the
Powder River Basin to the Midwest, and so provided economic incentives for substitution of this “clean
coal” for the high-sulfur coal mined in the eastern part of the country. A significant share of the SO2
emissions reductions associated with the CAAA was actually an unintended consequence of other, nonenvironmental policy innovations, and the availability of this low-cost compliance option was a major
factor in the system’s cost-effectiveness.
Market-based systems, such as cap-and-trade, would seem to be a quintessential Republican
approach to environmental protection. Indeed, history has validated this, with Ronald Reagan’s lead
trading system at the heart of his phasedown of leaded gasoline in the 1980s, George H. W. Bush’s SO2
allowance-trading system and international advocacy of cap-and-trade in the 1990s, and George W.
Bush’s Clear Skies proposal and Clean Air Interstate Rule in the current century. But more recent history
and politics surrounding potential public policies to reduce CO2 emissions linked to global climate change
have exhibited a very different pattern. With political polarization having reached high levels, the
environment is no longer a regional, bipartisan issue in Washington, but a decidedly and decisively
partisan one, with conservatives – largely Republicans – coming to be strongly opposed to national
climate legislation. In the process of opposition, they have demonized cap-and-trade proposals as “capand-tax” and have thereby tarnished this market-based approach to environmental protection. If the
tarnish cannot be removed, the cost of future environmental programs may be needlessly increased.
Ironically, an attempt to render more stringent the government’s SO2 emissions cap through the
use of a separate, but related cap-and-trade system eventually led through a series of court cases and
regulatory responses to the virtual closure of the SO2 allowance market. Because of increasing concerns
about the human health impacts of fine particles, the George W. Bush administration included SO2 targets
in its multi-pollutant Clear Skies legislation in 2002. The Congress failed to act on the legislation, and so
the Bush administration instead proposed tightening the CAAA cap in its Clean Air Interstate Rule or
CAIR, in 2005. That approach was invalidated by the courts in 2008, because it did not prevent interstate
transmission of pollution, and the Obama administration’s proposed replacement, finalized in 2011 as the
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, would virtually eliminate interstate trading, the source of most of the
potential gains from trade. As a result, the SO2 allowance trading system has essentially come to an end.
What the government gives, it can take away.
What are the implications of this history of the SO2 allowance trading program for future
environmental policy, including for climate change? The good news, which this program clearly
demonstrated, is that cap-and-trade is not just a subject of seminars and journal articles; it is a viable
option for tackling large-scale environmental problems. Even if the SO2 allowance trading program’s
performance was enhanced by unanticipated benefits and declines in coal prices, and even if it has been
essentially wiped out by later policy changes, the fact is that the allowance trading program achieved its
target emissions reductions rapidly and cost-effectively. Few other environmental programs of any sort
have performed as well.
The bad news is that “cap-and-tax” rhetoric may make it hard to use this approach in the U.S. to
deal with climate change. This is bad news indeed. Emissions of CO2 from coal-fired power plants will
no doubt be reduced by EPA rules on SO2, NOx, mercury, coal fly-ash, and cooling-water withdrawals
that are working their way through the regulatory process, and that will drive up the cost of generating
electricity with coal. But these rules, and those likely to be adopted by the EPA in response to the
requirement that it regulate CO2 under the Clean Air Act, are unlikely to be cost-effective policies for
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. At a time when environmental protection in general and climate
11

policy in particular have become highly polarized in the U.S. Congress, the outlook for an efficient and
effective national climate policy is not good. In particular, the tarnishing of cap-and-trade by
conservatives as a potential instrument of action may make it even more difficult to give serious
consideration in the future to this and other market-based approaches to environmental protection.



We thank Richard Sweeney for research assistance, and Dallas Burtraw, Denny Ellerman, Juan-Pablo
Montero, Sean Theriault, and Tom Tietenberg for valuable comments on a previous version of this paper. Any
errors and all opinions are our own.

12

Table 1: Estimated Annual U.S. Benefits and Costs of the SO2 Allowance Trading
Program; Title IV, Clean Air Amendments of 1990
(Billions of U.S. 2000 Dollars)

Benefits

Mortality

$ 50 – 100

Morbidity

3–7

Recreational Visibility

2–3

Residential Visibility

2–3

Ecosystem Effects

0.5
59 – 116

Total Annual Benefits

Costs

0.5 – 2.0

Net Benefits

58 – 114

Source: Burtraw et al. (1998); Burtraw (1999); Chestnut and Mills (2005); Banzhaf et al. (2006).

13

Figure 1: SO2 Allowance Prices and the Regulatory Environment, 1994-2012
(1995 $ per ton)

1400
EPA Announces It Will
Re-Examine CAIR

Hurricane Rita

1200

Hurricane Katrina

1000

CAIR
Vacated

Train Derailments Reduce
PRB Coal Deliveries

800

North Carolina Sues EPA

CAIR Remanded
to EPA

CAIR Finalized

600
Phase II Begins

400

CATR
Proposed

Clear Skies
Announced

CSAPR
Announced

200
0
8/94

8/96

8/98

8/00

8/02

8/04

8/06

8/08

8/10

Source: Data on spot prices compiled by Power & Energy Analytic Resources (PEAR) Inc. from Cantor Fitzgerald
until September 11, 2001, and from ICAP United thereafter.

14

REFERENCES
Ansolabehere, Stephen, and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2002. “The Incumbency Advantage in U.S.
Elections: An Analysis of State and Federal Offices, 1942-2000.” Election Law Journal 1(2):315338.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, James M. Snyder, Jr., and Charles Stewart, III. 2001. “Candidate
Positioning in U.S. House Elections.” American Journal of Political Science 45(1):136-159.
Arimura, Toshi H. 2002. “An Empirical Study of the SO2 Allowance Market: Effects of PUC
Regulations.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 44(2):271–289.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Dallas Burtraw, David Evans, and Alan Krupnick. 2006. “Valuation of
Natural Resource Improvements in the Adirondacks.” Land Economics 82(3):445–464.
Bartels, Larry M. 1988. Presidential Primaries and the Dynamics of Public Choice. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Baumol, William J., and Wallace E. Oates. 1971. "The Use of Standards and Prices for Protection of
the Environment." Swedish Journal of Economics, 73(1):42–54.
Bellas, Allen S., and Ian Lange. 2011. “Evidence of Innovation and Diffusion Under Tradable Permit
Programs.” International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics, 5(1):1–22.
Bohi, Douglas R., and Dallas Burtraw. 1992. “Utility Investment Behavior and the Emission Trading
Market.” Resources and Energy, 14(1–2)129–53.
Burden, Barry C. 2001. “The Polarizing Effects of Congressional Primaries.” Congressional
Primaries and the Politics of Representation, ed. P. F. Galderisi, M. Ezra, and M. Lyons. Lanham:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Burtraw, Dallas. 1999. “Cost Savings, Market Performance and Economic Benefits of the U.S. Acid
Rain Program. Pollution for Sale: Emissions Trading and Joint Implementation, Steve Sorrell and
Jim Skea, eds. Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Publishing, Ltd.
Burtraw, Dallas, Alan Krupnick, Erin Mansur, David Austin and Deirdre Farrell. 1998. “Cost and
Benefits of Reducing Air Pollutants Related to Acid Rain.” Contemporary Economic Policy 16(4):
379-400.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Sarah Jo Szambelan. 2009. “U.S. Emissions Trading Markets for SO2 and
NOx.” Discussion Paper 09-40, Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen L. Palmer, Anthony Paul, Blair Beasley, and Matthew Woerman. 2012.
“Reliability in the Electricity Industry under New Environmental Regulations.” Resources for the
Future, Discussion Paper 12-18.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen L. Cropper, and Karen Palmer. 2000. “Sulfur Dioxide
Control by Electric Utilities: What are the Gains from Trade?” Journal of Political Economy, 108
(6):1292–1326.
Carson, Jamie L., Michael H. Crespin, Charles J. Finocchiaro, and David W. Rohde. 2007.
"Redistricting and Party Polarization in the U.S. House of Representatives." American Politics
Research, 35(6):878–904.
15

Carson, Jamie L., Erik J. Engstrom, and Jason M. Roberts. 2007. “Candidate Quality, the Personal
Vote, and the Incumbency Advantage in Congress.” American Political Science Review 101(2):289–
301.
Chan, Gabriel, Robert Stavins, Robert Stowe, and Richard Sweeney. 2012. The SO2 Allowance
Trading System and the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990: Reflections on Twenty Years of Policy
Innovation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Environmental Economics Program.
Chestnut, Lauraine G., & David M. Mills. 2005. "A Fresh Look at the Benefits and Costs of the U.S.
Acid Rain Program." Journal of Environmental Management, 77(3):252–266.
Coase, Ronald H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics 3:1-44.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M.
Bailey. 2000. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program. Cambridge, United Kingdom:
Cambridge University Press.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Juan-Pablo Montero. 1998. “The Declining Trend in Sulfur Dioxide
Emissions: Implications for Allowance Prices.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 36(1):26–45.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Juan-Pablo Montero. 2007. “The Efficiency and Robustness of Allowance
Banking in the U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Energy Journal, 28(4): 47-71.
European Commission. 2012. Emissions Trading System (EU ETS). Available at http://ec.europa.
eu/clima/policies/ets/index_en.htm
Fiorina, Morris P. 1999. “Whatever Happened to the Median Voter.” Paper presented at the Midwest
Political Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois, April 15-17.
Fleisher, Richard, and John R. Bond. 2004. “The Shrinking Middle in the U.S. Congress.” British
Journal of Political Science, 34(3):429–451.
Gerking, Shelby, and Stephen F. Hamilton. 2008. “What Explains the Increased Utilization of Powder
River Basin Coal in Electric Power Generation?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
90(4):933-950.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the ‘Double Dividend’: A Reader's Guide.”
International Tax and Public Finance 2(2):157-183.
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 2011. “The Effect of Allowance Allocations on Cap-andTrade System Performance.” The Journal of Law and Economics 54(2), November, 2011,
(published August, 2012), pp. S267-S294.
Joskow, Paul L., and Richard Schmalensee. 1998. “The Political Economy of Market-based
Environmental Policy: The U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Journal of Law and Economics 41:81-135.
Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2003. “What Did the Market Buy? Cost Savings Under the U.S. Tradeable
Permits Program for Sulfur Dioxide.” Working Paper YCELP-01-11-2003. Yale Center for
Environmental Law and Policy, October 15.
King, Aaron S., Frank J. Orlando, and David B. Sparks. 2011. “Ideological Extremity and Primary
Success: A Social Network Approach.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwest
Political Science Association.
16

Kruse, Elizabeth. 2009. “North Carolina v. Environmental Protection Agency.”
Environmental Law Review 33(1):283-296.

Harvard

Lowry, William R., and Charles R. Shipan. 2002. “Party Differentiation in Congress.” Legislative
Studies Quarterly 27:33-60.
McCarty, Norian, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized America: The Dance of
Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Montero, Juan-Pablo. 1999. “Voluntary Compliance with Market-Based Environmental Policy:
Evidence from the U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(5): 998-1033.
Montgomery, W. David. 1972. “Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 5(3):395–418.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn. 2009. “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting the
Prices Right.” American Economic Review, 99(5):1714–39.
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program. 1998. Biennial Report to Congress: An Integrated
Assessment. Washington, DC: National Science and Technology Council, Committee on
Environment and Natural Resources.
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program. 2005. National Acid Precipitation Assessment
Program Report to Congress: An Integrated Assessment. Washington, D.C.: National Science and
Technology Council, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.
Newell, Richard N., and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. ACost Heterogeneity and the Potential Savings from
Market-Based Policies.@ Journal of Regulatory Economics 23(1):43-59.
Palmer, Karen, and David A. Evans. 2009. “The Evolving SO2 Allowance Market: Title IV, CAIR,
and Beyond.” Resources for the Future Weekly Policy Commentary, July 13.
Parsons, John E., A. Denney Ellerman, and Stephen Feilhauer. 2009. “Designing a U.S. Market for
CO2.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 21(1):79-86.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
Voting. New York: Oxford University Press.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology and Congress. New Brunswick: Transaction
Publishers.
Popp, David. 2003. “Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 22(4):641-660.
Portney, Paul R. 1990. “Economics of the Clean Air Act.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
4(4):173-181.
Regens, James L, and Robert W. Rycroft. 1988.
Pennsylvania: University of Pittsburgh Press.

The Acid Rain Controversy.

Pittsburgh,

Samuelsohn, Darren. 2005. “EPA Agrees to Re-Examine CAIR Power Plant Standard.”
November 23.

Greenwire,

Samuelsohn, Darren. 2006a. “Bush Regs Facing a Year of Legal Challenges.” Greenwire, January 6.
17

Samuelsohn, Darren. 2006b. “North Carolina Sues EPA Over Upwind Emissions.”
27.

Greenwire, June

Schmalensee, Richard, Paul L. Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M.
Bailey. 1998. “An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 12(3): 53-68.
Shadbegian, Ronald J., Wayne B. Gray, and Cynthia L. Morgan. 2005. “Benefits and Costs from
Sulfur Dioxide Trading: A Distributional Analysis.” Working Paper 05-09. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, National Center for Environmental Economics.
Shipan, Charles R., and William R. Lowry. 2001. “Environmental Policy and Party Divergence in
Congress.” Political Research Quarterly 54:245-263.
Stavins, Robert N. 1995. “Transaction Costs and Tradeable Permits.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29:133-148.
Stavins, Robert N. 1998. “What can we learn from the grand policy experiment? Lessons from SO2
allowance trading.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3):69–88.
Stavins, Robert N. 2003. “Experience with Market-Based Environmental Policy Instruments.”
Handbook of Environmental Economics, Volume I, eds. Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffrey Vincent,
Chapter 9, pp. 355-435. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Swift, Byron. 2004. “Emissions Trading and Hot Spots: A Review of the Major Programs.”
Environment Reporter 35(19):1–16.
Theriault, Sean M. 2006. “Party Polarization in the U.S. Congress: Member Replacement and Member
Adaptation.” Party Politics, 12(4):483–503.
Theriault, Sean M. 2008. Party Polarization in the Congress. New York: Cambridge University Press.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 1997. “The Effects of Title IV of the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990 on Electric Utilities:
An Update.”
Washington, D.C.
http://www.eia.gov/cneaf/electricity/clean_air_upd97/exec_sum.html U.S. Energy Information
Administration.
2011.
“Electricity Net Generation: Total (All Sectors), 1949–2010.”
http://205.254.135.24/totalenergy/ data/annual/txt/ptb0802a.html.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2011a. Clean Air Interstate Rule, Acid Rain Program, and
Former NOx Budget Trading Program 2010 Progress Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. www.epa.gov/airmarkt/progress/ARPCAIR10_01.html.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2011b. “National Emissions Inventory Air Pollutant Emissions
Trends Data: 1970–2011.” www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/index.html.
U. S. Government Accountability Office. 2007. Freight Railroads: Updated Information on Rates and
Other Industry Trends. Publication No. GAO-07-1245T.
Winston, Clifford. 2005. “The Success of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980.” AEI-Brookings Joint Center
for Regulatory Studies, Related Publication:05-24.

18

