                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         OPEN BORDERS

                                            John Kennan

                                       Working Paper 18307
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18307


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




A version of this paper was presented as a plenary talk at the SED meeting in Gent, July 2011. I thank
Michael Clemens, Eric French, two anonymous referees and many seminar participants for helpful
comments. Xiaodong Fan provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John Kennan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Open Borders
John Kennan
NBER Working Paper No. 18307
August 2012
JEL No. E25,F11,F22,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

There is a large body of evidence indicating that cross-country differences in income levels are associated
with differences in productivity. If workers are much more productive in one country than in another,
restrictions on immigration lead to large efficiency losses. The paper quantifies these losses, using
a model in which efficiency differences are labor-augmenting, and free trade in product markets leads
to factor price equalization, so that wages are equal across countries when measured in efficiency units
of labor. The estimated gains from removing immigration restrictions are huge. Using a simple static
model of migration costs, the estimated net gains from open borders are about the same as the gains
from a growth miracle that more than doubles the income level in less-developed countries.


John Kennan
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jkennan@ssc.wisc.edu
                                         Open Borders
                                           John Kennan∗
                            University of Wisconsin-Madison and NBER

                                                August 2012



                                                  Abstract

          There is a large body of evidence indicating that cross-country differences in income levels are
      associated with differences in productivity. If workers are much more productive in one country
      than in another, restrictions on immigration lead to large efficiency losses. The paper quantifies
      these losses, using a model in which efficiency differences are labor-augmenting, and free trade
      in product markets leads to factor price equalization, so that wages are equal across countries
      when measured in efficiency units of labor. The estimated gains from removing immigration
      restrictions are huge. Using a simple static model of migration costs, the estimated net gains
      from open borders are about the same as the gains from a growth miracle that more than doubles
      the income level in less-developed countries.


1    Introduction
      Imagine there’s no countries
      It isn’t hard to do

      Imagine [John Lennon]

    Citizens of Zimbabwe or Somalia who would prefer to respond to the enormous problems in
their home countries by simply moving to a country that does not have such problems are generally
prohibited from doing so by the governments of these destination countries. One could well argue
that prohibitions of this kind constitute a very serious violation of human rights.1 More prosaically,
one can ask what would happen if such prohibitions were eliminated.
    Before proceeding to analyze a world economy with open borders, the first question that must
be answered is whether restrictions on factor mobility have any real effects. If product prices
   ∗
     Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, 1180 Observatory Drive, Madison, WI 53706; jken-
nan@ssc.wisc.edu. A version of this paper was presented as a plenary talk at the SED meeting in Gent, July
2011. I thank Michael Clemens, Eric French, two anonymous referees and many seminar participants for helpful
comments. Xiaodong Fan provided valuable research assistance.
   1
     See Hanson (2010).


                                                       1
are the same across countries (because there is free trade and transportation is not costly, for
example), and if there are two goods that are produced in two different countries, and if the
production technologies (for these two goods) are the same across the two countries, then the
factor price equalization theorem applies. That is, real wages and other factor prices are equalized
across countries even though factors are immobile, because differences in factor prices are implicitly
arbitraged through the product market. The theoretical argument is beautiful, but of course the
facts are otherwise. For example, wages in the U.S. are about 2.5 times the Mexican wage, for
comparable workers.2
       Empirical studies that attempt to account for the observed differences in average incomes across
countries have repeatedly shown that large differences remain after adjusting for differences in
physical and human capital endowments. In other words, there are large differences in productivity.3
This paper considers a model with labor-augmenting differences in productivity across countries.
In this model, the factor price equalization theorem holds (under the usual assumptions) if wages
are measured in terms of efficiency units of labor. This means that the rental rate of capital is
equalized across countries, but a Mexican worker in the U.S. has more efficiency units of labor (and
therefore higher earnings) than the same worker in Mexico.
       In the standard (Heckscher-Ohlin) model, factor price equalization means that there is no
economic incentive to migrate from one country to another. But when the model is extended to allow
for labor-augmenting productivity differences, there are potentially large gains from migration,
because a worker who moves to a more productive place acquires more efficiency units of labor.
There are also potentially large costs, since people tend to be strongly attached to the place where
they were born and raised.4 Using a very simple specification of migration costs, the net gains from
open borders can be roughly estimated. The main conclusion of the paper is that these gains are
huge.
       Given that immigration is heavily restricted in developed countries, it is clear that the gains
accruing to immigrants are offset to some extent by perceived losses imposed on the residents
of these countries. These losses may be associated with changes in the wage structure, or with
the costs of including immigrants in social insurance schemes (net of the additional tax revenue
collected), or with the dilution of a country’s cultural identity. The effects of immigration on wages
are analyzed below, but no attempt is made to quantify the public finance implications of open
borders, and of course the cultural implications are far beyond the scope of the paper.5
   2
     See Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008)
   3
     See Hall and Jones (1999), Hendricks (2002) and Caselli (2005), for example. Schoellman (2011) shows that
cross-country differences in the quality of education are important, but even after accounting for these differences,
the remaining differences in labor productivity are very large.
   4
     For empirical evidence on the importance of attachment to place see Kennan and Walker (2011) (for migration
within the U.S.), and Lessem (2011) (for migration between Mexico and the U.S.).
   5
     See Storesletten (2000) for a detailed analysis of the fiscal effects of immigration, showing that, at least in some
realistic cases, the present value of the additional retirement benefits paid to immigrants is actually more than offset
by the present value of the additional tax revenue. Freeman (2006) discusses ways of transferring some of the gains
from immigration to residents of the host country, including the idea of simply selling entry permits, as suggested by



                                                           2
    The gains from open borders have also been stressed in recent work by Freeman (2006), Klein
and Ventura (2007), Klein and Ventura (2009) and Clemens (2011). In the Klein-Ventura model,
cross-country income differences are attributed to differences in total factor productivity, and there
are large gains when capital and labor are moved to more productive countries. The main novelty
in this paper is that the gains from open borders are analyzed in an environment in which income
differences are attributed to differences in labor productivity, and the factor price equalization
theorem holds, as in Trefler (1993). In contrast to the Klein-Ventura model, the gains have nothing
to do with reallocating capital across countries, because it is assumed, in line with the evidence
presented by Caselli and Feyrer (2007), that there are no differences in the productivity of capital,
and factor price equalization implies that the return to capital is the same in all countries.


2    Data
Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008) compare the wages of foreign-born, foreign-educated
workers in the 2000 U.S. Census with the wages of similar workers in 42 home countries. The
relative wage data are shown in Figure 1, along with data on GDP per person from the Penn World
Tables.6

                                                                                                  Figure 1:

                                                                     Relative Wages and GDP per Person, 1999
                                                          0
                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                us
                                                    50
               GDP per person (PPP, $2005, log scale)




                                                                                                                                                   pr
                                                  0
                                               00
                                            25




                                                                                                                         cl uy      mx
                                                                                                                                    ar    cr
                                          0




                                                                                                ve                      jm
                                       00




                                                                                                                                 tr
                                                                                                                       br pa za      bz    do
                                    10




                                                                                                                               co       th
                                                                                                             ec        pe    gt
                                 00




                                                                          eg                            jo
                              50




                                                                                                             bo                 py
                                                                                                id cn                  gy
                                                                                                             lk                           ma
                                                              ye                           pk    in                    ph ni
                       00




                                                                                                cm
                                                                               ht
                     20




                                                                                                vn
                                                               ng                                             np
                                                                                          kh                   bd
                  00




                                                                                           gh                    ug
               10




                                                                                          sl
                                                                                                                  et
                                          0
                                       50




                                                      .06           .08        .1   .12    .15    .2 .25 .3           .4     .5                 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                          Wages relative to U.S. (log scale)


Becker and Becker (1998).
   6
     The GDP data are from PWT version 7.0; see Alan Heston and Aten (2011). The relative wage estimate for
Puerto Rico is taken from Table 9 in Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008). A relative wage estimate for China
has been added, using data from Shi (2009). In the figure, countries are identified by internet domain names.




                                                                                                             3
   These relative wages are used below to measure labor efficiency differences. For example, the
wage of a Mexican worker in Mexico is about 40% of the wage of a comparable worker who was born
and educated in Mexico but who was working in the U.S. in the 2000 Census. This is taken to mean
that Mexican workers have 0.4 efficiency units of labor, so that a Mexican worker who crosses the
U.S. border becomes as productive as 2.5 Mexican workers who stayed at home. The assumption
here is that the variables that reduce productivity in Mexico (whatever they might be) are specific
to the location, and not to the people who work in that location. This is obviously a strong
assumption, given that there is no theory of what the relevant variables are. The main concern
is that the workers who migrate are selected from the upper tail of the productivity distribution
(conditional on observables).


                                                                                                Figure 2:

                                                                            Selected Wage Differences, 1999
                                                                                                                                             th        ma
              0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6




                                                                                                                                                       do
                                                                                                                                                  cr
                  Wage Relative to U.S., 70% Selection




                                                                                                                              za ar
                                                                                                                                  mx
                                                                                                                          gt py
                                                                                                                           co
                                                                                                                       uy
                                                                                                                               tr
                                                                                                          ph      pa
                                                                                                          pe clni
                                                                                                           brjm
                                                                                                     et
                                                                                                    ug
                                                                            ht                  lk bd
                                                                                                bo
                                                                                               ecnp
                                                                                 kh  cm
                                                                                  ghid
                                                                                     vn
                                                                                     pkin jo
                                                                                 sl ve
                                                                      ng

                                                                           eg
                                                                      ye




                                                            0   .05        .1    .15     .2   .25   .3      .35   .4                   .45        .5        .55
                                                                                       Mean Wage Relative to U.S.



   Figure 2 presents some evidence suggesting that the measure of labor efficiency is in fact not
much affected by positive selection of migrants. Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008) re-
viewed the empirical literature on migrant selection, and concluded that although the typical mi-
grant is probably somewhat more productive than the typical nonmigrant (conditional on observ-
ables), it is quite unlikely that the typical migrant is drawn from a point above the 70th percentile
of the productivity distribution (in the home country). In Figure 2, the relative wage on the vertical
scale is the wage at the 70th percentile in the sending country relative to the mean U.S. wage (for a
worker with the same observables), and this is plotted against the relative wage at the mean. The
result is that the selection effect is not large.
   Income per worker varies across countries not only because of differences in labor efficiency,


                                                                                                      4
but also because of differences in human capital endowments. Income per worker can be computed
from data on GDP per worker and labor share. The labor share in country j can be written as

                                                                                         waj hj Nj
                                                                                  λj =
                                                                                            Yj

where w is the real wage, aj represents efficiency units of labor per worker in country j, hj is the
human capital of the average worker, Nj is the labor force, and Yj is total GDP. So if data are
available on λj and Yj , income per worker can be computed as

                                                                                                     λj Yj
                                                                             yj = waj hj =
                                                                                                      Nj

Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2002) and Gollin (2002) report labor shares for 20 countries that are
also in the Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008) data. The relationship between relative
incomes and relative wages is illustrated in Figure 3.

                                                                                   Figure 3:

                                                            Relative Wages and Income per Worker
                               .5
                .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45
              Relative Income per worker (PPP)




                                                                                                                               cr
                                                                                                                         mx
                                                                                                cl

                                                                                               jm    pa
                                                                 ve                                       uy
                                                                                                                    za
                                                    eg                                                         co
                                                                       jo
                                                                        ec                pe
                               .1




                                                                             lk
                                                                             bo
                                                                  in                                                py                ma
                               .05




                                                                                          ph
                                                                 vn
                                                 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2 .22 .24 .26 .28 .3 .32 .34 .36 .38 .4 .42 .44 .46 .48 .5
                                                                                  Wage Relative to U.S.



   A country that has the same level of human capital per worker as the U.S. should lie on the
45-degree line in this plot. For most countries, the data lie well below the 45-degree line, indicating
that the average worker in these countries has considerably less human capital than the average
worker in the U.S. But the data for Egypt and Venezuela are implausible: for example, the average
worker in Egypt surely does not have more human capital than the average worker in the U.S.
   Figure 4 shows factor price data for 17 countries. The vertical axis shows measures of the


                                                                                          5
marginal product of capital, taken from Caselli and Feyrer (2007). The horizontal axis shows the
relative wage data from Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008). There are big wage differences,
but the return on capital is roughly equal across countries, as Caselli and Feyrer (2007) point out.
This is consistent with factor price equalization, given labor-augmenting technology differences
across countries.

                                                                                      Figure 4:

                                                                                      Factor Prices
                             .11 .12




                                                                     uy
                             .1




                                                                                                             us
               .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09




                                                            cl
                                                          pe                    mx
                                                jo        ph               py            ma
                                                                           za
                                 MPK




                                                           jm
                                                                pa        co
                                                     lk


                                                     bo


                                                     ec                                 cr


                                             .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                                                                    Wage Relative to U.S.




3     Model
3.1       The Heckscher-Ohlin Model

The Heckscher-Ohlin theorem says that each country exports factors in which it is abundant.
Trefler (1993) shows that data on imports and exports can always be made to satisfy the Heckscher-
Ohlin theorem if suitable productivity adjustments are made. Let Ω∗f j = af j Ωf j be the effective
endowment of factor f in country j, where Ω denotes physical units, and a represents factor-
augmenting productivity differences, so that Ω∗ is measured in efficiency units. Then f is abundant
in j if
                                                                                Ω∗f j − sj       Ω∗f τ > 0
                                                                                             X

                                                                                             τ

where sj is j’s share in world consumption.
    If there are I produced goods, and T is the vector of net exports of these goods, then F∗j = A∗ Tj
is the factor content of trade, where A∗ is the matrix of cost-minimizing factor quantities for each


                                                                                             6
good (at a given factor-price vector), and it is assumed that this matrix is the same for all countries.
That is, it is assumed that technology differences across countries are confined to factor-augmenting
productivity differences (as opposed to differences in elasticities of substitution between factors, for
example). Then the (modified) Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is


                                         F∗f c = Ω∗f c − sc              Ω∗f j
                                                                    X

                                                                     j

   There are a lot of free parameters in this model. The issue is whether the productivity adjust-
ments match the data on relative factor prices across countries – whether the adjustments needed
to match the trade flow data are consistent with factor price equalization. For capital and labor,
and for a sample of 33 countries, Trefler (1993) shows that the match is quite good; moreover, the
labor adjustments are bigger than the capital adjustments. The next section develops a version
of this model in which cross-country differences in technology are purely labor-augmenting. This
model is used in the subsequent sections to analyze the implications of open borders.

3.2   Factor Price Equalization with Labor-Augmenting Technology Differences

Suppose there are J countries, with different productivity levels. If the productivity differences
are labor-augmenting (i.e. Harrod-neutral), then the technology for product s in country j can be
specified as
                                                                           
                                          Qjs = Fs Ksj , aj Ljs

where aj represents efficiency units of labor per worker in country j.
   Let c0s be the unit cost function for product s when the labor input is measured in efficiency
units, so that the production function is Qs = Fs (Ks , Ls ). Then it is easy to see that the cost
function for product s in country j is
                                                                            !
                                                                       w
                                         cjs (v, w)   =     c0s     v,
                                                                       aj
where w is the wage per efficiency unit of labor, and v is the price of capital.
   If there is free trade in the product markets, with no transportation costs, then the zero-profit
condition implies

                                                                            !
                                                                       wj
                                          ps =        c0s         vj ,
                                                                       aj

   If two products r and s are produced in country j, then




                                                        7
                                                             !
                                                        wj
                                             c0r   vj ,          = pr
                                                        aj
                                                             !
                                                        wj
                                             c0s   vj ,          = ps
                                                        aj

       These equations determine the factor prices in country j. If the marginal rates of technical
substitution satisfy a single-crossing condition, the factor prices are uniquely determined. Then if
country ` also produces these same two products, the same equations determine factor prices in
country `, with a` in place of aj . This implies vj = v` , and

                                                    wj   w`
                                                       =
                                                    aj   a`
       Thus
                                                   wj = a j w0

where w0 is a reference wage level that can be normalized to 1.
       In this model, migration has no effect on relative wages. Thus if 30 million workers move from
Mexico to the U.S., it will still be true that the wage in the U.S. is 2.5 times the wage in Mexico.
In particular, it is not the case that migration reduces the wage in the receiving country while
increasing the wage in the sending country, as would be the case in a single-product model where
migration involves opposing movements along the marginal product of labor curve. But migration
affects wage levels (this is analyzed in Section 3.4 below).7

3.3       General Equilibrium

Given the factor prices, the prices of consumer goods are determined by the cost functions. Then
the quantities are determined by these goods prices, and by preferences and total income (where
income depends on factor prices). Given the quantities to be produced, and the factor prices,
producers determine the profit-maximizing factor quantities. This gives demand curves for the
factors, and factor prices are determined so as to clear the factor markets.
       For simplicity, it is assumed that: (1) preferences are identical in all countries, and are described
by a loglinear utility function with expenditure share parameters θs ; and (2) the production function
for each good is a CES, and is the same in all countries, with an elasticity of substitution σ that is
the same for all goods (and with the understanding that the labor input is measured in efficiency
units). It is also assumed that each worker supplies one time-unit of labor (inelastically). This
time-unit implies different amounts of effective labor in different countries, for two reasons: human
capital endowments hj may differ across countries, and each unit of human capital in country j
   7
     See Borjas (2009) for an analysis of the effects of immigration on wages in a setting where the domestic and
foreign economies produce distinct goods, so that the factor price equalization theorem doesn’t apply.



                                                         8
means aj efficiency units of labor.8
       Given that the production function for each good is a CES, the price of good s is given by
                                                                1−σ                     1−σ
                                                          v                         w
                                                                               
                                      p1−σ
                                       s       = αs                      + βs
                                                          αs                        βs

where w is the wage in efficiency units, and where αs + βs = 1. The quantities to be produced are
determined by the expenditure shares θs applied to total income
                                                                                   
                                               ps Qs = θs wL̄ + v K̄

where L̄ is the aggregate amount of labor in the world (in efficiency units), and K̄ is the aggregate
amount of capital.
       The conditional factor demand functions are the derivatives of the cost functions, by Shephard’s
lemma. The derivatives are determined by


                                                   ∂cs             v −σ
                                                                              
                                               c−σ
                                                s               =
                                                   ∂v              αs
                                                                   −σ
                                                   ∂cs             w
                                               c−σ
                                                s               =
                                                   ∂w              βs

       Thus the factor demands are given by


                                                                v −σ
                                                                              
                                               Ks = Qs cσs
                                                                αs
                                                                −σ
                                                                w
                                               Ls     = Qs cσs
                                                                βs

       Finally, the factor market clearing equations are
                                                                     −σ
                                                                v
                                               X            
                                                   Qs cσs                      = K̄
                                               s                αs
                                                                     −σ
                                                                w
                                               X            
                                                   Qs cσs                      = L̄
                                               s                βs

       One of these equations is redundant, by Walras Law. Write the capital market equation as
                                                                         −σ
                                                                    v
                                         X                      
                                               ps Qs cσ−1
                                                      s                            = K̄
                                           s                        αs
   8
    These are obviously strong assumptions. When there are more than two factors of production, with variable
elasticities of substitution (for different pairs of factors, or for different goods), the analysis becomes much more
complicated. But there is no reason to believe that these complications would seriously undermine the main argument
regarding the gains from open borders, so it is useful to develop the argument in the context of a simple and relatively
transparent model.


                                                                 9
     and define ξs as the capital share for good s:

                                                 vKs
                                  ξs =
                                               vKs + wLs
                                                                              1−σ
                                                                          v
                                                                αs        αs
                                        =                      1−σ                        1−σ
                                                           v                            w
                                               αs          αs             + βs          βs


     Then the market-clearing equation for capital can be expressed as

                                   X 1  v −1                                         K̄
                                                                 θs ξs =
                                    s   αs         αs                              wL̄ + v K̄
     which reduces to
                                             X                            v K̄
                                                   θs ξs =
                                             s                        v K̄ + wL̄
     The point here is that ξs is the capital share for product s, and θs is the share of product s in
total consumer expenditure, so the equilibrium condition is that the weighted average of the capital
shares has to match the capital share of total income (implying that the corresponding equality
holds for labor).
     Note that ξs may be an increasing or decreasing function of the factor price ratio, depending
on the elasticity of substitution. But in the case of Cobb-Douglas production functions (σ = 1),
ξs = αs is just a technological parameter, and the equilibrium factor price ratio is then determined
by
                                             X                                 1
                                                   θs α s =                           ,
                                                                               w L̄
                                               s                      1+       v K̄

implying that the elasticity of the factor price ratio with respect to the capital-labor ratio is unity.

3.3.1    Goods Prices

The price ratio between any two consumer goods is given by

                                                                       v 1−σ
                                        p1−σ                    αsσ                  + βsσ
                                                                         
                                         s                             w
                                                    =
                                        p1−σ                    αtσ    v 1−σ
                                                                                     + βtσ
                                                                         
                                         t                             w

Thus an increase in the price of capital relative to labor implies an increase in the relative price of
capital-intensive goods. For example, in the limit, when σ approaches 1,

                                        ps                              v
                                                                                           
                                    log                = (αs − αt ) log
                                        pt                              w




                                                                 10
3.4      Immigration and Wages

The effective total supply of labor aggregated over countries is
                                                                    X
                                                            L̄ =            aj hj Nj
                                                                    j


where Nj is the labor force in country j. When workers move to countries with higher productivity,
the effective supply of labor increases, and if the world capital stock is taken as fixed, this reduces
the capital-labor ratio. Thus if Mjk workers migrate from j to k, the change in the effective labor
supply is

                                                           XX
                                                ∆L̄ =               (ak hk − aj hj ) Mjk
                                                            j   k
                                                                                                                                     ps
      The amount of effective labor time needed to earn enough to buy one unit of good s is                                          w.   This
is determined by
                                                         1−σ                         1−σ
                                                    ps                            v
                                                                             
                                                                =       αsσ                    + βsσ
                                                    w                             w

and in the Cobb-Douglas case this reduces to


                                       ps                           v
                                                                     
                             log                = αs log                    − αs log (αs ) − βs log (βs )
                                       w                            w

                                                                                                         K̄
      When immigration restrictions are relaxed, the capital-labor ratio                                 L̄
                                                                                                              falls, so the factor-price
         v                                                                              w
ratio    w   rises, and this leads to a fall in the real wage,                          ps ,    measured in terms of good s.9 The
reduction in the real wage is the same in all countries (regardless of whether they are sending or
receiving countries). Factor price equalization holds both before and after the migration of labor,
but migration reduces the wage per efficiency unit of labor (and therefore also reduces the wages
of all workers who do not migrate).
      Even though migration reduces the prices of labor-intensive goods relative to capital-intensive
goods, there is a reduction in the real wage regardless of whether the real wage is defined in
terms of labor-intensive or capital-intensive goods. But the magnitude of the effect depends on the
composition of the consumption bundle. For example, in the Cobb-Douglas case, the elasticity of
the factor price ratio with respect to the capital labor ratio is unity, so if the effective labor supply
doubles, the factor price ratio is cut in half. Then if the capital share for good s is αs = 13 , the real
wage falls by about 20% when measured in terms of good s.
  9                                                                                                                  ps
                                                                                                                          σ−1
      In the CES case, the elasticity of the real wage with respect to the factor price ratio is αs                  v
                                                                                                                                 .




                                                                        11
3.5       Wages in the Long Run

Migration increases the return on capital, since the effective capital-labor ratio decreases. In steady
state equilibrium with a constant returns technology

                                                    f 0 (k ∗ ) = ρ + δ

where f 0 is the marginal product of capital, ρ is the rate of time preference, δ is the depreciation rate
and k ∗ is the effective capital-labor ratio. In the short run, migration increases the effective labor
supply, so the capital-labor ratio falls below k ∗ , and the marginal product of capital rises above
ρ + δ. The investment rate therefore increases, and this continues until the effective capital-labor
ratio returns to k ∗ , and the real wage returns to its original level. Thus migration does not reduce
wages in the long run. And if immigration restrictions are removed gradually, in such a way that
the effective labor supply grows at the same rate as the capital stock, then wages do not fall even
in the short run.

3.6       Migration Decisions

One might initially expect that in a world with open borders, everyone would move to the most
productive location. But this ignores the strong attachment to home locations that is evident in
the data.10
                  yj
       Let aj =   y0   ≤ 1 be the level of income in the home location (yj ), relative to the highest income
available elsewhere (y0 ), and assume that migration involves a utility cost δ, which is drawn from a
distribution F . Since the utility function is loglinear, the indirect utility function can be expressed
as log (y). Then it is optimal to stay in the home location if

                                              log (y0 ) − δ ≤ log (yj )

       If the distribution of δ is the unit exponential, F (t) = 1 − e−t , then the probability of staying
is11


                                                           !!                            
                                                                                     y0
                                                      y0                 − log       yj
                                   Prob δ ≥ log                     = e                       = aj
                                                      yj
   10
      For example, Kennan and Walker (2011) show that attachment to home is an important determinant of internal
migration decisions in the U.S.
   11
      Klein and Ventura (2009) use a similar specification of the disutility of living away from home. More generally,
it is reasonable to suppose that this disutility varies from one country to another. For example, if δ is exponentially
distributed with scale parameter νj in country j, F (t) = 1 − e−νj t , then the probability of staying is

                                                                  
                                                               y0                ν
                                           Prob δ ≥ log                  =   aj j
                                                               yj




                                                           12
    This model is of course oversimplified in many respects.12 But it is consistent with the data
on migration between Puerto Rico and the U.S. According to Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett
                                                                               2
(2008), the relative wage in Puerto Rico is approximately                      3   of the U.S. wage, and according to
the 2000 Census, the proportion of adults born in Puerto Rico who were living in Puerto Rico is
also approximately 32 . Moreover, Lessem (2011) estimates that a 10% increase in the Mexican/U.S
wage ratio would decrease migration by 11.6%, which is roughly consistent with the unit elasticity
of the migration rate predicted by the simple model.


4     Labor Supply and Wages with Open Borders: Magnitudes
4.1    The Effective Supply of Labor

Given that each person starts with ah units of effective labor, and that the proportion of stayers
is a, the average supply of effective labor after migration (to the most productive location, where
the efficiency level is normalized to 1) is

                                                                                       
                                    a × ah + (1 − a) × h = 1 − a + a2 h

Thus the increase in effective labor per person is 1 − a + a2 − a h = (1 − a)2 h, and the aggregate
                                                                                    

increase in effective labor due to migration is

                                                     J
                                                           (1 − aj )2 hj Nj
                                                     X
                                             ∆L̄ =
                                                     j=1


    The increase in the supply of labor is proportional to the increase in gross income (since income
is just effective labor multiplied by the wage, and the wage is the same everywhere). Since total
labor income can be written as waj hj Nj = λj Yj , the proportional increase in effective labor can
be restated in terms of income as
                                                       J
                                                       P     (1−aj )2
                                                               aj     λ j Yj
                                              ∆L̄      j=1
                                                  =          J
                                              L̄0            P
                                                                   λj Yj
                                                             j=1

    In order to estimate this increase in the effective labor supply, it is necessary to have data on
labor incomes and relative wages for all countries. The available data include measures of real GDP
per capita for almost all countries (i.e. all 189 countries in the Penn World Tables), real GDP per
worker for all but 12 of these countries, together with labor shares and relative wage estimates for
  12
     For example, if skilled and unskilled labor are not perfect substitutes, interesting questions arise. Are the
differences in efficiency more important for skilled labor or for unskilled labor? Internal migration data for the U.S.
show much higher migration rates for skilled workers, suggesting that the attachment to home may be weaker for
skilled workers. Thus if the efficiency differences are similar, one might expect that the flow of skilled workers would
be larger with open borders. Open borders also affect the incentive to invest in human capital; in a more general
treatment, one would not take the numbers of skilled and unskilled workers as given.



                                                            13
a limited set of countries.
                 The first step is to define a set of countries at the productivity frontier. This involves choosing
a cutoff productivity level above which the gains from migration are negligible. The most recent
data on GDP per person in PWT7.0 are for 2009. These data are displayed in Figure 5, with a
proposed cutoff point at $25,000. This cutoff is of course arbitrary to some extent, but the results
are not sensitive to the precise number chosen. The $25,000 cutoff gives a reasonable classification:
the frontier set contains 36 countries, including all of Western Europe except for Portugal, as well
as Japan and South Korea (which is just above the cutoff). The set is then expanded to include
countries that already share open borders with the frontier countries. This adds 12 relatively poor
countries that are in the European Union (which has open borders); Puerto Rico is also added,
since the border between the U.S. and Puerto Rico is open. Thus defined, the frontier set includes
49 countries in all.

                                                                     Figure 5: Cross-Country Differences in Real GDP per person
                                               GDP per person, Non−Frontier Countries, 2009                                                                                                                   GDP per person, Frontier Countries, 2009
                                                          sc          bb            bh                                                                                                                                            qa
                                                                              gq
                                          0




                                                                                             om                     sa
                                        00




                                                                                                                                                                                                   00
                                                                                                  ly
                                     25
 GDP per person (PPP, $2005, log scale)




                                                          ag                                                                                               GDP per person (PPP, $2005, log scale)

                                                                                                                                                                                                00
                                              pw                                             hr                                      ru
                                                   kn      gd lc                           lbcr         by cl                                                                                 15
                                                                      sr                uy                cu kz my ar ir mx
                                                                               muga     pa              do                     tr
                                                                                    bwjm            rsaz             ve
                                                                                                                                                                                           00
                                  0




                                                                   bz                                                                    br
                               00




                                                         to                         mk                               pe co za th                      cn                                                                 lu
                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                         vc              me
                                                      mh
                                                      dm      wsvu                     al ba  tmsv
                            10




                                                                                                         tn gtec        dzua
                                                                                                                                                                                      10


                                                                                       am                                       eg
                                                                     mv bt          na       gejo          ao         iq
                         00




                                                         ki              gy
                                                                          fj                                      lk
                                                                                                                   sy                     id
                                                                                                  pyhnbo
                       50




                                                          fm          cv        sz     mn pg                           ma                           in                                                  bm                   mo                               ae
                                                                                                                                 vn
                                                                                                                                  ph                                                                                                              kw          no
                                                                                                 la                yeuz
                                                                                                                                                                                  0



                                                                                            md kg                                       pk                                                                              bn                                    sg
                                                                                                                                                                               00




                                                                                           cg   ni                        sd
                                                                      sb dj                         tj                                ng                                                                                                                              ch             au                          us
                                                                                                                                                                            50




                                                                                                             khcm
                                                                                                            zm                                                                                                     is
                   00




                                                             st                        mr                                                                                                                                                                            hkatsebe   nl        ca
                                                                                  gm                    htsn ci
                20




                                                                                   ls
                                                                                                         td         gh   ke
                                                                                                                                      bd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tt                    iefidk                                uk de
                                                                             tl                        bjrw          np
                                                                                                                    af ugtz                                                                                                                                                                         fr    jp
                                                                                                            ml                                                                                                     bs                                        nz            gr        tw         es it
                                                                         km                                    bf
            00




                                                                                 gw            sl       gn mg                                                                                                                                si                      il                         kr
                                                                                                  tg               mz
          10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pr
                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                             cfer                                et
                                                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                              mw                                                                                                        mt                                                cz
                                                                                                              ne                                                                                                                                                           pt
                                                                                                                                                                 25




                                                                                                        so                                                                                                                             cy                       sk
      0
 30 50




                                                                                         lr             bi                                                                                                                              ee                               hu                pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lt
   0




                                                                                                                             cd                                                                                                               lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bg
                                                                                                           zw                                                                                                                                                                        ro
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                        15




                                                                                                                                                                               00




                                                         .1                   1               10            100                        300     1000                                                      .1                    1                    10                                              100        300
                                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                           Population (millions, log scale)                                                                                                                   Population (millions, log scale)




4.1.1                                         Labor Income and Relative Wages

Gollin (2002) analyzed the available data on labor shares and concluded that the variation across
countries is quite limited, and in particular that labor shares do not vary systematically with the
level of income. Based on this, labor share is taken to be a constant for countries not included
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
in Gollin (2002)’s data, or in the data analyzed by Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2002); thus λj =                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
for these countries, this value being very close to the average labor shares reported in both papers
(.675 and .650).
                 There remains the problem of estimating aj for countries without relative wage data. This is
done by regressing relative wages in 1999 on real GDP per worker in 1999, for the 40 countries for
which the relevant data are available, and using the estimated regression function to predict the
missing relative wage data.13 The results are adjusted for changes in real GDP per worker between
   13
                For most countries, the most recent data on GDP per worker in PWT7.0 refer to 2008. There are 11 (small,


                                                                                                                                               14
1999 and 2008.14

4.2     Effective World Labor Supply Estimates

Using the above approximations, the effective world labor supply, before allowing for migration, is
estimated as 741.3 million workers, taking one U.S. worker as the efficiency unit; this is just total
world labor income divided by income per worker in the U.S.15 With open borders, the supply
increases to 1,471.5 million. Thus the effective labor supply doubles. The number of workers in
frontier countries increases by much more than 100%, but this greatly overstates the increase in
the effective labor supply, since the labor supplied by each worker who migrates is proportional to
the amount of human capital the worker has, and the relative wage and income data imply that
human capital levels in the sending countries are much lower than in the frontier countries.
    A surprising conclusion from this analysis is that the effect of open borders on real wage rates is
small (even in the short run, with capital held fixed). For example (as was mentioned in Section 3.4),
if the technology is Cobb-Douglas, and the real wage is computed in terms of goods for which the
capital share is 31 , the real wage would fall by only about 20% if everyone moved immediately, with
no time for adjustment of the capital stock. In a dynamic model, the effect on real wages would be
very much attenuated, even in the short run. For example, in the Kennan and Walker (2011) model
of internal migration within the U.S., it takes about 10 years before the response to a simulated
(permanent) increase in the real wage in one location is more or less complete.


5     Net Gains from Migration
Given factor price equalization, average income per worker in country j is yj = aj hj w, where hj is
the human capital of the average worker.16 Both h and a are measured in efficiency units of labor;
the difference between them is that h is embodied in the worker, and is carried from one country to
another when the worker migrates, while a is embodied in the country. Thus when a worker moves
non-frontier) countries with missing observations on GDP per worker in 2008. Predictions for these countries are
made by using real GDP per person in place of real GDP per worker.
   14
      In the case of countries that are included in the regression, âj (t + s) = aj (t) + [Yj (t + s) − Yj (t)] β̂; for the
countries that do not have relative wage data, âj (t + s) = α̂ + Yj (t + s) β̂. Here Y denotes real GDP per worker,
α̂, β̂ are estimated regression coefficients, t = 1999 and t + s = 2008.
   15
      An even simpler calculation, assuming equal labor shares for all countries, divides total world GDP by GDP per
worker in the U.S; the result of this calculation is 787.6 million workers (using data for 2008). Since the U.S. labor
force is 155.6 million, this means that the U.S. supplies about 20% of the (effective) labor in the world market. This
illustrates the Leontief (1953) explanation for why the U.S. exports labor-intensive goods in exchange for capital-
intensive goods: when differences in labor productivity are taken into account, the U.S. has a relative abundance of
labor.
   16
      Note that a country’s endowment of physical capital has no effect on income per worker. Factor price equalization
means that endowments do not change factor prices, so low wages cannot be explained by low physical capital
endowments. On the other hand, two countries with the same productivity level can have quite different levels of
income per worker (as is evident from Figure 3), if the average levels of human capital per worker are different.




                                                            15
from j to a frontier country (where a = 1), the (gross) income gain is

                                               ∆y = (1 − aj ) hj w
                                                    1 − aj
                                                  =        yj
                                                      aj

       The net gains from migration differ from one individual to another. The net gain for the
marginal migrant is zero, and of course there is no gain for those who do not migrate. If the lowest
                                                                                                                 1−aj
migration cost is zero then the first person who moves gains the full income difference,                          aj yj .
                                                                                      1−aj      17
For the average migrant, the gain is roughly the average of these:                     2aj yj .      The proportion of
people who do not migrate is aj (according to the simple model of migration decisions described in
Section 3.6), so the income gain for the average person (including nonmigrants) is

                                                         1 (1 − aj )2
                                                 ḡj =                yj
                                                         2    aj
       After deleting three countries (Egypt, Yemen and Venezuela) with anomalous relative wage
data, net gains from migration (ḡj ) can be estimated for a sample of 40 countries. This includes 18
countries for which labor share estimates are available either from Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2002)
                                                                                  λ j Yj
or from Gollin (2002), with income per worker computed as yj =                     Nj ,    and 22 countries for which
                                                                                        λ̄Yj
labor share is fixed at λ̄ = 23 , with income per worker computed as yj =                Nj .        The results of this
calculation are shown in Figure 6; some details are shown in the                Appendix.18
       The average net gain over all countries is given by
                                                           P
                                                          j      Nj ḡj
                                                    ḡ = P
                                                                 j Nj

       For the 40 countries in Figure 6 this gives an estimate of $11,046, per worker (including non-
migrants), per year (in 2012 dollars, adjusted for purchasing power parity). This is a very large
number: the average income per worker in these countries is $8,382, so the gain in (net) income is
132%. For all of the countries in the Penn World Tables that are not at the productivity frontier
(as defined above), using GDP data to estimate relative wages, the estimated gain is $10,369, rela-
tive to an average income of $8,903, so the gain is 116%. These are of course just rough estimates,
relying on a number of strong simplifying assumptions. But unless these assumptions are extremely
far off the mark, the results indicate that the gains from open borders would be enormous.
  17
    This is not exact for the exponential cost distribution assumed in Section 3.6, but it is not far off.
  18
    Although the results are noisy, Figure 6 shows a hump-shaped relationship between income and migration gains
across countries. In the case of very poor countries, the gains are small because h is low; for relatively rich countries,
the gains are small because a is relatively high.




                                                            16
                                                                                                               Figure 6:

                                                                                  Open Borders: Net Gains from Migration
                                                                                             ng




                                                                         0
                                                                      00
                                                                                                                             jo
                                                                   21
                                  Net Gain per Worker (ppp$2012)

                                                                 0
                                                              00
                                                           18

                                                                                                                                                             cl
                                                         0
                                                                                                                                        jm
                                                       00
                                                    15



                                                                                                   id    in
                                                                                              pk                                  br
                                                                                                          ec       cn                                       pa
                                                                             ht
                                                 6




                                                                                                    bo        lk
                                              04




                                                                                             vn                                              uy
                                            11




                                                                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                                       cm                               pe        gt    co                        mx
                                                                                                                                                                                      tr
                           00 00 00 00 00




                                                                                                                                             za        bz
                                                                                  kh                     gy
                         10 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                                                                        cr
                                                                          gh
                                                                         sl                  ph
                                                                                        ni
                                                               np                                                                                  do
                                                                             bd              py                          th
                                                                             ug
                                                                  et                               ma
                         0
                        00

                                                                                  00

                                                                                             00

                                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                              0



                                                                                                                                            0



                                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                      50




                                                                                                                         00



                                                                                                                                        00



                                                                                                                                                   00



                                                                                                                                                                   00



                                                                                                                                                                              00
                     20

                                                                              40

                                                                                        60

                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                        12



                                                                                                                                       15



                                                                                                                                                  18



                                                                                                                                                                 21



                                                                                                                                                                             24
                                                                                                                   Income per Worker



6         Conclusion
Liberal immigration policies are politically unpopular. To a large extent, this is because the ben-
eficiaries of these policies are not allowed to vote. It is also true, however, that the enormous
benefits associated with open borders have not received much attention in the economics litera-
ture19 . Economists are generally enthusiastic about free trade. But if free movement of goods is
important, then surely free movement of people is even more important.
         One conclusion of this paper is that open borders could yield huge welfare gains: more than
$10,000 a year for a randomly selected worker from a less-developed country (including non-
migrants). Another is that these gains are associated with a relatively small reduction in the
real wage in developed countries, and even this effect disappears as the capital-labor ratio adjusts
over time; indeed if immigration restrictions are relaxed gradually, allowing time for investment in
physical capital to keep pace, there is no implied reduction in real wages.




    19
         See Clemens (2011) for a recent review of the relevant literature.


                                                                                                                        17
                            Appendix: Migration Gains



                 Table 1: Migration Gains, using Labor Share Data
Country              Code   Labor Share      Relative Wage       Workers    Gain      GDP      Income
                                                 1999    2008    millions            per worker
Bolivia               bo     0.67   0.627        0.199   0.196     4.4      10,455     9,489       6,357
Chile                 cl     0.59                0.283   0.299     7.5      15,148    31,326      18,483
Colombia              co     0.65                0.347   0.365    17.8       7,592    21,157      13,752
Costa Rica            cr     0.73                0.483   0.485     2.1       5,612    28,084      20,502
Ecuador               ec     0.45   0.571        0.194   0.203     6.1      11,894    16,954       7,629
India                 in            0.828        0.160   0.186   450.1      13,164     8,944       7,406
Jamaica               jm     0.60   0.566        0.275   0.261     1.3      14,347    22,866      13,720
Jordan                jo     0.64                0.177   0.186     2.0      19,501    17,163      10,984
Sri Lanka             lk     0.78                0.202   0.228     8.5      11,202    10,989       8,571
Morocco              ma      0.58                0.500   0.512    11.5       1,427    10,612       6,155
Mexico               mx      0.55                0.395   0.407    46.5       8,232    34,563      19,010
Panama                pa     0.73                0.298   0.338     1.6      11,688    24,723      18,048
Peru                  pe     0.56                0.264   0.293    13.1       8,559    17,945      10,049
Philippines           ph     0.59   0.661        0.262   0.274    40.3       4,605     8,102       4,780
Paraguay              py     0.49                0.360   0.348     2.9       2,851     9,530       4,670
Uruguay               uy     0.58                0.323   0.330     1.6       9,926    25,114      14,566
Vietnam               vn            0.802        0.154   0.170    46.3       9,551     5,879       4,715
South Africa          za     0.62                0.364   0.382    18.7       7,244    23,401      14,509


Total                                                            682.2
Average                      0.61   0.676        0.291   0.303               9,687    18,158      11,328
Average (weighted)           0.59   0.808        0.205   0.227              11,394    11,879       8,471




                                            18
                 Table 2: Migration Gains, using Fixed Labor Share
Country              Code   Relative Wage    Workers    Gain      GDP      Income
                                             millions            per worker
Argentina             ar     0.394   0.401     19.4      8,489    28,448      18,966
Bangladesh            bd     0.217   0.221     72.6      2,963     3,236       2,158
Brazil                br     0.266   0.263    102.2     12,296    17,861      11,907
Belize                bz     0.412   0.407      0.1      7,402    25,759      17,173
Cameroon              cm     0.153   0.150      7.3      8,566     5,346       3,564
China                 cn     0.163   0.224    772.4     12,345    13,731       9,154
Dominican Republic    do     0.503   0.532      4.2      3,454    25,234      16,823
Ethiopia              et     0.230   0.232     39.0      1,322     1,560       1,040
Ghana                 gh     0.140   0.146     10.7      5,070     3,040       2,027
Guatemala             gt     0.340   0.328      5.0      8,284    18,023      12,016
Guyana                gy     0.258   0.271      0.3      7,008    10,715       7,143
Haiti                 ht     0.097   0.087      4.3     11,346     3,531       2,354
Indonesia             id     0.149   0.159    117.8     13,241     8,916       5,944
Cambodia              kh     0.134   0.144      7.2      6,920     4,094       2,729
Nigeria               ng     0.067   0.087     47.0     21,940     6,899       4,599
Nicaragua             ni     0.284   0.274      2.2      3,970     6,190       4,126
Nepal                 np     0.206   0.203     12.7      3,027     2,903       1,935
Pakistan              pk     0.152   0.151     60.0     12,492     7,856       5,237
Sierra Leone          sl     0.135   0.142      1.9      4,378     2,527       1,685
Thailand              th     0.461   0.481     37.4      2,946    15,760      10,507
Turkey                tr     0.373   0.450     25.4      8,010    35,837      23,892
Uganda                ug     0.228   0.234     13.5      2,535     3,027       2,018


Total                                        1362.8
Average                      0.244   0.254               7,637    11,386       7,591
Average (weighted)           0.188   0.226              11,185    10,907       8,337




                                        19
References
Alan Heston, R. S., and B. Aten (2011): “Penn World Table Version 7.0,” Discussion paper.
  3

Becker, G. S., and G. N. Becker (1998): The Economics of Life : From Baseball to Affirmative
  Action to Immigration, How Real-World Issues Affect Our Everyday Life. McGraw-Hill, New
  York. 3

Bernanke, B. S., and R. S. Gurkaynak (2002): “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw,
  Romer, and Weil Seriously,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 11–72. 5, 14, 16

Borjas, G. J. (2009): “The Analytics of the Wage Effect of Immigration,” Working Paper 14796,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 8

Caselli, F. (2005): “Accounting for cross-country income differences,” Handbook of economic
  growth, 1, 679–741. 2

Caselli, F., and J. Feyrer (2007): “The Marginal Product of Capital,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 122(2), 535–568. 3, 6

Clemens, M., C. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett (2008): “The Place Premium: Wage Dif-
  ferences For Identical Workers Across The US Border,” World Bank Policy Research Working
  Paper No. 4671. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13

Clemens, M. A. (2011): “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 83–106. 3, 17

Freeman, R. B. (2006): “People Flows in Globalization,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  20(2), pp. 145–170. 2, 3

Gollin, D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” The Journal of Political Economy, 110(2),
  pp. 458–474. 5, 14, 16

Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
  per Worker than Others?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83–116. 2

Hanson, G. H. (2010): “International Migration and Human Rights,” Working Paper 16472,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 1

Hendricks, L. (2002): “How Important Is Human Capital for Development? Evidence from
  Immigrant Earnings,” American Economic Review, 92(1), 198–219. 2

Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): “The Effect Of Expected Income On Individual Migration
  Decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251. 2, 12, 15

                                               20
Klein, P., and G. Ventura (2007): “TFP Differences and the Aggregate Effects of Labor
  Mobility in the Long Run,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 7(1), 1–36. 3

         (2009): “Productivity differences and the dynamic effects of labor movements,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 56(8), 1059 – 1073. 3, 12

Leontief, W. (1953): “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade; The American Capital Position
  Re-Examined,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 97(4), pp. 332–349. 15

Lessem, R. (2011): “Mexico-U.S. Immigration: Effects Of Wages And Border Enforcement,”
  Carnegie-Mellon University. 2, 13

Schoellman, T. (2011): “Education quality and development accounting,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies. 2

Shi, L. (2009): “Chinese Household Income Project, 2002,” . 3

Storesletten, K. (2000): “Sustaining fiscal policy through immigration,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 108(2), 300–323. 2

Trefler, D. (1993): “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!,” The Journal
  of Political Economy, 101(6), pp. 961–987. 3, 6, 7




                                               21
