NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHOICE OF DISCOUNT RATE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY EVALUATION
Lawrence H. Goulder
Roberton C. Williams III
Working Paper 18301
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18301

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Kenneth Arrow, Elisabeth Moyer, Nicholas Stern,
David Weisbach, and participants in the RFF-Stanford workshop, “The Next Round of Climate Economics
& Policy Research.” We also acknowledge financial support for this work (in the form of a workshop
stipend) from SIEPR and RFF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lawrence H. Goulder and Roberton C. Williams III. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Choice of Discount Rate for Climate Change Policy Evaluation
Lawrence H. Goulder and Roberton C. Williams III
NBER Working Paper No. 18301
August 2012
JEL No. D61,D63,H43,Q54
ABSTRACT
Nearly all discussions about the appropriate consumption discount rate for climate-change policy evaluation
assume that a single discount rate concept applies. We argue that two distinct concepts and associated
rates apply. We distinguish a social-welfare-equivalent discount rate appropriate for determining whether
a given policy would augment social welfare (according to a postulated social welfare function) and
a finance-equivalent discount rate suitable for determining whether the policy would offer a potential
Pareto improvement.
Distinguishing the two rates helps resolve arguments as to whether the choice of discount rate should
be based on ethical considerations or empirical information (such as market interest rates), and about
whether the discount rate should serve a prescriptive or descriptive role. Separating out the two rates
also helps clarify disputes about the appropriate stringency of climate change policy.
We find that the structure of leading numerical optimization models used for climate policy analysis
may have helped contribute to the blurring of the differences between the two rates. In addition, we
indicate that uncertainty about underlying ethical parameters or market conditions implies that both
rates should decline as the time-horizon increases.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland,
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
rwilliams@arec.umd.edu

1. Introduction
The choice of discount rate is critical to assessments over climate change policy. Most of
the climate-related benefits from current policy efforts would take the form of avoided damages
many years from now, while many of the costs would be borne in the nearer term. A high
consumption discount rate1 thus tends to shrink the present value of benefits relative to the present
value of costs and weakens the case for aggressive current action. Relatively small differences in
the choice of this rate can make a very large difference in the policy assessment.
The discount rate issue has become a source of significant disagreement. The Stern
Review on the Economics of Climate Change (2007) gained considerable attention in supporting a
policy of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by about three percent per year (relative to business
as usual), starting more or less immediately.2 To support this conclusion, the Review employed a
consumption discount rate of 1.4 percent.3 But several analysts, including Nordhaus (2007) and
Mendelsohn (2008), have argued that the Review’s rate was inappropriately low and that its
conclusions consequently are not well-founded. Nordhaus, in particular, has argued that a
considerably higher consumption discount rate has greater justification, and that once this higher
rate is employed one can no longer justify climate action nearly as aggressive as that endorsed by
the Review. His preferred model simulations employ a discount rate of about 4.3 percent.3 Using
his own DICE model, Nordhaus indicated that the differences between the Stern-endorsed and
Nordhaus-supported discount rate accounted for all of the difference between the more aggressive
climate policy endorsed by Stern and the considerably more modest effort supported by
Nordhaus.
The disagreements about the discount rate are not merely arguments about empirical
matters; there are major debates about conceptual issues as well. For example, Stern (2008) and
Sterner and Persson (2008) argue that the choice of consumption discount rate should be based
almost entirely on ethical considerations: there is no need, for example, to ground the
consumption discount rate in observed or expected interest rates or in estimates of the opportunity
cost of capital. In contrast, Nordhaus maintains that it is critical to base the choice of discount
1

We offer definitions for this rate below.
This policy would aim to stabilize greenhouse gas atmospheric concentrations at approximately 550 parts per
million in CO2 equivalents.
3
This number derives from a particular definition of and formula for “consumption discount rate,” as discussed
below.
2

1

rate in observed behavior – behavior that is reflected in market interest rates. Similarly, some
analysts argue that the choice of discount rate is a purely prescriptive issue, while others claim it
should be a descriptive question (that is, empirically based).
There remains relatively little agreement as to what might constitute a reasonable value for
the consumption discount rate. This can leave policy analysts and decision makers confused
about what conclusions can legitimately be drawn.
This paper examines closely the discount rate issue. We aim to unravel and clarify the
sources of differences of viewpoint. As a result of our efforts to sort out the disagreements, we
have arrived at important distinctions that we feel resolve apparent contradictions across the
viewpoints. Specifically, we find that nearly all of the discussion implicitly assumes that the
term “consumption discount rate” refers to a single concept, when in fact two very different
concepts are involved. The same label has been used for two very different notions: what we will
call the social-welfare-equivalent consumption discount rate (rSW) and the finance-equivalent
consumption discount rate (rF). Distinguishing the two concepts can resolve a good part of the
controversy over “the” discount rate.4 Distinguishing the concepts also can clarify substantially
whether ethical or empirical considerations are relevant to the analysis. Both concepts have
important uses. As we discuss, rSW is less directly linked with actual market behavior than is rF.
In that sense, rF has a clearer empirical basis. However, both rates are useful for policy
evaluation, and thus both have a prescriptive role. Depending on the objective of the policy
analysts involved, one or the other rate will be appropriate.
We find that the particular structure of leading numerical optimization models may have
helped contribute to the blurring of the differences between the two rates. In most of the leading
optimization models used for climate change policy analysis, the actual and the desirable are not
clearly separated. As we discuss below, the same function serves both as a behavioral function
(to indicate how individuals actually would behave under various conditions) and as a social
welfare function (to indicate how individuals or societies should behave).5 In these models,
4

Our paper’s distinction between the two discount rates parallels the distinction offered in Kaplow et al. (2010)
between “evaluative” and “predictive” discounting. Our paper also parallels Kaplow et al. in bringing out how a
social welfare function offers a basis for decision making distinct from the basis offered by market conditions. We
became aware of the Kaplow et al. paper after having drafted the present paper and were struck by the overlap of
ideas.
5
This is a necessary consequence of the assumption, employed in many models, that the behavior of an economy can
be expressed in terms of an infinitely lived representative agent. From this assumption it follows directly that
whatever maximizes this agent’s utility function also maximizes social welfare.

2

parameters are selected to generate plausible behavioral responses. But the absence of a
distinction between a behavioral function and a social welfare function means that the same
parameters employed to generate a plausible behavioral function perforce must be parameters of
the social welfare function – since only one function is involved. This eliminates the possibility
of distinguishing rSW from rF.
Separating out the two consumption discount rates (and, in numerical models, the two
types of objective functions) resolves disagreements about the extent to which “the” discount rate
should be grounded in actual behavior. Nordhaus’s insistence that applied models reflect actual
(as opposed to ideal) behavior, and Dietz and Stern’s argument that climate policy evaluation
must embrace ethics (the desirable) as well as economics (narrowly defined, to refer to the actual)
no longer are inconsistent.6 In addition, consistently accounting for these distinctions can narrow
considerably the differences in viewpoint as to how ambitious current policy should be.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers some basic definitions.
Section 3 defines rSW and rF, and justifies the distinction between the two. Section 4 indicates
why rSW and rF cannot be distinguished in existing numerical optimization models for climate
change policy, and indicates that this derives from the equating of behavioral and social welfare
functions in these models. This section also suggests how current practice biases the results of
numerical models, and how a cleaner separation of the actual and desirable (along with a
consistent use of rSW and rF) would help resolve apparent differences in policy conclusions. We
show that the climate policy that maximizes a plausible social welfare function is likely to be
more aggressive than one that maximizes net benefits based on rF.
Through Section 4, our analysis ignores the issue of uncertainty. The phenomenon of
uncertainty raises a large number of hugely complex issues. As discussed in Section 5, attending
to uncertainty can influence one’s choice of values for both rSW and rF. Under either approach, it
calls for using lower rates when discounting over longer time horizons, which tends to imply
more aggressive climate policy. But the underlying distinctions between rSW and rF remain, as do
the distinctions between behavioral and social welfare functions. In the presence of uncertainty, it
remains the case that the social-welfare-maximizing climate policy can be significantly more
aggressive than the one that maximizes net benefits based on rF.
6

These arguments are in Nordhaus (2007) and Dietz and Stern (2008). The views are sharply contrasted in Dasgupta
(2008).

3

Section 6 is a conclusion.

2. Preliminaries
Before introducing a distinction between types of consumption discount rates, it is worth
noting the difference between a discount rate on utility and one on consumption. Ethicists often
argue that future utility should not be discounted – that the well-being of future generations
should count as much as that of the current generation in a social welfare function.7 This suggests
a value of zero for the social rate of time preference8 – or perhaps a very low value to reflect the
possibility that, because of a future exogenous calamity (for example, an asteroid’s hitting the
earth) some future generations might not ever arrive. Using this logic, the Stern Review employs
a value of .001 for the social rate of time preference, which we designate by ρ.
Consumption discount rates, in contrast, translate values of future consumption into
equivalent values of current consumption. There is no necessary contradiction between
employing a (positive) discount rate to future consumption and maintaining the view that future
utilities should not be discounted.

3. Consumption Discount Rates
Suppose the social welfare function W is of the intertemporally additive form:
t

⎛ 1 ⎞
W0 = ∑ ⎜
⎟ U t (Ct )
t =0 ⎝ 1 + ρ ⎠
∞

(1)

7

See Broome (2008), for example.
The social rate of time preference is sometimes referred to as a utility discount rate. As emphasized by Kaplow, et
al. (2010), the term is potentially confusing since it does not make clear whether it represents the intertemporal tradeoff of utilities in a social welfare function or the trade-off within an individual’s intertemporal welfare function. The
social rate of time preference refers to the former.
8

4

where W0 is social welfare evaluated at time 0, ρ is the social rate of time preference, Ct is
consumption in year t, and Ut is utility at time t. Suppose that the utility function does not change
through time (U t (Ct ) ≡ U (Ct ), ∀t ) and that the utility function has the constant elasticity form:
U (Ct ) = Ct1−η / (1 − η )

(2)

The parameter η is the (constant) elasticity of marginal utility of consumption.9
a.

The Social-Welfare-Equivalent Discount Rate
Define the social-welfare-equivalent discount rate rSW as that rate which translates a

marginal change in consumption at some future date t into the social-welfare-equivalent marginal
change in consumption at time 0. Thus rSW must satisfy:

∂W0
t ∂W
0
= (1+ rSW )
∂C0
∂Ct

(3)

Substituting in the derivatives of equation (1) with respect to C0 and Ct and rearranging yield

(1+ r ) = (1+ ρ )
t

SW

t

∂U 0 ∂C0
∂U t ∂Ct

(4)

This equation illustrates that there are two distinct reasons for discounting: the rate of time
preference (represented by the first term on the right-hand-side) and the difference in the marginal
utility of consumption between the two time periods (the second term). Because the marginal
9

Two features of this formulation of utility and social welfare may be noted. First, it considers only a single
consumption good. Recent papers (e.g., Sterner and Persson (2008) and Traeger (2011)) have pointed out that with
multiple consumption goods that are not perfect substitutes, relative prices are likely to change over time, with
environmental goods rising in value relative to produced goods. These papers argue that this implies a different
consumption discount rate for each good, with a lower discount rate for environmental than for produced goods. This
is a very important point, but we view it as largely separate from discounting. The phenomenon can be incorporated
into the calculation of the benefits from climate change policy (implying that value of the benefits from climate
change mitigation will be rising over time), which then permits the use of a single discount rate, rather than a separate
discount rate for every good. Both approaches yield the same answer, but the latter approach will generally be
simpler.
t

⎛ 1 ⎞
∑ ⎜⎝ 1+ ρ ⎟⎠ Vt (Ut (Ct )) where Vt = (Ut (Ct ))1−θ / (1− θ ) and
t=0
∞

Second, a more general formulation would define W0 as

U t = Ct1−η / (1− η ) . This would allow a separate specification for the curvature of the social welfare function and that
of the utility function, as determined by θ and η, respectively. Kaplow et al. (2010) point out where failing to split
out the two elements has led to misinterpretations. Dasgupta (2008) discusses additional possible formulations for U.

5

utility of consumption declines as consumption rises, that second term will depend on how fast
consumption is rising or falling over time. Let g represent the growth rate of C, such that Ct =
(1+g)t C0. Substituting that, along with the derivative of the utility function (2) with respect to Ct,
into (4), and simplifying give

(1+ r ) = (1+ ρ ) (1+ g )
t

t

ηt

(5)

SW

Assuming “small” values for ρ, η, and g, taking logarithms of both sides of (5), and simplifying10,
yield11:
rSW ≈ ρ + η g

(6)

This expression again reveals that social-welfare-equivalent discounting depends on two main
elements: the social rate of time preference (ρ) and the change in the marginal utility of
consumption over time. The latter in turn is the product of how fast consumption is growing or
falling over time (g) and how sensitive the marginal utility of income is to changes in
consumption (η).12
It is important to recognize that rSW serves to convert future consumption into a level of
current consumption that is equivalent in terms of social welfare. rSW will generally be positive to
reflect both the (minimal) discounting of future utility implied by ρ, and the fact that the
marginal contribution to social welfare of increased consumption is declining, as implied by η.13
It is also important to note that the formula relies on no information about the structure of the
economy, although the expected performance of the economy is certainly implied by the assumed
value of g. The critical determinants of rSW are assumed parameters of the social welfare function
(namely ρ) and of the utility function (namely η). The choice of ρ is largely, if not entirely, based
on ethical considerations: how much should future well-being count relative to current well-being
in the social welfare function.14 The choice of η can be based on empirical as well as ethical
10

A key step in the simplification uses the approximation that if x is small, ln (1 + x) ≈ x.
Dasgpta (2008) offers a different but complementary derivation.
12
The formula is a bit more complicated if the utility function U does not exhibit constant elasticity of marginal
utility of consumption or if the social welfare function is not additively separable. But the essential factors remain
the same: how much the utility of a future person counts relative to a current person, and the marginal utility of
changes in income.
13
However, Dasgupta, Maler, and Barrett (1999) and Dasgupta (2008) point out that for some countries, it cannot be
guaranteed that growth will be positive over the relevant time-interval, particularly if there is severe climate change.
This raises the possibility of a negative value for rSW.
14
It should be recognized that ρ represents a parameter of a social welfare function extending across generations, and
thus is not generally the same as an individual’s rate of time preference.
11

6

issues. A relevant empirical issue is the extent to which increments to consumption lead to higher
individual well-being. A relevant ethical question is how much an increment to consumption
should count in the social welfare function.15
Using equation (6), we can calculate the implied values of rSW in several leading studies.
Dasgupta (2008) uses reported values for ρ and η, along with and assumed value of 1.3 for g16 to
arrive at the following:

Implicit	  Values	  of	  r SW 	  in	  Leading	  Climate	  P olicy	  Evaluations
ρ

η

g

r SW

Stern	  (2007)

0.1%

1.0

1.3%

1.40%

Cline	  (1992)

0.0%

1.5

1.3%

2.05%

Nordhaus	  (2007)

3.0%

1.0

1.3%

4.30%

The differences in rSW account for much of the difference in conclusions about the appropriate
level of aggressiveness in climate change policy. For example, when the DICE model applies
Nordhaus’s preferred consumption discount rate of 4.3 percent, it yields an optimal abatement
path involving CO2 emissions reductions of 14 percent in 2015, 25 percent in 2050, and 43
percent in 2100 (Nordhaus, 2007). When the same model employs Stern’s preferred rate of 1.4
percent, it yields emissions reductions of 53 percent in 2015. The implied difference in optimal
carbon prices is very large as well: $35/ton in 2015 for a discount rate of 4.3 percent, versus
$360/ton for a discount rate of 1.4 percent.17 These differences reflect the fact that relatively
small differences in the consumption discount rate imply large differences in the discounted
values attached to events in the distant future. For example, a given loss of consumption 100
years from now is 17 times smaller using a discount rate of 4.3% as compared with the result
under a discount rate of 1.4%.

15

η is also interpreted as a measure of society’s aversion to inequality. Ethical considerations influence the choice of
the value of this aversion parameter. Empirical considerations may apply as well in that the choice of η might be
based on an empirical assessment of the aversion to inequality expressed by individuals.
16
The value for g was based on Dasgupta’s estimate of the growth rate of consumption under business as usual in
Stern (2007).
17
More precisely, these two simulations incorporate the values for ρ, η, and g in the rows marked “Nordhaus (2008)”
and “Stern (2007),” respectively, in the table above.

7

b. The Finance-Equivalent Discount Rate
The finance-equivalent discount rate rF is different from rSW. We define rF as that rate
which equates future and current consumption in financial terms. Put differently, this is the
marginal product (or marginal opportunity cost) of capital. The rate rF indicates how
consumption levels are connected across time: if society forgoes one unit of consumption in any
given period in order to increase the capital stock, this will increase the amount available for
consumption in the next period by 1 + rF.
If capital is paid its marginal product (that is, if the capital market is undistorted), then the
market rate of interest will equal rF. Similarly, if the individual savings/consumption decision is
undistorted and individuals are not liquidity constrained, then individuals will discount
consumption at the rate of interest. If any of these markets are distorted, however, then
individuals may discount consumption at a rate that differs from rF.18
Especially important is the fact that, no matter whether distortions are present or absent, rF
generally is not equal to rSW. The former reflects equivalences in terms of social welfare (as
defined by a given social welfare function). It is not generally equal to the rate at which an
individual discounts his or her own future consumption
As mentioned in the introduction, one reason for the apparent impasse in discussions
about discounting in climate policy is that it’s often assumed that analysts should settle on one
rate. As we discuss below, this assumption lacks justification. The appropriate rate – rSW or rF –
depends on the question at hand.
c.

When Should Each Rate Be Used?
Suppose a given climate change policy is being considered, and that models suggest that

this policy, by preventing some climate change, would produce a benefit of ΔCt – that is, it avoids
a loss of ΔCt in future consumption. The discount rate rSW could then be used to show how much
current consumption could be sacrificed without lowering social welfare. So long as the sacrifice

18

For example, capital taxes create a substantial wedge between rF (which, as we’ve defined it here, is equal to the
return on capital before taxes) and the rate at which individuals discount consumption, which will equal the after-tax
return on capital (under the assumption that the capital tax is the only distortion in the capital market).

8

of current consumption is less than ΔCt / (1+rSW)t (assuming no other impacts), the policy raises
social welfare.
The same policy could be evaluated using rF – but for a different type of evaluation. rF is
appropriate if one wishes to determine whether the policy would yield a potential Pareto
improvement: that is, whether the winners from the policy could in theory compensate all the
losers and still be better off. In other words, it is appropriate for evaluating whether a policy
would satisfy the Kaldor-Hicks criterion.19
The potential for a Pareto improvement can be illustrated (with rF) as follows. Consider a
combination of the climate change policy and a transfer from the future beneficiaries of the policy
to the present generation such that the combination leaves utility unchanged in all future periods.
Suppose that this transfer is accomplished by diverting resources from current investment to
current consumption, and that (other things equal) it allows current-period consumption to
increase by ΔCt / (1+rF)t. This transfer would hold constant consumption in all intervening
periods between the current period and time t , and would reduce consumption by ΔCt in period t
(which exactly offsets the gain of ΔCt in period t from the climate policy).20 Thus, the
combination of climate policy and transfer leaves utility unchanged in all future periods. Now if
the sacrifice of current consumption required by the climate policy (before the transfer) is less
than ΔCt / (1+rF), then (assuming no other impacts) this combination will raise utility in the
current period, thus yielding a Pareto improvement.
Thus, both rSW and rF can be used for assessing climate policy, but they match up to two
different criteria: social welfare in the first case, a potential Pareto improvement in the second.
The objectives of increasing social welfare and of offering a potential Pareto improvement are
both important – hence both rSW and rF serve important purposes. If rSW and rF differ, then these
two measures can yield different results: that is, a policy can offer a potential Pareto
improvement without increasing social welfare, or vice versa.
It is sometimes argued that the choice between using a “market interest rate” and using a
“social discount rate” in climate-change policy analysis is the choice between a “descriptive” and
19

Similarly, Kaplow et al. (2010) discuss how the return on capital is relevant to evaluating whether a given climatechange policy represents a better use of resources than alternative investments.
20
This could be achieved via government borrowing to finance consumption in the current period with the borrowed
funds paid back in period t. (This assumes that private saving doesn't change in response; if it does change, then the
necessary change in the path of government borrowing would be more complicated, but could still accomplish the
transfer as long as full Ricardian equivalence does not hold.)

9

a “prescriptive” approach to policy analysis. While it is the case that rF has a more immediate
connection with actual behavior (and in that sense has a more “descriptive” foundation), both rF
and rSW can be used to evaluate or prescribe policies. The social welfare function underlying the
use of rSW offers a normative basis for policy analysis, and thus rSW offers a basis for
recommending some policy options and rejecting others. But the Kaldor-Hicks criterion that
underlies the use of rF also has a normative basis: most people would agree that satisfying the
Kaldor-Hicks criterion gives a policy option greater appeal, other things equal. Hence rF, as well
as rSW, can be used prescriptively.
However, it should be recognized that, by definition, the use of rSW offers a broader
assessment of the social welfare implications of a policy option. When a policy’s net benefits are
assessed using rF, its potential benefits are measured according a criterion (the Kaldor-Hicks
criterion) that takes no account of the distribution of impacts and other potential determinants of
social welfare.
d. Implications of Discrepancies between rSW and rF
A discrepancy between rSW and rF implies that resources (and associated levels of
consumption) are not allocated across different time periods in a way that maximizes social
welfare. This issue of consumption allocation can be understood without specific reference to
climate policy. If, for example, rSW < rF, then transferring resources to future time periods by
consuming less now and increasing the capital stock (e.g., by reducing the government budget
deficit) will increase social welfare. Reducing consumption by one unit today and increasing the
capital stock will increase the amount available for consumption next period by 1+rF. If rSW < rF,
that increase is worth more to social welfare than one unit of consumption today. If rSW > rF, then
the opposite intertemporal reallocation of consumption – consuming more now and decreasing the
capital stock – will increase social welfare. In either case, existing policy with respect to the
capital stock is not optimal because a change could increase social welfare.
A discrepancy between rSW and rF also has implications for the kind of policy that can
most efficiently increase social welfare. Specifically, it can imply that climate policy will not be
the most efficient approach. As we’ll discuss in a moment, this is not an argument against climate

10

policy – such policy can still be welfare-improving – but it indicates that the government may
have even more efficient opportunities to raise welfare.
Specifically, consider the case in which rSW < rF. In this circumstance, suppose that a
particular climate change policy (with costs ΔC0 now and benefit ΔCt at time t) has positive
discounted net benefits when using rSW as a discount rate, but negative discounted net benefits

(

when using rF: that is, ΔC0 1+ rSW

) < ΔC < ΔC (1+ r ) .
t

t

t

0

F

In this case, the policy increases social

welfare. But it also in effect transfers resources from the present to the future. The government
could achieve a larger increase in social welfare by making a similar transfer of resources to the
future via the capital stock. Or put differently, the climate policy is a less efficient way to transfer
resources to the future than a policy that increases the capital stock.
In this case, what action should the government take on the climate policy? The answer
depends on what the options are. If the choice is simply whether to enact the climate policy or
not, without any other policy changes, then the policy is worth enacting: it increases social
welfare. If the choice is between the climate policy and a similarly costly transfer to future
generations via the capital stock – one cannot do both – then using the capital stock would be
better.
When the government has the opportunity to optimize the capital stock as well as consider
a given proposed climate policy, the implemented changes in the capital stock will influence the
values of rSW and rF. Assuming that initially rF exceeds rSW, the optimization involves increasing
the capital stock, which means consuming less and saving more now. This implies both a higher
rSW (since consuming less and saving more now will increase the rate of growth of consumption
over time, thus increasing rSW) and a lower rF (because increasing the capital stock will lower the
marginal rate of return to capital). At the social-welfare optimum, the two rates will be the same,
at values somewhere above the original value of rSW but below the original value of rF.21 At the
optimum, both rates give the same answer about whether the candidate climate policy is
worthwhile – that is, the proposed policy will either pass both the social-welfare-improvement
and the Kaldor-Hicks tests, or fail both.22

21

Note that this doesn’t just mean that the two rates will be equal in the social-welfare-optimal steady state. The two
rates will also be equal at all points along the social-welfare-optimizing growth path.
22
Dasgupta (2008) maintains that “only in a fully optimizing economy … is it appropriate to discount future
consumption costs and benefits at the rate that reflects the direct opportunity cost of capital.” Translated into the

11

4. The Melding of the Two Rates in Numerical Optimization Models
The distinction between rSW and rF implies a need for a refinement in the structure of many
optimization models used for climate change policy analysis. Fundamental assumptions in these
models make it impossible to clearly separate the two rates. This has helped perpetuate confusion
and unnecessary disagreement.23
To see this, it helps to start by recognizing that optimization models have two important
tasks. In these models, both tasks are served by a single function -- the objective function. As
indicated here, the two tasks require two functions, not one.
One key task is to indicate how the economy might actually perform under business-asusual and under various alternative policies. To be taken seriously, the model needs to generate
plausible behavior under business as usual, as well as realistic behavioral responses to various
policy changes. In these models, the objective function drives behavior. Thus the parameters of
the objective function must be chosen so as to imply plausible behavior. In Nordhaus’s DICE
model24, for example, the objective function is an intertemporal utility function of a representative
agent. Parameters of this function are chosen so that the consumption and saving decisions of
this agent seem plausible, given initial conditions and the conditions specified by policy.
A second task of numerical optimization models is (as the name implies) to reveal what
policy would maximize social welfare. By definition, social welfare is maximized when the
objective function is maximized. But this objective function is also the behavioral function. Thus,
in the DICE model, for example, the same intertemporal utility function serves both to specify
how people actually behave and is used as the metric of social welfare.25 The fact that the
framework of our paper, this statement means that it is only legitimate to use rF to measure changes in a social
welfare function when all policies are optimal – in which case rF will equal rSW.
23
Kaplow et al. (2010) arrive at similar conclusions.
24
The first comprehensive description and application of the model is in Nordhaus (1994). More recent applications
and model refinements appear in several articles, including Nordhaus and Boyer (2000), Nordhaus (2007), and
Nordhaus (2010).
25
In many optimization models, the identification of the social welfare function and the behavioral function stems
from the assumption that the performance of the economy can be modeled by the behavior of an infinitely lived
representative agent. Once this assumption is made, it is natural to assume that whatever maximizes the
representative agent’s welfare also maximizes social welfare (the only alternative would be to have a social welfare
function that overrides the agent’s preferences). It should be noted that the representative agent assumption is a

12

objective function serves two roles is critical: it restricts the social welfare function to be the
same as the behavioral function. Whatever parameters are chosen to make behavior realistic must
also serve as parameters of a social welfare function.
Ethicists will have difficulty with this, for two reasons. For one, they might wish to
employ a social welfare function that has a different functional form from that of the behavioral
function in the numerical model. Second, even if they accepted the functional form, in general
they would not wish to employ in the social welfare function the same parameters as the
(restricted) parameters used in the behavioral function – the parameters that were restricted by the
need to generate realistic time-paths.
The blurring of the distinction between the social welfare function and the behavioral
function helps sustain the misimpression that there is but one consumption rate of discount. To
generate realistic behavior, the optimization models must generate plausible values for, among
other things, the market interest rate or opportunity cost of capital. This opportunity cost depends
directly on the choice of the utility discount rate (ρ) and on the choice of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in utility (1/η). Only certain combinations of the utility discount rate and

η are consistent with plausible savings behavior. One is constrained in the choice of social
welfare function.
This may seem like a fundamental dilemma. On the one hand, it seems vitally important
that optimization models (and other models, for that matter) generate realistic behavioral
responses. On the other, it seems important to allow for a social welfare function to incorporate
ethical considerations that might imply different parameters or functional forms from those that
meet the demands of calibration.
The dilemma is not real. It is possible to maintain a behavioral function that leads to
realistic behavioral responses and to have a wide choice of social welfare functions. Likewise, it
is possible to disentangle – even in numerical models – the two discount rates rSW and rF. The
solution is to include distinct behavioral and a social welfare functions in numerical optimization
models. As is current practice, the behavioral function can be parameterized so as to generate
plausible behavioral responses and plausible values for the opportunity cost of capital. Nordhaus,
strong one, and that the use of this assumption (combined with the need to parameterize the function to yield realistic
behavior) severely restricts what can be considered as a social welfare function. A model with multiple agents with
finite lives (such as the standard overlapping-generations model) provides far more flexibility in the choice of a social
welfare function.

13

for example, might wish to stick with the parameters that he arrived at for the behavioral function
in DICE. At the same time, a social welfare function can be superimposed on the model, to
evaluate the outcomes that the behavioral function and other aspects of the model generate. The
social welfare function would not alter the behavior of the model; it would only evaluate the
outcomes.
This approach would yield both rSW and rF as distinct rates. The former would derive
directly from the social welfare function. For example, if the social welfare function is of the
form in equation (1) above, it would be calculated from equation (6). The choice of η and ρ
would not be constrained by the interest rate or opportunity cost of capital that emerges from the
model (though, as discussed above, some empirical considerations could influence these choices).
The latter would derive directly from the opportunity cost of capital that emerges from the model.
Separating out the two discount rates in these models can help resolve disputes about the
appropriate stringency of climate change policy. Using equation (6) often yields a value for rSW
that is lower than most estimates of rF (the opportunity cost of capital). Thus, analysts may well
support a relatively aggressive approach to emissions abatement to the extent that they are
evaluating the policy in social welfare terms. At the same time, analysts can point to the higher
value of rF as an indicator that the Kaldor-Hicks criterion cannot support policies as aggressive as
the social-welfare criterion can.

5. Uncertainty and Discount Rates
All of the discussion thus far has assumed that all of the relevant parameters of the
problem are known with certainty. This is useful for exposition but obviously highly unrealistic –
particularly in the context of climate change policy. Hence it is important to consider how
uncertainty affects discounting. This issue applies for both rSW and rF and uncertainty usually has
qualitatively the same influence on each of the two rates. For convenience, through most of this
section the discussion simply refers to “the discount rate.”
One aspect of the climate change problem that is highly uncertain is the potential benefit
of any given climate policy. What effect this has depends on how the uncertainty in benefits is
correlated with uncertainty about future levels of consumption. For example, a policy with
14

benefits that are negatively correlated with consumption (that is, one that has relatively large
benefits when consumption is low and relatively low benefits when consumption is high)
effectively provides some insurance, and thus is more attractive than would be suggested if one
focused only on the expected benefit.26
One way to handle this type of uncertainty is to use the expected benefit in the analysis,
and to address risk through adjustments in the discount rate. For a policy with benefits negatively
correlated with consumption, this approach would use a discount rate below the risk-free rate.27
This approach can sometimes be convenient, but it conflates the issues of risk and discounting.
Uncertainty about the benefits of policy has exactly the same effect in a case where the benefits
occur immediately as it does in a case where the benefits occur far in the future. Thus, it is
generally better to take an approach that separates the two issues by using a risk-free discount rate
and incorporating risk into the analysis by using certainty-equivalent benefits rather than expected
benefits. For a policy with benefits negatively correlated with consumption, the certaintyequivalent benefits are higher than expected benefits (because they reflect both the expected
benefit and the insurance value of the benefits). Thus, both approaches recognize that the
negative correlation makes the policy more attractive, but the latter approach separates the issue
of uncertainty from the issue of discounting – it avoids lumping those two issues together by
adjusting a single discount rate.
The one situation where discounting and uncertainty cannot be separated is when there is
uncertainty about the elements that define the discount rate. In the case of rSW, there is
uncertainty about the growth rate g, for example; in the case of rF, there is uncertainty about
future opportunity costs of capital. Suppose that there is a range of possible states of nature,
denoted by j, where rj is the discount rate in state j, and pj is the probability of that state.28 One
way to handle this situation is to explicitly include this uncertainty when calculating the
discounted cost and benefit of a policy. Under this approach, the expectation of the discounted
value of a certain benefit of ΔCt at time t would equal

∑ ⎡⎢⎣ p (1+ r )
j

j

26

j

−t

ΔCt ⎤⎥ . This approach has
⎦

More generally, what matters is the correlation with the marginal utility of consumption. Uncertainty about
benefits makes a policy more attractive if the policy provides higher benefits when the marginal utility of
consumption is high.
27
In many other contexts (such as business investments), the more common case is to have benefits that are
positively correlated with consumption. In such a case, this approach would use a rate above the risk-free rate.
28
For simplicity, assume that in any given state, the discount rate is constant over time.

15

the advantage of transparency, but may be impractical because it would require every cost-benefit
analysis to consider the entire distribution of possible discount rates.
An alternative approach would be to collapse the range of possible values for the discount
rate into a “certainty-equivalent rate” that would yield the same result.29 This implies that

(1+ r )

* −t

(

= ∑ ⎡⎢ p j 1+ rj
⎣
j

)

−t

⎤,
⎦⎥

(6)

where r* denotes the certainty-equivalent rate. Note, however, that the r* that satisfies this
equation will vary depending on t. For t = 1, the r* that satisfies (6) will simply equal the
expected value of rj, and this will be approximately true for any relatively small value of t (i.e.,
for discounting over a relatively short time horizon). But the larger the value of t, the lower will
be the value of r* that satisfies (6). In the limit as t goes to infinity, r* will converge to min rj . In
j

other words, when discounting over very long time horizons, this certainty-equivalent discount
rate equals the lowest possible discount rate.30
The key to this result is that decisions depend on the expected value over discount factors
(the right hand side of (6)), not discount rates. And as t increases, the discount factor associated
with a high discount rate will decline much more rapidly than the discount factor associated with
a lower discount rate. Thus, as t increases, the higher the discount rate is in a particular state, the
less important that state becomes in determining the certainty-equivalent rate. So for very large
values of t, the certainty-equivalent rate is determined almost entirely by the lowest of the
possible discount rates. Similarly, if one explicitly uses the full distribution of possible discount
rates (rather than a certainty-equivalent rate), the states with the lowest discount rates will become
increasingly important as t increases.
This is a powerful result. It implies that when discounting the distant future, one should
use a lower rate – potentially much lower – than the rate one would use for relatively short time

29

This alternative approach has the virtue of simplicity, and is particularly useful for illustrating the effect of
uncertainty about discount rates. But that simplicity relies on the highly unrealistic assumption that any uncertainty
about benefits is uncorrelated with uncertainty about the discount rate. (One can still employ this approach when this
assumption does not hold, but in such a case the certainty-equivalent rate will depend on the joint distribution of
benefits and discount rates.)
30
This point was first made by Weitzman (1998 and 2001).

16

horizons. And since the longer the time horizon is, the more important the discount rate becomes,
this result can have dramatic consequences. 31
This issue applies to both rSW and rF, because both are uncertain. As discussed earlier in
the paper, rSW depends on ρ, η, and g, each of which are uncertain: there is a great deal of
disagreement in the literature about the appropriate values to use for ρ and η, and any forecast of
future economic growth rates is highly uncertain. The value of rF is also uncertain, because the
future marginal product of capital is difficult to predict. Because the sources of uncertainty differ
across the two rates, the magnitude of the uncertainty will probably also differ across the two
rates, and thus the quantitative importance of this issue will likely differ. But the direction of the
effect will be the same: whichever rate is appropriate for a given analysis, the corresponding
certainty-equivalent rate will be lower the longer the time horizon.
Newell and Pizer (2003) provide an empirical analysis of this effect, using two centuries
of data on U.S. interest rates.32 It shows that under a random-walk model of the interest rate
uncertainty, the certainty-equivalent rate falls gradually from 4% for very short time horizons to
2% after 100 years, 1% after 200 years, and 0.5% after 300 years. The analysis suggests that
taking this interest-rate uncertainty in account roughly doubles the expected discounted benefits
from climate mitigation policy.

6. Conclusions
There has been much debate about the appropriate consumption discount rate for use in
climate change policy analysis. Nearly all discussions implicitly assume that a single discount
rate concept applies. We argue that in fact two distinct rates apply, and that one or the other rate
will be appropriate depending on the evaluation criterion. If the objective is to assess whether a
given policy would augment social welfare (according to the postulated social welfare function),
the social-welfare-equivalent discount rate rSW is appropriate. If the objective is to determine
31

This time-varying discount rate can lead to cases in which the optimal decision between two policies depends on
when that decision is made. These choice reversals resemble the preference reversals that occur under hyperbolic
discounting, but occur for a very different reason: the choice reversals occur because of new information that is
revealed over time, not because of any preference reversal or other similar irrationality.
32
Thus, their quantitative results are primarily relevant for rF, though the general pattern of the results also provides
some guidance for how analyses using rSW might be affected.

17

whether the policy would yield a potential Pareto improvement (that is, pass a Kaldor-Hicks test),
the finance-equivalent discount rate rF should be used.
Distinguishing the two rates resolves major disagreements about “the” consumption
discount rate. For one, it resolves the debate about the extent to which the rate should be
grounded in actual saving-investment behavior and the associated opportunity cost of capital, as
opposed to less empirically-based ethical considerations. When the evaluation criterion is the
Kaldor-Hicks condition, then rF is the appropriate rate and a focus on market conditions (the
opportunity cost of capital) is justified. When the evaluation metric is the value of a social
welfare function, then rSW is the appropriate rate – a rate based on parameters that derive from
ethical considerations with a less direct empirical basis (although empirical considerations might
influence one’s views as to the appropriate values for the “ethical” parameters in the formula for
rSW).
Is one objective a better basis for decision-making than the other? By definition, the
social welfare function offers the most complete measure of impacts of policy on social welfare.
In principle, a social welfare function will embrace all relevant normative dimensions (including
both efficiency and distributional considerations); this all-encompassing quality gives it great
appeal. At the same time, the appropriate blending or weighting of these various dimensions is
subjective and leads to disagreements as to the appropriate form and parameters of the social
welfare function. For this reason, some analysts prefer to focus on the narrower Kaldor-Hicks
criterion (which engages rF). Although this criterion focuses only on one normative dimension
(namely, the potential for a Pareto improvement), it can be more tractable.
All of this is to suggest that neither objective dominates the other: the choice between
them is between an approach that is more comprehensive and one that might involve less
subjectivity. Note that the choice between the social-welfare-function-based approach and the
Kaldor-Hicks approach is relevant not only to climate policy evaluation but to policy assessments
in many other policy contexts, particularly when there are serious distributional as well as
efficiency consequences.
A closely-related issue is whether the choice of discount rate should be based on
“descriptive” or “prescriptive” considerations. We find that both rates are used for evaluating
policy. In this sense both have a prescriptive function. At the same time, rF is more directly tied
to actual behavior, and in this respect it has a stronger descriptive element. Nevertheless,
18

descriptive considerations also influence the choice of the parameters that determine rSW. For
example, the η parameter that enters the typical formula for rSW can be based on considerations of
individuals’ actual or revealed aversion to inequality.
We find that the particular structure of leading numerical optimization models may have
helped contribute to the blurring of the differences between the two rates. In all of the
optimization models we have encountered, the same function – the objective function – serves
both as a behavioral function (to indicate how individuals actually would behave under various
conditions) and as a social welfare function (to indicate how individuals or societies should
behave). This means that the same parameters calibrated or statistically estimated to generate a
plausible behavioral function must be parameters of the social welfare function – since only one
function is involved. This forces the social welfare function to be directly based on actual
behavior and the opportunity cost of capital. This prevents rSW from being separated from rF, and
eliminates the possibility of any separation of the desirable from the actual. Fortunately, this
difficulty can be overcome by introducing separate behavioral and social-welfare functions in
optimization models.
Uncertainty over the appropriate value for that rate implies that the rate used should
decline as the time horizon increases. This applies to both rSW and rF. It has substantial practical
importance for climate change policy, because of the long time horizons involved.
Separating out the two discount rates can help clarify disputes about the appropriate
stringency of climate change policy. Analysts who implicitly concentrate on rSW, focusing on
ethical considerations, tend to call for a relatively low discount rate. This leads them to argue for
more aggressive abatement efforts. Analysts who implicitly focus on rF, drawing attention to the
(relatively high) opportunity cost of capital, tend to call for a higher rate.33 This leads them to
support less aggressive action. The two views are not incompatible. rSW may well be lower than
rF. In this case, a relatively aggressive climate policy might well pass the social-welfareenhancement test yet fail the Kaldor-Hicks (potential Pareto improvement) test. Whether a given
level of policy stringency is justified will depend on which of the two important evaluation
criteria is being employed.

33

In principle, ethical considerations could support a value for rSW that exceeds rF. In practice, however, ethical
arguments for discount rates higher than rF are rare.

19

This analysis implies that practitioners need to make clear the evaluation metric in
assessing climate policy. Some analysts might be more comfortable utilizing rF since it has a
closer connection to observed behavior. It may be viewed as less subjective than rSW, which puts
more emphasis on ethical considerations. There is no inherent problem in using rF, but if rF is
employed it is important to interpret the results appropriately. In particular, a policy’s failing the
benefit-cost test with rF only shows that the policy lacks the potential to generate a Pareto
improvement: it does not rule out the possibility that the policy is social-welfare-improving. Our
recommendation would be for policy analysts to make very clear the distinction between the two
rates and the two associated evaluation criteria. This will lead to more informative evaluations
and help avoid unnecessary disagreements.

References
Arrow, K. J. et al., 1996. "Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency," in
Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change - Contribution of
Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. J.P. Bruce, H. Lee and E. F. Haites eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Broome, John, 2008. "The Ethics of Climate Change." Scientific American June 2008, pp. 97102.
Cline, William, 1992. The Economics of Global Warming. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Dasgupta, Partha, 2008. "Discounting Climate Change." Journal or Risk and Uncertainty
37:141-69.
Dasgupta, Partha, K. G. Maler, and Scott Barrett, 1999. "Intergenerational Equity, Social
Discount Rates, and Global Warming," in Discounting and Intergenerational Equity. Paul R.
Portney and J. P. Weyant eds. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
Dietz, Simon and Nicholas Stern, 2008. "Why Economic Analysis Supports Strong Action on
Climate Change: A Response to the Stern Review's Critics." Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 2(1):94-113.
Gollier, Christian and Martin L. Weitzman, 2010. "How Should the Distant Future Be
Discounted When Discount Rates Are Uncertain?" Economics Letters 107:350-53.

20

Kaplow, Louis, Elisabeth Moyer, and David A. Weisbach, 2010. The Social Evaluation of
Intergenerational Policies and Its Application to Integrated Assessment Models of Climate
Change.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10(2), article 7.
Mendelsohn, Robert O., 2006. "A Critique of the Stern Report." Regulation 29 (4)(42-46).
Mendelsohn, Robert O., 2008. "Is the Stern Review an Economic Analysis?" Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy 2(1):45-60.
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer, 2003. “Discounting the Distant Future: How Much
Do Uncertain Rates Increase Valuations?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 46:52-71.
Nordhaus, William, 1994. Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change.
Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press.
Nordhaus, William, 2007. "A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change."
Journal of Economic Literature 45:686-702.
Nordhaus, William, 2010. “Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-Copenhagen
Environment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences June 14, 2010.
Nordhaus, William and Joseph Boyer, 2000. Warming the World: Economic Models of Global
Warming. Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press.
Stern, Nicholas, 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK,
and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stern, Nicholas, 2008. "The Economics of Climate Change." American Economic Review 98(2):137.
Sterner, Thomas and U. Martin Persson, 2008. "An Even Sterner Review: Introducing Relative
Prices into the Discounting Debate." Review of Economics and Policy 2(1):61-76.
Traeger, Christian, 2011. “Sustainability, Limited Substitutability, and Non-Constant Social
Discount Rates.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 62:215-228.
Tol, Richard S. J. and Gary W. Yohe, 2006. "A Review of the Stern Review." World Economics
7(4):233-50.
Weitzman, Martin L., 1998. "Why the Far-Distant Future Should be Discounted at Its Lowest
Possible Rate." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36(3):201-08.
Weitzman, Martin L., 2001. "Gamma Discounting." American Economic Review 91(1):260-71.
Weitzman, Martin L., 2007. "A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change." Journal of Economic Literature 45:703-34.
21

