NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANKS, SOVEREIGN DEBT AND THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF
BUSINESS CYCLES
Luca Guerrieri
Matteo Iacoviello
Raoul Minetti
Working Paper 18303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18303
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Replication
codes and an Appendix containing detailed derivations are available from the authors upon request.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Raoul Minetti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banks, Sovereign Debt and the International Transmission of Business Cycles
Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Raoul Minetti
NBER Working Paper No. 18303
August 2012
JEL No. F4,G21,H63
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the international propagation of sovereign debt default. We posit a two-country
economy where capital constrained banks grant loans to firms and invest in bonds issued by the domestic
and the foreign government. The model economy is calibrated to data from Europe, with the two countries
representing the Periphery (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain) and the Core, respectively. Large contractionary
shocks in the Periphery trigger sovereign default. We find sizable spillover effects of default from Periphery
to the Core through a drop in the volume of credit extended by the banking sector.
Luca Guerrieri
The Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
luca.guerrieri@frb.gov
Matteo Iacoviello
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20
20th and C st NW
Washington DC 20551
matteo.iacoviello@frb.gov

Raoul Minetti
Michigan State University
minetti@msu.edu

1

Introduction

In the last fifteen years, following the introduction of the euro and the resulting elimination of exchange
rate risk among euro area members, European banks have increasingly, “happily owned regional, rather
than merely national, government bond portfolios” (The Economist, 2012). In particular, banks of the
core European countries (e.g., France and Germany) have turned into major holders of the sovereign
debt of periphery countries, such as Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. For instance, combining data
from the Bank for International Settlements with data from the Bank of France reveals that in the
last quarter of 2009, just before the outbreak of the eurozone sovereign debt crisis, the ratio of French
banks’ holdings of Periphery’s sovereign debt over their holdings of French government debt equaled
56 percent, up from 19 percent in the first quarter of 2005. Figure 1 plots various ratios for French
banks’ holdings of Periphery’s sovereign debt from the first quarter of 2005 to the third quarter of
2011.1 The figure shows a dramatic increase in the holdings of Periphery sovereign debt by French
banks, whether these are normalized by banks’ total assets, their holdings of French government debt
or by the total sovereign debt of Periphery countries.2
During the current sovereign debt crisis in Europe, the large holdings of government bonds
accumulated in recent years have significantly exposed European banks to the default risk of periphery
countries. This has been exacerbated by the fact that, as shown by the restructuring of Greek sovereign
debt in March 2012, banks and other private investors are treated as junior creditors relative to official
investors (e.g., the central banks of the Eurosystem) during sovereign debt restructurings.3 European
banks have thus suffered from a sizable erosion of their capitalization and a severe difficulty to tap
wholesale funding and interbank markets. Allegedly, this has resulted, in turn, into reduced ability
and propensity to extend credit to firms.
The propagation of sovereign default to the banking sector and, ultimately, to the corporate
sector poses challenges that have been largely unexplored, thus far. A first question regards the
magnitude of the possible effects. How large can a bank credit crunch induced by a sovereign debt crisis
be and how important the international spillovers? Second, how does the degree of banks’ exposure
1
2

We choose data for France since analogous data for German banks are available only starting in 2010Q4.
The holdings of Belgian, Italian and Spanish government debt exceeded the tier 1 capital of banks in the three

countries and 50 percent of the tier capital of banks in France and Germany (see Shambaugh, 2012).
3
The restructuring of Greek debt in March 2012 involved bonds for a total value of about 199 billion Euros. The
exchange of new bonds for old ones reduced the face value of bonds by almost 55 percent.

2

to foreign sovereign debt affect the transmission of shocks across countries?4 If banks deleverage by
selling government bonds, they will aggravate the financing problems of the government, but will avoid
a credit crunch on firms. If instead banks deleverage by contracting credit to the corporate sector,
they will not exacerbate the funding pressures on the government, but their actions will push up firms’
financing costs.5 In an international setting, these issues are more complex since banks hold both
domestic and foreign government bonds and may also deleverage by scaling down their holdings of
foreign government bonds.
To answer these questions, we develop an equilibrium business cycle model. The model features
two country blocs, Periphery (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain) and Core (the rest of the Europe).
Prices and wages are assumed to be flexible, so that, absent sovereign default, our model behaves
not too differently from a standard international real business cycle model. In each bloc there are
households, entrepreneurs, final good firms, and a government. In addition, in each bloc a banking
sector intermediates funds between households and entrepreneurs. Households supply labor to domestic
entrepreneurs and deposit savings in local banks. Banks, in turn, grant loans to entrepreneurs and
invest in bonds issued by the domestic and the foreign government. Agents in both countries derive
utility from consumption. In each country, entrepreneurs produce final goods using capital and labor.
Banks are subject to an exogenous capital requirement that constrains their supply of loanable funds.
The government maximizes the utility from its expenditure, finances itself through taxes and bonds
and can choose to default on its outstanding debt. In each period, its debt capacity is related to its
repayment history, reflecting the possibility that default induces punishment in the form of partial
exclusion from financial markets.
We use the model to understand cause and effects of sovereign default. Regarding the cause,
default occurs when contractionary shocks in a country are large enough that the government prefers
to stop honoring its debt in order to curb the contraction in spending. Regarding the consequences
of default, we decompose them in two effects, a debt repudiation effect, and a punishment effect.
Repudiation represents a transfer of wealth from banks and domestic households to the government.
4

In the analysis, we abstract from the interbank market and posit that banks fund themselves through retail deposits

and equity.
5
During the eurozone crisis, banks of core European countries have only slightly decreased or increased their holdings
of domestic government debt. By contrast, they have reduced both their holdings of foreign government bonds and the
credit extended to firms.

3

This wealth transfer affects both the decision of banks to make loans and the saving decision of
households. Debt repudiation has a negative effect on output both in the core and in the periphery,
with the size of the effect depending, intuitively, on the relative shares of government debt held by
households and banks. In particular, debt repudiation erodes the capitalization of both domestic and
foreign banks. In the presence of binding capital requirements, this erosion forces banks to contract
their loans, causing a drop of investment and output. The punishment effect, instead, is nothing else
but the deleveraging of the government caused by reduced access to credit markets after default. We
find that the punishment may have opposite effects on output in the core and in the periphery: under
our preferred calibration, the punishment may force a portfolio rebalancing that cushions the negative
effects of default on output in the periphery (since banks stop buying government debt and make more
loans to Periphery firms), while worsening it in the core.
To explore the quantitative implications of our model, we calibrate it so that the Periphery is
Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, and the Core is the rest of the euro area, together with Switzerland
and the United Kingdom. Under our benchmark calibration, a partial default on the sovereign debt
of the Periphery, sized to equal 10 percent of Periphery GDP (or 12 of Periphery debt) and, taking
into account relative sizes, about 3 percent of Core GDP, lowers Core and Periphery GDP by almost
half a percent after two years. To relate this calibration to recent events, the default we consider is
equivalent to roughly twice the size of the Greek debt restructuring in March 2012.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 relates the paper to the literature.
Section 3 describes the model. Section 4 presents the calibration and the solution method. Section 5
discusses the results. Section 6 concludes.

2

Related Literature

There are very few studies on the role of banks and supply-side credit market imperfections in global
economies. In addition, these studies do not focus on sovereign debt problems. Devereux and Yetman
(2010) study a two-country economy in which investors hold assets in the domestic and the foreign
country but are exposed to leverage constraints. They find that if international financial markets are
highly integrated, productivity shocks will be propagated through investors’ financial portfolios. In
turn, this will generate a strong output comovement between the two countries. Mendoza and Quadrini

4

(2010) consider a two-country model with a different degree of financial development in each country,
as captured by households’ ability to insure against income shocks. They investigate cross-country
spillover effects of shocks to bank capital. Both Kollmann, Enders and Muller (2011) and KalemliOzcan, Papaioannou and Perri (2011) consider a two-country environment with a global banking
sector. When a shock erodes the capitalization of global banks, it reduces credit supply and depresses
economic activity in both countries.6 In particular, banks’ losses raise bank intermediation costs in
both countries, triggering synchronized business fluctuations. Kamber and Thonissen (2012) analyze
the international transmission of shocks in a global economy in which banking sectors are mostly
independent: banks in the large economy do not lend to firms in the small economy. Ueda (2012)
constructs a two-country model in which financial intermediaries stipulate chained credit contracts
domestically and abroad (that is, they engage in cross-border lending by undertaking cross-border
borrowing from investors). His analysis reveals that negative shocks to one country propagate to the
other, strengthening international comovement.7
Our paper also relates more broadly to the literature on financial imperfections in open economies.
A growing body of research finds that credit market imperfections help explain some of the features
of the international transmission of business cycles that cannot be explained by RBC models. Backus,
Kehoe and Kydland (1992), Baxter and Crucini (1995) and Heathcote and Perri (2002) find that
restrictions in the trade of financial assets can account for the positive output correlation across countries by reducing international capital mobility. More recently, papers such as Kehoe and Perri (2002),
Iacoviello and Minetti (2006) and Gilchrist, Hairault and Kempf (2002) have analyzed models in which
agents face borrowing constraints when tapping international financial markets. The presence of borrowing constraints amplifies the international transmission of shocks. In Dedola and Lombardo (2012)
and Perri and Quadrini (2010) firms face borrowing constraints due to limited credit contract enforceability. In their environments, tighter borrowing constraints in one country can induce a contraction
in economic activity in the other country.8
6

Gilchrist (2004) models a financial accelerator in a two-country model where the two countries feature different

leverage. Shocks are transmitted internationally by affecting foreign borrowers’ net worth.
7
Other papers in this literature include Olivero (2010) and Gerali, Neri, Sessa and Signoretti (2010). Olivero (2010)
investigates an imperfectly competitive global banking system and examines how changes in banks’ markup can propagate
shocks internationally.
8
In Dedola and Lombardo (2012) investors hold both domestic and foreign capital stock but can only borrow from
the domestic capital market in a model with financial frictions as in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).

5

On the modeling front, our analysis is also related to the growing literature on the role of banks
and bank capital in general equilibrium closed-economy models. Papers in this literature include
Gertler and Karadi (2010) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).9 Banks do not hold government debt in
these papers.
Finally, our paper is also related to the literature on the macroeconomic consequences of
sovereign default. The empirical literature is vast but has to confront the difficult problem of separating
cause and effect of default. The survey by De Paoli, Hoggart and Saporta (2006) is an example: they
find that output losses in the wake of sovereign default are around 7 percent per year, but note that it
is difficult to separate the loss due to default per se from the loss caused by the shock that triggered
default. Sturzenegger (2004), using annual data, finds that growth in the defaulting country falls by
0.6 percentage points per year after default. Instead, Levy Yeyati and Panizza (2011), using quarterly
data for a panel of countries, find that default marks the beginning of the recovery in the country that
defaults. On the modeling front, Mendoza and Yue (2012) construct a small open economy model of
sovereign default and business cycles: their model does not study the international transmission of
business cycles when default takes place, which is instead the main focus of our analysis.

3

The Model

This section describes the set-up of the model, solves for agents’ decisions, and characterizes the
equilibrium.

3.1

Environment

The world economy consists of two countries, Core and Periphery. In each country there are infinitelylived households, entrepreneurs (capital good producers), final good producers, bankers. All agents
of a given type are homogeneous. In addition, in each country there is a government that purchases
final goods financing its expenditures with debt and lump-sum taxes. In the world economy there is
one final good (tradeable internationally at no cost). The final good is produced using labor (nontradeable internationally) and capital.10 All markets are competitive. The Periphery and the Core
9
10

See also, e.g., Den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2004), Minetti (2007), and Iacoviello (2011).
In the tradition of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992), we do not allow for labor mobility between the two country

blocs. Labor mobility across countries can affect the responsiveness of labor supply to the wage rate within a country.

6

have symmetric preferences and technology. In what follows, we concentrate on the description of the
Periphery, denoting the variables of the Core country by an asterisk (*).11
Agents’ activities are as follows. In each period, households supply labor to entrepreneurs.
Households can save in three ways: they can invest in physical capital, which they rent to final good
producers; they can hold deposits in domestic banks; they can purchase noncontingent bonds issued by
the domestic government.12 Entrepreneurs receive loans from banks and invest into physical capital,
which they rent to final good producers. Final good producers produce the final good using labor and
capital. Bankers receive deposits, make loans to domestic entrepreneurs and purchase bonds issued by
the domestic and the foreign government. In each period, final good producers interact with households
in the labor market and in the market for capital and with entrepreneurs in the market for capital;
bankers interact with entrepreneurs in the credit market.

3.2

Households

There is a continuum of identical infinitely-lived households, who derive utility from consumption and
from leisure. The representative household maximizes its expected utility
)
(∞
X
t−s
β H u (CH,t , NH,t ) ,
Es

(1)

t=s

where Es denotes the expectation operator conditional on the information available in period s, β H
is the household’s subjective discount factor, CH,t is its consumption, NH,t is its labor supply. As
explained below, differences in the subjective discount factor across households, bankers, and entrepreneurs give rise to borrowing and lending.
Equation (2) shows the budget constraint of the representative household:
CH,t + Dt + BH,t + Tt

(2)

= RD,t Dt−1 + RB,t−1 BH,t−1 −

BH,t−1
ζ + Wt NH,t + ACH,t ,
Bt−1 t

where Dt are the household’s holdings of deposits in domestic banks, and BH,t are the holdings of
domestic government bonds. RD,t and RB,t−1 are, respectively, the gross interest rates on deposits
Accordingly, its effects may be partially captured through appropriate choice of the wage elasticity of labor supply.
11
Our model features perfect substitutability between goods produced at home and abroad.
12
For simplicity, we do not allow households to hold foreign government debt and foreign deposits. The amount of
foreign government bonds held by households directly (i.e., without the intermediation of the banking sector) is very
small.

7

and government bonds between period t−1 and period t. Notice that the return on deposits is assumed
to be predetermined. Wt is the wage rate, and Tt is a lump-sum tax imposed on households by the
government. In any period, after agents purchase government debt, the government may decide to
default. The term ζ t captures the loss borne by households from government default, where

BH,t−1
Bt−1

is

the share of outstanding government bonds Bt−1 held by households. ζ t takes non-negative values and
is equal to zero unless (partial) sovereign default occurs. Finally, the term ACH,t denotes quadratic
portfolio adjustment costs (we specify the functional form in the calibration section) which are paid
by the household to change the holdings of Dt , and to change the holdings of BH,t relative to a target
steady-state level. These costs make the households’ supply of deposits, bonds and capital less sensitive
to interest rate differentials.13
Using the first-order conditions for the household’s problem with respect to consumption and
government debt holdings, one obtains the following Euler condition:
¶
·µ
¸
ζ t+1 ∂u (CH,t+1 , NH,t+1 )
∂u (CH,t , NH,t )
= β H Et RB,t −
.
∂CH,t
Bt
∂CH,t+1

(3)

From this condition, it is easy to see that the expectation of default affects the effective rate of return
from bond holding. Accordingly, equilibrium interest rates will adjust to the extent that government
default is anticipated.
The remaining optimality conditions for the households with respect to bank deposits, capital
holdings and labor supply are standard. The households’ optimality conditions will imply that in
an interior steady state the households will demand both deposits and government bonds when their
return equals the households’ discount rate, 1/β H − 1.

3.3

Bankers

Bankers collect deposits from domestic households, make loans to domestic entrepreneurs, and hold
domestic and foreign government bonds. Since the banking sector is perfectly competitive, banks
take interest rates prevailing in the domestic and foreign bond and credit markets as given. The
13

We solve our model using first-order approximations around the deterministic steady state. In principle, given the

total supply of government debt, the relative holdings of households and banks could be solved for endogenously using the
methods described in Devereux and Sutherland (2011); this would in turn require specifying a richer stochastic structure
for our model economy, an approach that we do not pursue here.

8

representative banker maximizes expected discounted utility
"∞
#
X
t−s
Es
β B u (CB,t ) ,

(4)

t=s

where CB,t denotes the banker’s consumption, and β B is its discount factor. The flow budget constraint
of a banker is
CB,t + RD,t Dt−1 + Lt + BB,t + BF,t
∗
= Dt + RL,t Lt−1 + RB,t−1 BB,t−1 + RB,t−1
BF,t−1
BF,t−1 ∗
BB,t−1
ζt −
ζ t + ACB,t ,
−
∗
Bt−1
Bt−1

(5)

where Lt denotes loans to entrepreneurs, BB,t and BF,t are the banker’s holdings of domestic and
foreign government bonds respectively. The terms ζ t and ζ ∗t measure the losses that are borne by the
bankers in case of domestic and foreign sovereign debt defaults. Like for the household problem, ACB,t
denotes quadratic adjustment costs for changing Lt , BB,t , BF,t , and Dt .14
Bankers are subject to a capital constraint that specifies that the value of the loans they extend
cannot exceed a certain fraction of the value of their net worth. The capital constraint reads as:
Dt ≤ γ L Lt + BB,t + BF,t ,

(6)

where γ L < 1. We assume that the bankers’ discount factor β B is lower than the households’. This
relative impatience assumption implies that the bankers’ capital constraint binds with equality in a
neighborhood of the steady state.
The capital constraint in Equation 6 is aimed at capturing both regulatory-driven and marketdriven capital requirements. In the case of loans, the constraint puts a limit on the leverage of the
bank since it requires that, for each unit of loans extended, the bank set aside 1 − γ L units of goods
as bank capital. As a consequence, the equilibrium return on loans will be higher than the return
on government bonds (and higher than the cost of deposits) in order to compensate the bank for
the relative illiquidity/non-pledgeability of loans relative to government bonds. The assumption that
14

A possible extension of the bankers’ problem would allow for costs of managing loans. These costs would introduce a

wedge between the loan rate and the deposits rate, which would compensate banks for their intermediation cost. Without
time variation in this wedge, the model would be little changed. Furthermore, notice that intermediation costs are not
absent from our setup. The adjustment costs on bank loans capture costs of granting new loans or redeeming existing
ones.

9

γ L < 1 implies that loans and deposits are not perfect substitutes for the bank, and that loans provide,
loosely speaking, lower utility to the bank, the lower γ L is.
For the banker to be indifferent between financing its operations through loans and deposits,
the interest rate on loans adjusts in equilibrium to compensate the banker for the relative illiquidity
of loans. This happens because all bankers are identical (and subject to the same constraint) and
because markets are incomplete – only bankers have the technology to make loans. The nature of the
bank problem described here extends the closed-economy formulation of Iacoviello (2011) to an open
economy setting and to the case where banks can hold more than one asset. We also assume that
government bonds are fully collateralizable by the bank (that is, the bank can collect one dollar of
deposits and buy one dollar of government bonds without having to set aside any net worth), in line
with standard features of capital regulation.15
The modelling of the bankers’ problem in our model abstracts from various realistic features.
Liabilities consist of deposits only and there is no separate category of bank bonds.16 However, in the
absence of an explicit notion of asset liquidity, deposits closely resemble simple forms of bank bonds.
Thus, they can also be considered to be broadly representative of bank bonds. Another simplification
in our model is that banks cannot issue new outside equity. In practice, banks face several obstacles in
issuing new equity, especially during contractionary phases of the business cycle. First of all, existing
shareholders do not favor a dilution of the value of their equity holdings. Second, issuing new equity,
especially when market conditions are unfavorable, can be prohibitively costly.17 For example, following
a negative shock, banks with troubled portfolios have greater incentives to issue equity than banks with
higher quality portfolios. If investors cannot distinguish between troubled banks and healthy ones, a
standard lemon problem arises and equity issues may only occur with substantial price discounts.
15

The Basel accords imply that government bonds are attributed a zero weight risk in the calculation of regulatory

capital ratios. Currently, there is a debate on whether government bonds should be assigned a positive weight in the
computation of the TIER 1 ratio. For the households’ problem to have an interior solution, one requires that the
steady state return on government bonds equals the steady state return on deposits. Since bankers receive deposits from
households and also purchase government bonds, imposing that government bonds are not fully collateralizable for the
bank would imply that banks would not want to purchase government bonds, since deposits would always be cheaper as
a source of financing.
16
Similar assumptions are made in Hartley (1998), Hartley and Walsh (1991), Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2003)
and Goodfriend and McCallum (2007).
17
See for instance the Basel II Accord notes, paragraph 757c.

10

3.4

Entrepreneurs

In each country, there is a continuum of identical infinitely-lived entrepreneurs who maximize the
following expected lifetime utility
Es

"∞
X

#
β t−s
E u (CE,t ) ,

(7)

t=s

where β E is the entrepreneur’s subjective discount factor, and CE,t is the entrepreneur’s consumption.
Entrepreneurs are less patient than households and bankers.18 Entrepreneurs transform loans into
capital and into consumption using a one-for-one technology. The capital good they produce is rented
out to final good producers. In each period, the representative entrepreneur borrows from bankers,
produces and rents capital, repays debt, and consumes. The flow budget constraint is:
CE,t +Kt +RL,t Lt−1 = RK,t Kt−1 + (1 − δ) Kt−1 +Lt + ACE,t ,

(8)

where Kt is the capital stock owned by the entrepreneur, RL,t is the gross interest rate on loans
between period t − 1 and period t, RK,t is the rental rate of capital paid to entrepreneurs by final good
producers, and ACE,t are quadratic adjustment costs for changing K and Lt between one period and
the next. Entrepreneurs are subject to a constraint that limits their leverage to a fraction m of their
capital holdings:
Lt = ρE Lt−1 + (1 − ρE ) mKt ,

(9)

where the parameter ρE dictates how elastic is the loan limit to the current capital choice of the
entrepreneur.

3.5

Final good producers

The representative final good producer operates a Cobb-Douglas production function given by
α
Yt = F (At , Kt−1 , Nt ) = At Kt−1
Nt1−α ,
18

(10)

We assume that entrepreneurs are impatient relative to bankers and that bankers are impatient relative to households.

The assumption that discount factors are heterogeneous across agents is typically made in macroeconomic models with
financial imperfections (see, e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). Implicitly, we also assume that the markets are segmented,
so that banks are essential in order to intermediate funds between households who want to save and entrepreneurs who
want to borrow. These assumptions ensure that in the steady-state equilibrium there is borrowing and lending between
the household and the bankers (through deposits), and borrowing and lending between the bankers and the entrepreneurs
(through loans).

11

where Yt is the output of domestic final good, Kt is the capital stock rented from entrepreneurs, Nt
is the labor input and At denotes a stochastic process for productivity. Producers simply maximize
period by period revenues, make zero profits because of perfect competition and constant returns to
scale, and equate the marginal product of each factor to its rental cost.

3.6

Government

Government spending is financed through taxes on households and through debt. The government
budget constraint is
Gt + RB,t−1 Bt−1 = Bt + Tt + ζ t ,

(11)

where Gt is government spending and Bt is government debt. Taxes Tt are governed by the following
reaction function:
Tt = (1 − ρT ) tYt + ρT Tt−1 .

(12)

Government debt is held by households, domestic and foreign banks (that is, Bt = BH,t + BB,t + BF∗ t ).
We assume that the government is myopic and seeks to maximize current expenditure.19 The term ζ t
in equation (11) captures the partial default on previously contracted debt obligations. We restrict ζ t
to take only two values – either zero in the non-default state, or some positive value ζ if partial default
occurs.
Given its myopic objective, the government could in principle try to borrow as much as possible
today in order to maximize its expenditures Gt . We impose a limit to the government ability to raise
funds in financial markets, with the tightness of the constraint being related to the government debt
repayment history. The debt-ceiling constraint takes the form
Bt ≤ (1 − ρB ) bYt + ρB Bt−1 − pt .

(13)

The specification of the debt ceiling in Equation (13) follows a large body of literature in international
finance (for a review, see Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996, ch. 6).20 When the parameter ρB is zero, the
19

The literature frequently makes the assumption of government myopia in order to rationalize the observed high

levels of sovereign debt as well as other government behaviors. See, e.g., Grossman and Van Huyck (1988), and Grilli,
Masciandaro and Tabellini (1991); see also Rieth (2011) for a recent discussion and review of the literature.
20
According to Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, ch. 6), a possible theoretical foundation for this specification is that output
serves as collateral that backs sovereign debt. For example, in the event of default creditors can seize the output of their
sovereign debtor.

12

debt ceiling only depends on current output Yt and captures restrictions codified in the Maastricht
Treaty. Values of ρB greater than zero allow for dependence of the current debt ceiling on the limit in
the previous period. In the event of default, the term pt denotes a punishment triggered through an
immediate reduction in the debt ceiling, where

 (b̄ − b)Yt if default occurs,
pt =

ρp pt−1 otherwise.

(14)

The parameter ρp governs the persistence of the punishment. With ρp < 0, eventually pt returns
to zero. The parameters b and ζ are chosen so that, in the non-stochastic steady state, default is
punished with a reduction of the debt ceiling large enough to imply a fall in government spending.
Only when shocks, through their effects on Yt , lead to a large enough reduction in the debt ceiling
does the government find it convenient to default.21
This specification of the government’s problem allows to endogenize the government’s decision to
default. This endogenization relates the occurrence and persistence of default episodes to the evolution
of key macroeconomic variables.22

4

Calibration and Solution

We choose the relative size of technology in the two country blocs so that the relative size of output
between Periphery and Core is 1/3 in the non-stochastic steady state. This choice reflects the size of
nominal GDP at the end of 2010 for Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain relative to the rest of the euro
area together with the United Kingdom and Switzerland. Unless otherwise stated, we adopt the same
parametric choices for the two country blocs.
21

For instance, suppose that ρT = ρB = 0. The government maximum expenditure without default is
D
GN
= bYt − Rt−1 Bt−1 + tYt ,
t

while expenditure with default is
GD
t = bYt + ζ − Rt−1 Bt−1 + tYt .
ζ
, then GD > GN D , and the government finds it convenient to default.
If Yt < b−b
In this paper we only consider the effects of shocks starting from steady state allocations. When considering longer

22

sequences of innovations to the shock processes in the model, one would also have to check the additional constraint that
the amount of debt repudiated cannot the outstanding obligations.

13

We choose log utility over consumption for entrepreneurs and bankers. As for households,
following Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988), we choose a specification of the form:
µ
¶
1
1+η
u = log CH,t −
(NH,t )
.
1+η

(15)

The Households’ discount factor, β H , is set to 0.9925, implying an annual interest rate on deposits
and bonds of 3 percent, given that the unit of time is one quarter. η is set to 3, implying a Frisch
labor supply elasticity equal to 1/3. The discount factors of bankers and entrepreneurs are set equal
to 0.965 and 0.96, respectively.
On the production side, the depreciation rate δ is 0.03 and the capital share in production α is
´2
³
It
− 1 . We set φI = 5 in order
0.33. The investment adjustment cost function takes the form φI It−1
to mimic a relative volatility (standard deviation) of investment to output of around 3, like in the
´2
³
t
− 1 . We set
data. Entrepreneurs also pay a convex cost for adjusting loans of the form φLE LLt−1
φLE = 0.05. Capital adjustment costs are a typical feature of closed and open economy models. They
help dampen the volatility of investment over the business cycle (see, e.g., Mendoza, 1991). Changing
the capital stock of a business involves disruption costs for installation of new machines and plants.
Indeed, this process often entails delivery lags and time to install and/or build. Moreover, a costly
process of learning may be necessary to adapt to a new structure of production. Finally, secondary
markets for capital goods are often thin. This makes many projects irreversible, generating further
adjustment costs. We set the parameter governing entrepreneurs’ working capital constraint, m equal
to 0.90, and set ρE = 0.75.
Moving to the government, the debt ceiling parameter b̄ is 3.4 for the Periphery bloc and 2.38
for the Core bloc. These choices imply a debt-to-GDP ratio equal to 0.85 in the Periphery and 0.6
in the Core, in line with data from the IMF Economic Outlook for 2010. The value for b (the debt
ceiling parameter when punishment takes place) is instead 3 for the Periphery, and an arbitrarily low
value for the Core bloc. With the latter choice, the Core bloc never finds it optimal to default. In
the tax rate reaction function (equation 13), we set ρT = 0.5 and t = 0.24. As for the persistence of
the government debt ceiling, we set ρB = 0.5. In case of default, the punishment is governed by an
autoregressive process with persistence ρp = 0.5.

³

Dt
Dt−1

14

−1

´2

. We set φDH = 0.05.
´2
³
B
−
1
,
The adjustment cost function for sovereign bonds held by households takes the form φBH BH,t
H
Households pay a cost for adjusting deposits of the form φDH

where BH denotes the households’ steady-state holdings of government debt. We set φBH = 0.20,
an adjustment cost higher than for deposits, capturing the idea that deposits are somewhat easier to
adjust than bonds. In the bank problem, the adjustment cost takes the same form: the two parameters
measuring the convexity of the adjustment cost function, φBB and φBF , denote how costly it is for
the banks to adjust domestic and foreign bonds: we set φBB = 0.20 and φBF = 0.20, implying
equal adjustment costs for government bonds held by domestic banks, foreign banks, and households.
As shown in the next section, assuming equal adjustment costs implies that all holders of sovereign
bonds reduce their holdings by similar proportions in response to a tightening of the debt limit of
the government. We choose this calibration as the benchmark in order to balance two opposing
considerations. On the one hand, local banks may face smaller diseconomies of scale in liquidating
domestic assets in a short period of time, so that they may adjust their domestic portfolio more quickly
than their foreign counterparts (and reduce holdings of government debt by a relatively large amount
following sovereign default).23 On the other hand, the recent experience of Ireland, Italy, Portugal,
and Spain, where non-domestic holdings of government securities have declined substantially between
2009 and 2012,24 hints at the possibility that foreign lending might fall more than domestic lending
should default occur in one of these countries. In the next section, we perform robustness analysis
around these parameters.

´2
³
t
−1
Banks also pay a cost for adjusting deposits and loans. The cost functions are φDB DDt−1
´2
³
t
− 1 for loans. We set φDB = φLB = 0.05. Portfolio adjustment costs
for deposits, and φLB LLt−1
capture transaction and trading costs associated with buying and selling financial assets. These costs
are frequently assumed in the literature and are reputed to be important for explaining sluggish
portfolio adjustment and limited participation to financial markets (see, e.g., Cooley and Quadrini,
1999, for a discussion).
To apportion the steady-state holdings of government debt to households, Periphery banks,
and Core banks, we use several data sources on debt holdings of the Periphery. The key numbers
are reported in Table 1 and refer to end of 2010. We begin with debt held by Core banks: data
23
24

See Iacoviello and Minetti (2006) for a similar idea and related discussion.
See for instance our Figure 1 as well as the note by J.P.Morgan (2012): “A primer on Euro area government debt

markets”. However, while private foreign lending seems to fall in the wake of foreign default, other studies (for instance
Mendoza and Yue, 2012) find that foreign lending inclusive of official holdings tends to rise after default.

15

on government debt held by foreign counterparties25 show that 49.7 percent of the Periphery debt is
held outside the Periphery (either by European or by non-European financial institutions). Absent a
country-by-country breakdown, we apportion this 49.7 percent to European and non-European financial institutions using the Consolidated Banking Statistics of the BIS, which show that 84 percent of
the Periphery sovereign debt held by banks is held by European (Core) banks.26 Accordingly, we fix
at 41.7 percent (that is, 84 percent times 49.7 percent) the share of public debt of the Periphery held
by the Core bloc.
Next, we compute debt held by Periphery households. Using data from national flow of funds
accounts, we estimate that 10.8 percent of government debt is held directly by local households. We
increment this percentage by the holdings of non-European financial institutions, which equal 8 percent
of the total debt of the Periphery, so that the share of public debt of the Periphery held by Periphery
households is 18.8 percent in our calibration. The remainder of the Periphery government debt, 39.5
percent, is allocated to Periphery banks.
The calibration of the households’ holding of government debt for the Core European bloc is
based on national flow of funds accounts for France, Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
11 percent of their collective sovereign debt is held by households in those countries.27 To ensure
balanced trade in steady state, we force the foreign debt of the Core countries held by Periphery
banks to match the level of its counterpart. The remainder of the outstanding debt of the Periphery
European bloc, 70 percent of the total, is assigned to domestic banks.
For the parameters governing bank leverage, we set γ L = 0.86. Given the relative shares of
loans and bonds in the bank balance sheet, this parameter implies a steady state bank capital to asset
ratio of 0.10 (see for instance ECB, 2010).
Moving to the solution method, we use a piece-wise linear solution approach as is common in
the expanding literature on the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.28 We treat the possibility
of default as an alternative regime. The same numerical method can handle occasionally binding
25
26

These data are from the World Bank Quarterly External Debt Statistics.
For the European bloc, we selected the banks of all the countries in the euro area (excluding Periphery) that respond

to the BIS. The list of these countries included: Belgium, France, Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The
non-european bloc included all other countries in the BIS database (not including the Periphery).
27
For both the Periphery and the Core, when national flow of funds data did not split out explicitly the holdings of
government debt held by households, we used broader holdings of securities excluding shares.
28
For instance, see Eggertson and Woodford (2003) and Bodenstein, Guerrieri and Gust (2010).

16

constraints or regime switches that depend on the evolution of endogenous variables. In case of no
default, the linearized system of necessary conditions for an equilibrium can be expressed as
A1 Et Xt+1 + A0 Xt + A−1 Xt−1 = 0,

(16)

where A1 , A0 , and A−1 are square matrices of coefficients, conformable with the vector X. In turn, X
is a vector of all the variables in the model expressed in deviation from the steady state for the regime
without default. Similarly, in case of default, the linearized system can be expressed as
A∗1 Et Xt+1 + A∗0 Xt + A∗−1 Xt−1 + C ∗ = 0,

(17)

where C ∗ is a vector of constants. In the absence of default, we use standard linear solution methods
to express the decision rule for the model as
Xt = PXt−1 .

(18)

With default, we use a guess-and-verify approach. We shoot back towards the initial conditions, from
the first period when no default is guessed. For example, to check for no default in period t + 1 and
default in period t, the decision rule between period t − 1 and t can be expressed as:
A∗1 PXt + A∗0 Xt + A∗−1 Xt−1 + C ∗ = 0,
¡
¢
Xt = − (A∗1 P + A∗0 )−1 A∗−1 Xt−1 + C ∗ .

(19)

We proceed in a similar fashion to construct the time-varying decision rules for the case when default
is guessed to last multiple periods or to happen starting in periods beyond t.
Under this solution, government bond yields reflect the possibility of default only when default
is perfectly anticipated. Since anticipated future defaults imply a default premium that completely
compensates bond holders for default, we conjecture and verify that default is only chosen for one
period in response to contractionary unanticipated shocks. Intuitively, if anticipated, default will be
priced into bond yields and the government will not find it convenient to default.

5

Results

We are interested in investigating the impact of unexpected shocks that induce partial default by the
government of the Periphery. Our objective is to address the following questions: how do shocks to
17

a government’s debt service capacity propagate internationally? To what extent can they trigger a
global credit crunch? And what are the factors that shape banks’ responses to the government default
shock, especially the relative contractions of loans and government bond holdings? To answer these
questions, in this section we report the impulse responses of our model economy to country-specific
shocks to productivity. To establish a benchmark, we first consider a scenario in which the shock is
sufficiently small so that the government does not default on its debt obligations. Then, we turn to
the scenario in which the shock is large enough that the government defaults.

5.1

No Default

To isolate the transmission of country-specific productivity shocks, we first consider the effects of a 1
percent decrease in the process At in the Periphery. The autoregressive persistence is set to 0.95.
As households anticipate a future rebound in output, consumption drops less than output up
front, reflecting households’ incentive to smooth consumption in response to the shock. Accordingly,
the supply of households’ savings contracts. Households’ deposits and holdings of bonds fall by roughly
similar amounts.
To understand the response of equilibrium bond rates, one must also take into account the
government supply of bonds. Under the benchmark calibration, the debt ceiling is sufficiently elastic
with respect to output that the drop in supply exceeds the drop in savings at constant interest rates.
Therefore, to reduce demand for bonds and reestablish the equilibrium in the bonds market, the yield
on public debt falls. Lower interest rates on bonds lead banks to skew their portfolio towards loans
to entrepreneurs, cushioning the drop in investment in the Periphery and leading to an expansion in
investment abroad. In this respect, the implications for the spillover effects of country-specific shocks
in our baseline model with no default are closely aligned with those that obtain in an international
real business cycle model with complete markets, in which resource reallocation implies that shocks in
one country do not generate international comovement. We therefore consider in the next subsection
whether or not introducing default can generate output comovement across countries.

5.2

Default

We now turn to the scenario where government default occurs. Figure 3 shows the effects of a 5 percent
decline in technology. The solid lines show the piece-wise linear solution that reflects the partial default
18

on government debt in the Periphery. The dashed lines show the response in a model that excludes
the possibility of default, but is otherwise identical to the benchmark.
The amount of default is governed by the parameter ζ in the budget constraint of the government.
We choose ζ to mimic a scenario somewhat worse than the March 2012 Greek debt restructuring, when
the face value of Greek sovereign debt held by private investors was cut by about 100 billion euros.
Given our calibration, such a scenario would correspond to a (partial) default equal to roughly 4
percent of the annual GDP of Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain, our periphery bloc, and, taking into
account country sizes, 1.5 percent of the GDP for the Core. In our experiment, we size ζ so that the
non-repayment is equal to 10 percent of GDP in the Periphery. As a consequence the losses for Core
banks amount to about 1.25 percent of Core GDP. Ultimately, the main impact of the default on core
European economies is to erode bank capital by about 80 billion euros.
As shown in Figure 3, sovereign default initially cushions the contraction in government spending
in the periphery – in the first period, the black line in panel 3 is above the dashed line. Mechanically, the
punishment for default is in the form of a fixed proportional reduction in the debt ceiling. Default occurs
because the contraction in output lowers the debt ceiling even in the absence of default. Accordingly,
as the economy contracts, the punishment shrinks in absolute terms and default implies a rise in
government spending on the margin.
As the punishment is persistent, and the debt ceiling is lag dependent, government debt initially
continues to shrink. Then, as output gradually recovers, the government ability to borrow also bounces
back. In spite of a reduced ability to borrow, lower interest payments eventually allow government
spending to expand above the steady state level.
The evolution of investment and capital in the Periphery is closely linked to the behavior of loan
rates. In turn, loan rates are influenced by two opposing effects, a portfolio substitution effect and a
hit to the equity position of banks stemming from the default. To explain the portfolio substitution
effect, it is helpful to consider sovereign bond rates. As seen above, even without default, a negative
productivity shock lowers the returns on government bonds, because the supply of bonds falls more
than the demand. Furthermore, in our setting, no further default is anticipated for the future. By
curtailing the government’s ability to issue debt, the punishment from default deepens the initial drop
in bond yields. Due to lower yields, Periphery banks find it optimal to substitute away from government
bonds into loans to entrepreneurs. The equity effect stems from banks’ direct losses when the default

19

rate rises above what expected when they invested in bonds. This loss induces a decline in banks’
capitalization and in turn, in the presence of binding capital requirements, generates a contraction in
credit supply. Overall, the equity effect dominates. Accordingly loan rates rise on the margin and
capital and investment fall below the level that would have prevailed in the absence of default.
Similar considerations apply to loan rates in the Core. The capitalization of Core banks shrinks.
However, as Periphery sovereign debt accounts for a smaller fraction of the portfolio of Core banks, the
direct hit from default on their equity position is smaller. Faced with the need to restore their target
position for government debt, Core banks divert part of their funds away from lending to entrepreneurs.
Accordingly, Core loan rates (not plotted) rise and, returning to Figure 3, entrepreneurs’ investment
and capital contract. Hence, the overall spillover effects of sovereign default on foreign output are
negative. In our benchmark calibration, output drops nearly 0.4 percent relative to no-default case
when default occurs.
As the large productivity shock pushes output in the Periphery bloc down, the resource constraint implies that the expansions in investment and government spending described above need to be
counterbalanced by a contraction in absorption elsewhere. Panel 4 of Figure 3 shows that the default
pushes down Core consumption. Furthermore the bottom panel of Figure 4 shows that the counterpart
to the debt repudiation is a contraction (after a short-lived increase) in Periphery net exports.

5.3

Decomposing the Marginal Effects of Default into Debt Repudiation and Punishment

How large and persistent are the effects of a government default shock and their international spillovers?
Figure 5 presents the marginal effects of default. The solid lines in that figure are the difference between
the 5 percent productivity contraction in the Periphery bloc with and without default – respectively
the solid and dashed lines in Figure 3. As shown in Figure 5, after controlling for the decline in output
that would happen under no default, both Core and Periphery output contract after default. In the
baseline calibration, they are almost 0.5 percent below baseline after two years.
Figure 5 also presents a decomposition of the marginal effects of default into two components.
One component is the debt repudiation effect, the other component is the punishment effect, that is,
the marginal effect of the reduction in the debt ceiling.29
29

The marginal effect of debt repudiation (without punishment) is computed as the difference between the responses

20

In our model, the punishment scheme ensures that defaults are rare events, associated with
large declines in output. An alternative way of reconciling this observation is to rely on a punishment
scheme that involves a utility loss for the government when default occurs. Under such a scheme,
the marginal effects of default would then be limited to marginal effects of the debt repudiation, the
dashed lines in Figure 5.
The marginal effects of debt repudiation imply a fall in output both in the Periphery and Core
blocs. There are three main channels that explain the relative size of the output loss in the two blocs:
a hit to Periphery household wealth, a hit to the equity position of banks, and portfolio rebalancing.
With multiple agents holding Periphery sovereign debt, sizing the hit to the wealth of Periphery
households depends importantly on the government spending rule and on the tax rate reaction function.
With taxes largely unchanged, as implied by the tax rate reaction function in Equation (12), and with
an expanding level of government spending, the wealth effect of default on Periphery households
is negative – the interest payments that would have gone to households are now used to push up
government spending. The hit to wealth lowers the consumption of Periphery households. However,
consumption smoothing motives induce Periphery households to spread the fall in consumption through
time. Savings decline and bank deposits are reduced. In turn, lower deposits coupled with binding
capital requirements for banks, reduce the supply of loans and bring investment down.
The debt repudiation has another important effect. It erodes the equity positions of Periphery
and Core banks. Lending declines, capital stocks shrink. With the decline in capital, hours worked go
down, both because there is a contraction in labor demand, and because the real wage declines.
In sum, debt repudiation pushes consumption, investment, and output down in both the Periphery and Core blocs. The effects on output in the Periphery are slightly larger, even accounting for
relative sizes, because of the additional negative wealth effect on Periphery households.
Figure 5 also shows that the reduction in the debt ceiling buffets the increase in Periphery
government spending, keeps down lending rates (at least on impact) and allows Periphery investment
and consumption (at least eventually) to expand on the margin. The dotted lines shown in the figure,
have an interpretation that goes beyond the decomposition presented. They can also be interpreted
as the responses to a shock that lowers the debt ceiling of the Periphery government. The shock is
governed by the lower branch of Equation 14 and the innovation to the process (not shown in the
to a 5 percent productivity shock with and without default in a model in which b = b̄

21

equation) would be sized to 9.6 percent of Periphery steady-state output.

5.4

Sensitivity Analysis

Figures 6, 7, and 8 present sensitivity analysis. For ease of comparison, in those three figures, the
solid lines report again the marginal effects of default under the benchmark calibration, as presented
in Figure 5. The broken lines show the marginal effects of default under alternative calibrations.
Our first sensitivity experiment consists of modifying the degree of international integration
of bond markets, i.e., the financial openness of the two countries. Figure 6 considers an alternative
calibration that implies financial autarky, that is, banks do not hold foreign government bonds. We
achieve autarky by reassigning the Periphery debt held in the Core bloc to Periphery banks and pushing
up the adjustment costs on foreign debt – we set φBF = 100. Imposing financial autarky effectively
shuts down the international transmission of shocks through the financial sector. As the figure shows,
compared to the baseline calibration, the spillover effects of default from the Periphery to the Core
bloc fades away. Accordingly, the response of output in the periphery (panel 7) is essentially flat.
These results confirm the centrality of financial integration through the banking sector in accounting
for the sizable spillover effects of sovereign default.
Figure 7 considers two alternative calibrations for the portfolio adjustment costs on the holdings
of sovereign bonds. Under our benchmark calibration, the parameters governing the adjustment cost
are the same for domestic and foreign holders (φBB = 0.2, φBH = 0.2, and φBF = 0.2). The dashed
lines in the figure show the effects of imposing a lower adjustment cost for foreign than for domestic
bonds, which could capture greater facility of foreign agents to reduce their bond holdings. In that
case, we set φBB = 0.50, φBH = 0.50, and φBF = 0.10. Under this alternative, Periphery banks and
households attempt to maintain their holdings of Periphery government bonds at the levels prevailing
prior to default. By contrast Core banks shift away from lower-yielding government bonds of the
Periphery. In the Core, this portfolio reallocation frees up funds that can be redirected to lending:
loan rates fall and investment, capital, and output expand. By contrast, the implied output costs of
default in the Periphery are much larger. Output falls as much as 1.5 percent below baseline after two
years.
Figure 7 also considers an alternative calibration that makes the adjustment costs on the holdings
of sovereign bonds smaller for domestic holders than for foreign, which could capture greater facility of

22

domestic agents to reduce their bond holdings. Under that calibration, we set φBB = 0.10, φBH = 0.10,
and φBF = 0.50. The results for this alternative are shown by the dotted lines. This configuration
of adjustment costs generates a beggar-thy-neighbor effect of sovereign default: as Core banks try to
restore their pre-default holdings of government debt, they reduce lending in their own economy, thus
exacerbating the decline in output in the Core, while boosting the recovery in the Periphery.
Figure 8 presents sensitivity analysis relative to the choice of preferences. The alternative
considered for the period utility function is a familiar specification which is additively separable in
consumption and labor supply and follows the general form spelled out in King, Plosser, and Rebelo
(1988):
u = log CH,t −

1+η
NH,t

1+η

.

(20)

The benchmark preferences exclude a wealth effect on labor supply. By contrast, the alternative
preferences in Figure 8, allow for wealth effects to influence labor supply. When wealth declines,
labor supply expands. Under this alternative preference specification, an expansion in labor supply
buffets the contraction in output both in the Periphery and Core blocs. While this alternative is
not implausible, in a model like ours that excludes labor market frictions, we prefer the benchmark
specification that links hours worked more closely to supply factors.

6

Conclusions

This paper has investigated the international transmission of government default shocks through the
banking system. We have considered a two-country model where banks grant loans and invest in
government bonds both domestically and abroad.
Our results reveal that sovereign default generates output comovement across countries. In our
benchmark experiment, a sovereign default of 10 percent of Periphery GDP reduces GDP in the Core
and the Periphery by almost half a percent after two years. Larger default amounts could cause even
larger declines in economic activity. For instance, given a rough linearity of the effects, a default equal
to 30 percent of Periphery GDP could induce a 1.5 percent decline in the GDP in Europe. We believe
that these estimates are conservative: for instance, our model lacks nominal rigidities, and confidence
channels that could make the spillovers even larger.
A key advantage of our analysis is that we can parse cause and effect, which allows us to isolate

23

the marginal contribution of default over and above the effects of a large recession. Achieving this feat
is much harder with direct empirical analysis.
The emphasis of the analysis has been on the solvency of governments and its impact on the
credit market in the presence of tight bank capital requirements. However, the increase in the sovereign
default risk of periphery countries has also turned into a major liquidity crisis in the European interbank
market. As a result of the increase in the riskiness of their portfolios, the banks of core European
countries have experienced a liquidity “freeze”in the interbank market.
A pressing step for future research is to embed an interbank market into our environment and
allow for the presence of a lender of last resort. Such an analysis would help shed light on the way the
interventions of central banks can shape the transmission of a credit crunch induced by a sovereign debt
crisis, for example by affecting banks’ asset portfolio choices. During the current crisis, for instance,
after engaging initially in purchases of sovereign bonds in the secondary market, the European Central
Bank has shifted to a policy of liquidity provision to banks. It has granted large amounts of loans
to banks, accepting government bonds as collateral, including bonds of governments at higher risk
of default. As a result of these Long Term Refinancing Operations, banks have allegedly tilted their
portfolios towards government bonds. These operations have alleviated the funding pressures for
governments, but it is hard to size their effects on the funding costs for firms. We leave the analysis
of this and other issues for future research.

24

References
[1] Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F.E. Kydland (1992) “International real business cycles,” Journal
of Political Economy 100, 745–775.
[2] Baxter, M., and M. J. Crucini (1995) “Business cycles and the asset structure of foreign trade,”
International Economic Review 36, 821–854.
[3] Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999) “The financial accelerator in a quantitative
business cycle framework,” in: J. B. Taylor & M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics
1, 1, pp. 1341–1393.
[4] Bodenstein, M., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2010) “Oil shocks and the zero bound on nominal interest rates,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion
Papers, Number 1009.
[5] Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003) “The great depression and the FriedmanSchwartz hypothesis,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 1119-1215.
[6] Dedola, L. and G. Lombardo (2012) “Financial frictions, financial integration and the international
propagation of shocks,” Economic Policy 70, 319–359.
[7] Den Haan, W. J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2003) “Liquidity flows and fragility of business
enterprises,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1215–1241.
[8] De Paoli, B., G. Hoggarth, and V. Saporta (2006) “Costs of sovereign default”. Bank of England
Financial Stability Paper. No. 1.
[9] Devereux, M. B. and A. Sutherland (2011) “Country portfolios in open economy macro-models,”
Journal of the European Economic Association 9, 337–369.
[10] Devereux, M. B. and J. Yetman (2010) “Leverage constraints and the international transmission
of shocks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (s1), 71–105.
[11] Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz (1981) “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
analysis,” Review of Economic Studies 48, 289–309.

25

[12] ECB (2010). Financial stability review (June 2010), European Central Bank.
[13] Eggertsson, G., and M. Woodford (2003) “The zero bound on interest rates and optimal monetary
policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34, 139–235.
[14] Gerali, A., S. Neri, L. Sessa, and F. M. Signoretti (2010) “Credit and banking in a dsge model of
the euro area,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (s1), 107–141.
[15] Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011) “A model of unconventional monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, 17–34.
[16] Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010) “Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
analysis,” in: B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics 1, 3,
pp. 547–599.
[17] Gilchrist, S. (2004) “Financial markets and financial leverage in a two-country world economy,”
Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies Book Series, in: L. A. Ahumada, J. R. Fuentes,
N. Loayza and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, eds., Banking market structure and monetary policy 1, 7, pp.
27–58, Central Bank of Chile.
[18] Gilchrist, S., J. O. Hairault, and H. Kempf (2002) “Monetary policy and the financial accelerator
in a monetary union,” European Central Bank w.p. 175.
[19] Goodfriend, M., and B.McCallum (2007) “Banking and interest rates in monetary policy analysis:
A quantitative exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1480-1507.
[20] Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988) “Investment, capacity utilization, and
the real business cycle,” American Economic Review, 78, 402–17.
[21] Grilli, V., D. Masciandaro, and G. Tabellini (1991) “Political and monetary institutions and public
financial policies in the industrial countries,” Economic Policy, 6, 2, 341-392.
[22] Grossman, H. I., and J. B. Van Huyck (1988) “Sovereign debt as a contingent claim: Excusable,
default, repudiation, and reputation,” American Economic Review, 78, 5, 1088-1097.
[23] Hartley, P. (1998) “Inside money as a source of investment finance”,Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 30, 2, 193-217.
26

[24] Hartley, P., and C. Walsh (1991) “Inside money and monetary neutrality”, Journal of Macroeconomics, 13, 3, 395-416.
[25] Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2002) “Financial autarky and international business cycles,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 49, 601–627.
[26] Iacoviello, M. (2011) “Financial business cycles”, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
[27] Iacoviello, M., and R. Minetti (2006) “International business cycles with domestic and foreign
lenders,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 2267–2282.
[28] Kamber, G. and C. Thonissen (2012) “Financial intermediation and the international business
cycle: The case of small countries with large banks,” Working Paper, Reserve Bank of New
Zealand.
[29] Kehoe, P. J., and F. Perri (2002) “International business cycles with endogenous incomplete
markets,” Econometrica 70, 907–928.
[30] Kalemli-Ozcan, S., E. Papaioannou, and F. Perri (2011) “Global banks and crisis transmission,”
Working paper, University of Houston.
[31] King, R.G., C.I. Plosser, and S.T. Rebelo (1988) “Production, growth and business cycles : I.
The basic neoclassical model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 195–232.
[32] Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997) “Credit cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 211–248.
[33] Kollmann, R., Z. Enders, and G. Muller (2011) “Global banking and international business cycles,”
European Economic Review 55, 407–426.
[34] Levy Yeyati, E., and U. Panizza (2011). “The elusive costs of sovereign defaults,” Journal of
Development Economics, 94. 1, 95-105.
[35] Mendoza, E. and V. Quadrini (2010) “Financial globalization, financial crisis and contagion,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 24–39.
[36] Mendoza, E. and V. Yue (2012). “A general equilibrium model of sovereign default and business
cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 2, 889-946.
27

[37] Minetti, R. (2007) “Bank capital, firm liquidity, and project quality,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2584–2594.
[38] Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (1997), Foundations of International Macroeconomics, Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press.
[39] Olivero, M. P. (2010) “Market power in banking, countercyclical margins and the international
transmission of business cycles,” Journal of International Economics 80, 292–301.
[40] Paasche, B. (2001) “Credit constraints and international financial crises,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 48, 623–650.
[41] Perri, F. and V. Quadrini (2011) “International recessions,” NBER working paper 17201.
[42] Rieth, Malte (2011) “Myopic governments and welfare-enhancing debt limits,” European Central
Bank w.p. 1308.
[43] Shambaugh, J. C (2012) “The euro’s three crises,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
[44] Sturzenegger, F. (2004) “Toolkit for the analysis of debt problems,”. Journal of Restructuring
Finance 1 (1), 201–203.
[45] The Economist (2012) “Oat cuisine,” February 11th.
[46] Ueda, K. (2012) “Banking globalization and international business cycles: Cross-border chained
credit contracts and financial accelerators,” Journal of International Economics 86, 1–16.

28

Table 1: Sovereign Debt in the European Periphery (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain), broken down
by holder (Periphery Households, Periphery Banks, Core Banks)
Country

Italy

Spain

Portugal

Greece

Periphery

Holdings of Sovereign Debt, end-2010
Dom. HH

Non-Euro Banks

Euro Banks

Dom. Banks

Total

Bn Euros

184.3

149.1

649.2

555.5

1,538.2

% of GDP

11.9

9.6

41.8

35.8

99

% of Total

12.0

9.7

42.2

36.1

100

Bn Euros

46.6

46.2

240.4

189.2

522.4

% of GDP

4.4

4.4

22.9

18.0

49.7

% of Total

8.9

8.8

46.0

36.2

100

Bn Euros

22.7

9.1

85.8

36.4

154.0

% of GDP

13.1

5.3

49.7

21.1

89.2

% of Total

14.7

5.9

55.7

23.7

100

Bn of Euros

19.9

9.3

169.7

129.8

328.6

% of GDP

8.6

4.0

73.7

56.4

142.8

% of Total

6.1

2.8

51.6

39.5

100

273.5

204.2

1,059.8

1,005.7

2,543.2

% of GDP

9.1

6.8

35.2

33.4

84.6

% of Total

10.8

8.0

41.7

39.5

100

Bn of Euros

29

Figure 1: French Banks and Sovereign Debt of Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain.

0.4

0.8
French Banks Holdings of Periphery Debt/Total Periphery Debt
French Banks Holdings of Periphery Debt/Total Assets of French Banks
French Banks Holdings of Periphery Debt/French Banks Holdings of French Debt

0.7

0.3

0.6

0.25

0.5

0.2

0.4

0.15

0.3

0.1
0
1

0.2
02

0.05

0.1

0

0
2005Q1 2005Q3 2006Q1 2006Q3 2007Q1 2007Q3 2008Q1 2008Q3 2009Q1 2009Q3 2010Q1 2010Q3 2011Q1 2011Q3

30

Holdings
gs Periphery Debt/Holdings French Debt

ngs Periphery Debt/Total Periphery Debt
Holdings
ings Periphery Debt/Total Bank Assets
Holldings

0.35

Figure 2: Decline in Productivity in the Periphery – No Default
1. Periphery, Output

2. Periphery, Capital
0

−0.8

−0.2

−1

−0.4

% change

% change

−0.9

−1.1
−1.2
5

10

15

−0.6
−0.8

20

5

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

10

15

20

4. Periphery, Household Consumption

−0.5
−0.5
% change

−1.5
−2

PPt change, annualized

5

10

15

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of annualized SS output)
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7
−0.8
−0.9
5

10

15

−0.55
−0.6

20

20

PPt change, annualized

% change

−1

15

20

−0.01
−0.02
−0.03
−0.04
−0.05
5

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Capital

0.03

0.08

0.02

0.06
% change

% change

10

6. Periphery, Loan Rate (5−year)

7. Core, Output

0.01

5

5

10
Quarters

15

20

0.04
0.02
5

31

10
Quarters

Figure 3: Decline in Productivity in the Periphery – Default
1. Periphery, Output

2. Periphery, Capital
0

−4

−2

−5

% change

% change

−4.5

−5.5
−6
5

10

15

20

5

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

20

−3
% change

0
−5
−10
10

15

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of SS annualized output)
−4
−6
−8
−10
−12
5

10

15

−3.5
−4

20

20

5

PPt change, annualized

% change

15

−2.5

5

PPt change, annualized

10

4. Periphery, Household Consumption

5

7. Core, Output

10

15

20

6. Periphery, Loan Rate (5−Year)
0
−0.1
−0.2
5

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Capital
0.4

0.1

0.2

0

0
% change

% change

−4

−0.1
−0.2
5

10
Quarters

15

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6

20

Benchmark: Default
No Default

32

5

10
Quarters

Periphery, Sovereign Borrowing (share of annualized output)
0
−2
−4
−6
−8
Total G. Borrowing
Foreign Borr.
Borr. from HHs
Borr. from Banks

−10
−12
−14

Percentage Point Change from S.S.

Percentage Point Change from S.S.

Figure 4: Decline in Productivity in the Periphery – Default

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Periphery, Net Exports (share of output)
6
Benchmark: Default
No Default

4
2
0
−2
−4
−6
−8

2

4

6

8

10
Quarters

33

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 5: A Demposition of the Marginal Effects of Default in the Periphery
1. Periphery, Output

2. Periphery, Capital
2

0.5
0
% change

% change

0
−0.5
−1
5

10

15

−2

20

5

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

10

15

20

4. Periphery, Household Consumption

40

0

% change

0
−20
−40

PPt change, annualized

5

10

15

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of SS annualized output)
0

−5

−10
5

10

15

−1

20

5

7. Core, Output

15

20

6. Periphery, Loan Rate (5−Year)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
5

0

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2
−0.3
5

10

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Capital
0.2

% change

% change

−0.5

20

PPt change, annualized

% change

20

10
Quarters

15

−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

20

5

Default (Benchmark)
Debt Repudiation
Punishment

34

10
Quarters

1. Periphery, Output

2. Periphery, Capital

0

0
−1

−0.5

% change

% change

Figure 6: Marginal Effects of Default in the Periphery– No Foreign Debt

−1
5

10

15

−2
−3

20

5

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

10

15

20

4. Periphery, Household Consumption

10

−1

0

PPt change, annualized

% change

5

5

10

15

−2
−4
−6
−8
5

10

15

−3

20

5

7. Core, Output
0

10

15

20

6. Periphery, Loan Rate (5−Year)
0.4
0.2
0

5

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Capital
−0.2
% change

−0.1
% change

−2.5

20

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of SS annualized output)

−10

−2

PPt change, annualized

% change

−1.5

−0.2
−0.3
5

10
Quarters

15

−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

20

5
Benchmark
No Foreign Debt

35

10
Quarters

Figure 7: Marginal Effects of Default in the Periphery – Alternative Portfolio Adjustment Costs
2. Periphery, Capital
1

0

0

−0.5

−1

% change

% change

1. Periphery, Output
0.5

−1
5

10

15

5

15

20

−0.5

% change

5

0
5

10

15

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of SS annualized output)
0

−5

−10
5

10

15

−1

−1.5

20

20

5

PPt change, Annualized

% change

10

4. Periphery, Household Consumption

10

PPt change, Annualized

−3

20

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

7. Core, Output

15

20

6. Periphery, Bond Rate (5−year AR)
0.2
0
−0.2
5

0

0

−0.2

−0.5

−0.4
5

10

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Capital

% change

% change

−2

10
Quarters

15

20

−1
5

Benchmark
Lower Portfolio AC for Foreign
Higher Portfolio AC for Foreign

36

10
Quarters

Figure 8: Marginal Effects of Default in the Periphery – King-Plosser-Rebelo Preferences
1. Periphery, Output

2. Periphery, Capital

1
−0.5
% change

% change

0.5
0
−0.5
5

10

15

−1
−1.5

20

5

3. Periphery, Government Spending
(share of SS output)

% change

5

5

10

15

0

−5

−10
10

15

−0.5
−1

20

5. Periphery, Public Debt
(share of SS annualized output)

5

0

20

5

PPt change, annualized

% change
PPt change, annualized

20

0.5

7. Core, Output
0.2

10

15

20

6. Periphery, Loan Rate (5−Year)
0.2

0.1

0
5

10

15

20

15

20

8. Core, Hours Worked
0.2
0
% change

0
% change

15

4. Periphery, Household Consumption
1

10

0

10

−0.2

5

10
Quarters

15

20

−0.2
−0.4
5

Benchmark, GHH Preferences
KPR Preferences

37

10
Quarters

