NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAVING TEENS: USING A POLICY DISCONTINUITY TO ESTIMATE THE EFFECTS
OF MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY
Bruce D. Meyer
Laura R. Wherry
Working Paper 18309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18309
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

This work was supported by the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development. We
would like to thank Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Miriam Kalichman, Genevieve Kenney, Lindsey Leininger,
Tony Lo Sasso, Karin Rhodes and participants at seminars at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
the 2011 Census Research Data Center Conference, Purdue University, Syracuse University, University
of Michigan and the Midwest Health Economics Conference for their comments and Negasi Beyene,
Clint Carter, Karen Davis and Frank Limehouse for their assistance in accessing the restricted data
used in this project at the Chicago and Michigan Census Research Data Centers. Laura Wherry acknowledges
funding support from the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality National Training Fellowship
in Health Services Research and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health & Society Scholars
program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce D. Meyer and Laura R. Wherry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility
Bruce D. Meyer and Laura R. Wherry
NBER Working Paper No. 18309
August 2012, Revised January 2013
JEL No. I13,I14
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a policy discontinuity to identify the immediate and long-term effects of public health
insurance coverage during childhood. Our identification strategy exploits a unique feature of several
early Medicaid expansions that extended eligibility only to children born after September 30, 1983.
This feature resulted in a large discontinuity in the lifetime years of Medicaid eligibility of children
at this birthdate cutoff. Those with family incomes at or just below the poverty line had close to five
more years of eligibility if they were born just after the cutoff than if they were born just before. We
use this discontinuity in eligibility to measure the impact of public health insurance on mortality by
following cohorts of children born on either side of this cutoff from childhood through early adulthood.
We examine changes in rates of mortality by the underlying causes of death, distinguishing between
deaths due to internal and external causes. We also examine outcomes separately for black and white
children. Our analysis shows that black children were more likely to be affected by the Medicaid expansions
and gained twice the amount of eligibility as white children. We find a substantial effect of public
eligibility during childhood on the later life mortality of black children at ages 15-18. The estimates
indicate a 13-20 percent decrease in the internal mortality rate of black teens born after September
30, 1983. We find no evidence of an improvement in the mortality of white children under the expansions.
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
Laura R. Wherry
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
lwherry@uchicago.edu

I. Introduction

Interest in public health insurance in the U.S. is motivated by the relatively poor
health of children in families with low incomes. Not only are children from poorer
families more likely to be born in poor health, but the relative health of these children
worsens with age (Case, et al. 2002). To address this disparity in child health, U.S. policy
has largely focused on increasing access to medical care for children through expansions
in publicly provided health insurance.1 These expansions aim to promote health among
children by providing timely access to child health services that meet national standards
for pediatric care. A major focus is preventive care and the early diagnosis and treatment
of the physical and mental health needs of low-income children.
There is strong evidence that public coverage improves utilization of medical care
for children. Several papers have documented an increase in preventive care for children
under public health insurance expansions in the form of an annual doctor visit, including
Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004), Currie and Gruber (1996a), and Currie, et al. (2008). In
addition, other papers have found an increase in hospital use (see Currie and Gruber
1996a, Dafny and Gruber 2005).
There is also some evidence that this increase in utilization translates into
improved immediate health outcomes for children, but as Howell and Kenney (2012)
emphasize the evidence is much more limited.2 In a widely cited paper, Currie and
Gruber (1996a) find that increased Medicaid eligibility is correlated with a decline in
1

A series of expansions of the Medicaid program beginning in 1984, and later expansions under the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), are estimated to have more than doubled the share of
children eligible for public health insurance from 17.8 percent in 1987 (Cutler and Gruber 1996) to 41.7
percent in 2000 (Lo Sasso and Buchmueller 2004).
2
Although not discussed here, improvements in birth outcomes under expansions in pregnancy-related
coverage have also been documented (see Currie and Gruber 1996b).

2

child deaths where the underlying cause of death reflects disease, or other conditions
likely to be influenced by medical care. Finding no effect on deaths due to other
(external) causes, such as accidents or homicides, their results suggest an improvement in
child health achieved through improved access to care.3 A recent paper by Howell et al.
(2010) finds additional evidence of a decline in child mortality associated with expanded
public insurance, although their findings indicate a decline in external-cause mortality.
The authors cite anticipatory guidance, improved access to mental health services, and
timely medical care in the incidence of accident or injury as potential mechanisms behind
this improvement.
There is little evidence regarding the effect of public health insurance during
childhood on later life health. From a program evaluation standpoint, the effect of public
coverage on the long-term health of children is an important component of program
benefits. Many preventive services are designed to protect healthy children from future
disease or risks, such as immunizations and health education. Physician monitoring and
screenings during childhood may identify and target precursors for later health problems
such as cardiovascular disease. The payoffs from these types of interventions might not
be evident until later in life. For those children with mental and physical disabilities or
chronic illness, early diagnosis and treatment may help the management of these
conditions or limit their persistence into adulthood. Medical care may also have a

3

A number of studies using more subjective health measures, including parental reports of child health
status and restricted activity days, find little effect of improvement under public health insurance (Currie
and Gruber 1995, Racine, et al. 2001, Currie, et al. 2008).

3

positive impact through counseling regarding behavior risks and linking children to
helpful social services.4
This paper provides new evidence on the role of public health insurance coverage
during childhood on both immediate and long-term health. Our identification strategy
exploits a unique feature of several early Medicaid expansions that extended eligibility
only to children born after September 30, 1983. A path-breaking study by Card and
Shore-Sheppard (2004) identified and used this policy discontinuity to examine the
takeup of public health insurance and the crowdout of private insurance under these
expansions. The authors estimate an 8 percent Medicaid takeup rate among newly
eligible children born after this birthdate cutoff. They find that the expansions resulted in
an overall increase in health insurance coverage with little evidence of crowd-out. The
authors also provide evidence that this new Medicaid coverage led to a large increase in
the utilization of medical care. Their estimates suggest that children with new coverage
were 60 percent more likely to have at least one doctor visit within the last year.
Building on this earlier work, we show that the early Medicaid expansion rules
led to a large cumulative difference in public eligibility for children born before and after
September 30, 1983. Children in families with incomes at or just below the poverty line
gained close to five additional years of eligibility if they were born in October 1983
rather than just one month before. We use regression discontinuity and difference in
difference methods to examine outcomes for cohorts of children born just before and
after the birthdate cutoff to identify the impact of this additional public coverage during
childhood.

4

The standard economic argument is also applicable that providing free medical care may free up resources
for making other investments with long term impacts.

4

Importantly, this research design allows us to examine the impact of childhood
coverage later in life by following these cohorts of children into early adulthood. The
discontinuity in insurance coverage under the expansions occurred between the ages of 8
and 14. In addition to studying the immediate impact of coverage at these ages, we follow
these cohorts through age 18 to observe any long-term impacts on health. We also
provide some early evidence on impacts through age 22. Most previous studies of the
Medicaid expansions have only considered contemporaneous impacts on child health.
Two existing studies have considered the long-term effect of public health
insurance for children. Using variation in eligibility across states, Currie et al. (2008) find
some evidence to suggest improvements in adolescent health resulting from past
eligibility. The authors regress parent-reported health status for children of ages 9 to 17
on the fraction of children who were eligible in the child’s birth cohort and current state
of residence for a given year of age between 0 and 8.5 They find that more generous
coverage at ages 2, 3, and 4 is associated with better health status for older children.
De la Mata (2012) also examines longer-term effects of public eligibility using a
regression discontinuity design that compares children in families with incomes just
above and below the income eligibility thresholds for public health insurance. In addition
to looking at changes in contemporaneous health, she examines whether eligibility for a
child age 5-18 in a given year leads to health improvements after 1 or 5 years have
passed. Using health status, obesity, and the number of school days missed due to illness
as outcome measures, she finds no evidence of significant effects on health in the
immediate or longer-term.
5

Citing collinearity between eligibility at various ages, they run a separate regression with eligibility at
each age. In general, regressions of outcomes on eligibility at a single year of age will give coefficient
estimates that reflect the correlation of eligibility at other ages with eligibility in that given year of age.

5

In general, very little is known about the potential long-term effects of health
insurance coverage on health (Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000). The RAND Health
Insurance Experiment examined the health of children at entry and exit during its 3- and
5-year periods of study. Researchers found no significant differences in health measures
for children in families randomly assigned to health insurance plans providing medical
care free of charge and those requiring some form of co-payment, despite reduced
demand for ambulatory care for children in families enrolled in the cost-sharing plans
(Valdez et al. 1985).6
The main focus of this paper is measuring the effects of childhood Medicaid
eligibility on immediate and long-term mortality. We focus on mortality as our health
measure because it is accurately measured and higher values are unambiguously bad. We
considered other outcomes such as doctor visits and hospitalizations, but power
calculations suggested that the effects would need to be quite large to be detectible with
available data. In addition, the direction of any changes in these outcomes is not as
clearly predicted a priori and not obviously good or bad for health.
Following Currie and Gruber (1996a), we examine rates of mortality by the
underlying causes of death distinguishing between deaths due to internal and external
causes. Because we are using national-level data in our analysis, we also examine
outcomes for subsamples that are more likely to be affected by the change in Medicaid
policy. We estimate models separately for black and white children, and also split our
sample into states with a high or low gain in years of public eligibility for children at the
September 30, 1983 cutoff.
6

Some gains in health were observed among poor adults with existing chronic health problems, while
individuals between the ages 12 and 35 on the free-care plan showed some improvement in dental health
(Manning et al. 1987).

6

This paper is structured as follows: Section II provides some background on the
Medicaid expansions used in our estimation and the resulting discontinuity in childhood
eligibility for children born around the September 30, 1983 birthdate cutoff. Section III
reviews our research design and empirical specifications. Section IV describes the data
we use in our analysis while Section V presents our mortality results. Section VI
compares our results to past work and estimates the cost per life saved. Section VII
concludes with a summary of our findings and their applicability to public policy.

II. The Discontinuity in Eligibility

Medicaid is a joint federal-state program that provides health services to certain
low-income beneficiaries. Since 1967, the program has included a special benefit
package for children designed to provide comprehensive health coverage including
preventive care. This benefit package provides all Medicaid children with early and
periodic screenings for physical, mental and developmental health; vision, dental and
hearing examinations and follow-up care; and all health services they are found to need.
Historically not all children in poor families were eligible for Medicaid coverage.
Eligibility for non-disabled children was previously linked to participation in the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. Beginning in 1984, a series of
Congressional acts expanded eligibility for Medicaid to children who were not
traditionally eligible for AFDC, often with income levels above AFDC cutoffs. To phase
in the Medicaid expansions, many of the legislative changes were applied only to
children born after September 30, 1983 (see Table 1). This legislative provision meant
that children born in October 1983 faced more generous eligibility criteria for the

7

Medicaid program than children born just one month earlier in September 1983. The
result of this provision was a large discontinuity in the number of childhood years of
Medicaid eligibility for children born around this birthdate cutoff.
To illustrate the discontinuity, we model childhood public eligibility for cohorts
born between 1980 and 1987. Using detailed federal and state eligibility rules for the
years 1980 to 2005, our simulation program uses information on state of residence,
family structure and size, parent employment, and family income to calculate monthly
public eligibility status through age 17. 7 To obtain a nationally representative sample of
these characteristics of children and families, we employ data from the March
Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS). We use a random sample of 500
children of ages 0-17 from each year of the 1981-1988 CPS and estimate the childhood
eligibility for this pooled sample for each birth month between January 1980 and
December 1987. 8 This simulation holds family characteristics constant over the child’s
lifetime.9
Figure 1 shows the results of our simulation for children in families with income
below 150 percent of poverty, those most likely to be affected by the change in Medicaid
eligibility rules. This graph depicts the average total number of years of public eligibility
during childhood by birth month cohort. Each line on the graph represents an income
bracket. For all income brackets, we see a gradual increase in childhood eligibility across

7

For the years prior to welfare reform, we estimate eligibility for Medicaid under AFDC, state Ribicoff
rules, and federal and state Medicaid expansions. For 1997 forward, eligibility is estimated under the postwelfare reform eligibility rules for Medicaid, as well as under continuing state Medicaid expansions and
new separate state programs funded by SCHIP.
8
We use the 1981-1988 CPS surveys because the information collected on income is for the previous
calendar year.
9
This convention may understate eligibility during early childhood and overstate eligibility during the later
years of childhood if family income grows with child age and is not counterbalanced by changes in family
size that alter the poverty thresholds to which income is compared.

8

birth cohorts prior to a jump in years of eligibility for children born in October 1983.
Children born in October 1983 are the first cohort of children to be eligible for the
Medicaid expansions with the September 30, 1983 birthdate cutoff. Following this jump,
we again see a gradual increase in childhood eligibility for the remaining birth cohorts.10
The magnitude of the discontinuity in childhood eligibility at the September 30,
1983 cutoff varies by family income. Figure 2 presents the size of the discontinuity as
captured by the average difference in years of eligibility for a child born in October
versus September 1983 by income group. The largest jump in years of eligibility occurs
among children with family incomes above AFDC eligibility levels but below poverty.
Children in families with incomes just below poverty see the largest gain with an
additional 4.7 years of eligibility during childhood, while those with incomes between 50
to 74 percent of poverty see a gain of 3.9 years. We see a smaller discontinuity in
childhood eligibility among children in families with incomes at or below AFDC levels,
around 50 percent of poverty. This is unsurprising since many of these children were
already eligible for Medicaid under AFDC before the expansions. Finally, we also see a
very small discontinuity among children in families with incomes above poverty.
Across all family income groups, the main legislative source behind the jump in
eligibility is the implementation of the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA90).11
Effective July 1, 1991, OBRA90 mandated state coverage to children under age 19 born
after September 30, 1983 with family incomes below poverty. Children born in October
1983 were almost 8 years of age when this change was implemented. To illustrate the
10

Much of this gradual increase is due to a larger share of each successive cohort’s life occurring when
younger children were Medicaid eligible under various age cutoffs rather than a gradual change in rules.
11
We estimate that OBRA accounts for 92 percent of the 4.7 year gain in eligibility for children with
incomes between 75 and 100 percent of poverty and 89 percent of the 3.9 year gain for children with
incomes between 50 and 75 percent of poverty. See Appendix Table 1.

9

timing of the gain in eligibility, Figure 3 compares the share of children eligible for
public health insurance if born in October versus September 1983 by each year of age.
Corresponding to the introduction of OBRA90, we see a sizeable jump in the share of
October-born children with eligibility at age 8. Faced with new and more generous
eligibility criteria, this cohort remains more likely to be eligible for public health
insurance until the introduction of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program
(SCHIP) in August 1997. Authorized by the Balanced Budget Act, SCHIP allowed states
to expand eligibility for public health insurance to children of higher incomes, regardless
of the child’s month of birth, under existing state Medicaid programs or new state
programs. These expansions were quickly adopted by states and served to close any
discontinuity in eligibility by age 15.
We distinguish between three different age ranges in our analysis. Ages 4 to 7
captures a period prior to the implementation of OBRA90 where differences in eligibility
at the birthdate threshold are small. Our analysis of this period serves to establish a
baseline difference in health for children at the cutoff. We do not expect to find any
discontinuity in health for this age group.
Next we examine children at ages 8 to 14. Children who benefitted from the
expansions primarily gained eligibility during this age range, as shown in Figure 3. We
interpret any discontinuity in health observed during this period as an immediate effect of
public health insurance coverage, similar to the existing estimates using cross-sectional
data in the literature (e.g., Currie and Gruber 1996a). However, any difference in health
observed in our estimates may also be due to a cumulative gain in exposure to health
insurance coverage over the period. For instance, a child at age 14 born in October 1983

10

may have gained Medicaid coverage for the five years prior, beginning at age 8. There is
little research that has examined the effect of multi-year coverage on health care access or
outcomes for children.12
Finally, we examine children at ages 15 to 18, the period following the gain in
public eligibility. Although equally as likely to have public eligibility during this age
range, children born in October 1983 received an average of 0.43 years of additional
health insurance during their 8-14 years when compared to children born one month
earlier (see Table 3). We already showed that for children with incomes just below
poverty, the average difference in eligibility was 4.7 years. By examining this older age
group, we are able to consider the longer-term effects of childhood coverage as these
cohorts enter adulthood.
We also examine differential effects of the expansions by the race and state of
residence of the child. Black children in the U.S. are more likely to be in low-income
families and without health insurance than white children. At the time of the Medicaid
expansions, black children were nearly three times as likely to be in poverty as white
children. Therefore, we may see a larger impact of the expansions among black children.
The gain in Medicaid eligibility for children born after September 30, 1983 will also vary
across states due to differences in Medicaid policies before and after the expansions.
States had different eligibility criteria in place prior to the expansions depending on statedetermined AFDC program rules and optional eligibility programs. In addition, state
decisions regarding optional Medicaid and SCHIP expansions varied in terms of timing
12

One exception, Cassedy, et al. (2008) show that children with any gap in insurance coverage over a twoyear period have higher odds of lacking a usual source of care and not having well-care visits than those
with continuous insurance coverage, regardless of whether that continuous coverage was public or private.
This is also a substantial literature finding that continuous coverage during a year is associated with better
access to care (see Leininger 2009 for evidence and cites to the literature).

11

and child age and family incomes covered. We should emphasize that this source of
variation in Medicaid eligibility across states is not as clearly exogenous as birthdate.
States with improving child mortality may be less likely to expand coverage, for
example. However, this type of variation is the main source of identifying variation that
has been used in the literature on Medicaid expansions.
To compare the eligibility gains by child race and state of residence, we use a
sample that draws a maximum of 500 children ages 0-17 from each race (black, white,
other) and state cell from the pooled 1981-1988 CPS years, giving us 50,874 child
observations. Holding family characteristics constant, we estimate eligibility for each
child for each year during childhood by calculating eligibility in July of the appropriate
calendar year. We use these estimates to calculate the average gain in years of eligibility
at the September 30, 1983 cutoff by child race.13
To estimate the eligibility gain for each state that resulted from legislative
variation in Medicaid policy, we follow the literature and use a simulated eligibility
measure constructed using the national sample of children. We estimate the average
eligibility gain for the national sample given the rules in each state and, in this way,
capture variation due to legislative differences rather than demographic differences across
states. Ranking the state average estimates, we divide states into a “high” eligibility and a
“low” eligibility group that each represent approximately half of the total child
population. The high eligibility group includes the states with the largest average gain in
years of eligibility while the low eligibility group includes the states with the smallest
13

In calculating all averages that we report in the text and in tables, we multiply the CPS-provided survey
weights by an adjustment factor specific to each cell in order to account for the manner in which we
constructed our sample. This factor is calculated as the inverse of the ratio of the sum of the survey weights
of individuals in the cell in our sample and the sum of the survey weights of individuals in the cell in the
CPS.

12

average gain in years of eligibility. We use this method to identify the high and low
eligibility gain states for children of each race, in addition to the identification for all
children. Table 2 gives the ranking of states by their gain in eligibility for all children.14
Table 3 presents summary characteristics for children in each of the state groups
in 1983 prior to the first Medicaid eligibility expansions. Children in the high eligibility
gain states were less likely to be eligible for AFDC or Medicaid than children in the low
eligibility gain states, despite similar shares of children with family incomes below the
poverty level. This indicates that more children stood to gain from the Medicaid
eligibility expansions in the high eligibility gain states because pre-expansion eligibility
levels for Medicaid were lower.
Table 4 reports the estimated discontinuity in childhood eligibility at the
September 30, 1983 cutoff separately by race and state group. Looking across all states,
black children, on average, gain 2 times the average years of eligibility gained by white
children. Figure 4 gives additional insight into the nature of the gain in eligibility specific
to each racial group. Although the gain is concentrated during the 8 to 14-age range, a
much larger share of black children are affected by the expansion in eligibility.
Meanwhile, Table 3 shows that children residing in high eligibility gain states receive 5
times the average number of additional years of coverage of those in low eligibility gain
states.

14

Appendix Table 2 reports the state groupings for each racial group.

13

III. The Research Designs

Regression Discontinuity Methods
Our research design uses comparisons across the September 30, 1983 birthdate
cutoff to measure the impact of Medicaid eligibility on health outcomes. Since factors
other than date of birth determine childhood eligibility for public health insurance, such
as childhood family income, this is an example of a “fuzzy” RD design. Birth cohort is
defined in our sample using the month and year of birth for cohorts born between 1980
and 1987. We denote birth cohorts using the integer values c [45,50], where c=0 for
the birth cohort October 1983, the first cohort born after the cutoff date September 30,
1983. Our main analysis is based on a regression discontinuity (RD) model of the form
(1) yca    f ( ; c)   1(c  0)   a Aa   m M c   t Yt   ca
where yca represents mortality or another health-related outcome for cohort c at age a,

f () is a smooth function of birth month cohort with parameter vector  , and 1(c  0) is
an indicator for whether the cohort was born after September 30, 1983. Control variables
included in our regression are age dummies Aa, calendar year dummies Yt (where t is a
function of c and a), and month of birth dummies Mc. We may interpret  as the effect of
the eligibility expansions averaged across the full sample of children at the cutoff.15
The central question for implementation is how to model the function of birth
month cohort f () . We present estimates of the treatment effect  using both linear and
quadratic specifications of the regression function. We also report estimates where we
allow the parameter vector  of these specifications to differ on both sides of the

15

In other words, we estimate the proportion eligible times an intent-to-treat parameter.

14

birthdate cutoff (i.e. linear and quadratic splines). All regressions are estimated using
OLS.
As described above, we estimate equation (1) separately for each of the following
three age groups: 4-7, 8-14, and 15-18. All graphical representations plot the means of
the outcome variable for each birth cohort at each of the three age groups. The lines are
fitted values from a regression that includes a second-order polynomial in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983. In our regression
results, heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are clustered by birth month cohort to
account for our grouping of narrow age ranges into broader ones as we describe below.16

Differences, and Differences in Differences
The regression discontinuity approach allows us to examine how mortality
changes precisely at the date of the eligibility discontinuity. As a consequence it puts a
great deal of weight on a small number of data points. As a check on the results, we also
present simple differences that compare the mortality of children born over the twelve
months prior to the September 30, 1983 cutoff to that of children born over the following
twelve months. Particularly when we examine rare outcomes such as narrow causes of
death, the reliance on data for the full year before seems to be a better balancing of bias
and precision. Finally, when the underlying trends in mortality are similar across race
groups, we sometimes compare the magnitude of the estimated differences for the twelve
month before and after the cutoff for black and white children.
16

Clustering on each value of the discrete assignment variable can also account for uncertainty in the
choice of the functional form, as shown by Lee and Card (2008). Their model of deviations from the true
regression function (i.e. “specification errors”) introduces a common component to the variance term for
each value of the assignment variable provided that the specification errors on either side of the
discontinuity are the same.

15

IV. Outcomes and Data
Our empirical analysis requires data on child health or the utilization of medical
care with information on child birthdate. The main focus of this paper is measuring the
effects of childhood Medicaid eligibility on immediate and long-term mortality. We
initially considered using a broader range of outcome measures in our analysis. These
measures included doctor visits, hospitalizations, and the incidence of certain reportable
diseases. We considered the presence of at least an annual visit to the doctor as reported
in the National Health Interview Survey. We also considered the incidence of
hospitalizations, particularly avoidable hospitalizations, sometimes referred to as those
due to ambulatory care sensitive (ACS) conditions, as reported in the National Hospital
Discharge Survey.
Two issues, however, pointed us toward a focus on mortality. First, we conducted
extensive power analyses that suggested that reasonably large effects of Medicaid
eligibility on other outcomes might be hard to detect with the available data sources.
Second, for some of these outcomes such as hospitalizations, the interpretation of
changes in rates is unclear. Higher rates of contact with a medical provider do not
unambiguously mean that children are healthier. The availability of public health
insurance may lead to an increase in access that could even increase the rate of
hospitalizations that are commonly classified as avoidable.17
Our analysis uses mortality data records for all deaths in the United States. We
focus on this measure of the success of health insurance because mortality is precisely
17

In their analysis of expansions in public health insurance on child hospitalizations, Dafny and Gruber
(2005) find an increase in avoidable hospitalizations but it is not statistically significant. They find a larger
and significant increase in unavoidable hospitalizations under the expansions.

16

measured, it is very likely to be recorded even for those without access to health care, and
higher values are unambiguously bad. Previous path-breaking research has found an
impact of public eligibility on child mortality at young ages (Currie and Gruber 1996a).
Mortality is also an outcome for which we might potentially see long-term
impacts of health insurance coverage for children. Figure 5 shows the age profile of rates
of mortality due to internal and external underlying causes for children in their first year
of life through age 19 in the year preceding the Medicaid expansions. For both types of
death, the relationship with child age takes on a U-shape, though it is much less
pronounced for internal causes. Children face lower mortality rates during the middle
childhood years and higher rates of death in early and late childhood. Given this
relationship, the gain in health insurance coverage during the middle childhood years and
its impact on health might be more apparent during the later childhood years when
mortality is higher.
We construct aggregate mortality outcomes using information from the National
Vital Statistics System (NVSS) Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2006
and NVSS Birth Data files for the years 1980 to 1987. To take maximum advantage of
the discontinuity in childhood eligibility by birth cohort, we construct cohort-specific
death rates, where cohort is defined as the month and year of birth. While the date of
birth of the decedent is excluded from the publicly available mortality files, we are able
to access this restricted information at the Chicago Census Research Data Center.
Necessarily, we drop all observations from the mortality data with missing information
on child birthdate. The average share of child observations with missing birthdate
information for each year of mortality data is about 2 percent. We also exclude those

17

observations where the birth year information contradicts the reported age of the child.18
In addition, we use only those observations of children born in the U.S. with residence in
the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, excluding any residents of U.S. territories
or foreign residents.19
For our outcome measure, we construct the rate of death Rca for each of the 96
monthly birth cohorts in our sample for the following age groupings: 4-5, 6-7, 8-10, 1112, 13-14, 15-16, and 17-18. We tally the total number of deaths Dca for each birth cohort
c at specified years of age a. We then divide this number by the total population at risk,
calculated as the total population of births for each birth cohort Nc minus the total number
of deaths for all ages prior to age a.20 We express all final rates as the number of deaths
per 10,000 children in each birth cohort.
(2) Rca 

Total number of deaths ca
Dca
 10,000 
 10,000
a 1
Total population at risk ca
N c  i 0 Dci

In addition to examining mortality among all children, we also focus our analysis on
subpopulations that were more likely to benefit from the Medicaid expansions.
Specifically, we examine outcomes by child race and state of residence. As shown
earlier, black children gained on average twice the length of coverage as white children.
Meanwhile, children in states with a “high eligibility gain” saw an increase in coverage
that averaged six times that of children in low eligibility gain states.
18

The average share of child observations with conflicting responses for birth year and age for each year of
mortality data is approximately 0.09 percent.
19
The exclusion of foreign-born observations reduces our sample of mortality records by 10,232 out of
157,244 cases, or 7 percent. This count includes observations for whom place of birth was reported to be
unknown.
20
The NVSS Birth Data files for 1980-1984 offer only a 50% random sample of births for a handful of
states, stratified by month of birth and county of occurrence. For each of these states and years, we double
the number of births for each birth cohort to approximate the universe. We make this adjustment for the
following states and years: AZ, CA, DE, GA, and DC in 1980-1984, ND in 1980-1982, and NM in 19801981.

18

We also examine the underlying cause of death for children and distinguish
between internal and external causes of death, which we classify according to the medical
code reported on the death certificate. For the years 1999-2006, the cause of death is
reported according to the Tenth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-10), while the Ninth Revision (ICD-9) is used for the 1980-1998 years. We follow
the definition of external causes of mortality presented under both classifications, and
classify all other causes of death as internal.21
Table 5 presents the average rates of death for cohorts born prior to September 30,
1983 in our sample by race, age and state group. Mortality is much higher among older
children across all groups with mortality rates for 15-18 year-olds more than twice as
high as those of children of ages 4-7. Although deaths due to internal causes are more
common among older children, it is the frequency of deaths due to external causes that
drives most of the increase in total mortality for this age group. Black children have
higher rates of mortality than white children across all age and state groups. For the most
part, mortality rates are higher in the high eligibility gain states compared to the low
eligibility gain states. This suggests that the largest Medicaid expansions occurred in the
states that had children with poorer baseline health.
Finally, we examine more narrow classifications of the underlying causes of
death. For internal causes, we code subcategories following the chapter structure of the
ICD-10.22 We code subcategories for external causes following the groupings in a

21

The ICD-10 and ICD-9 differ in several respects including in the classification structures and rules for
coding of deaths. These changes may result in a slight definitional change between the revisions but the
inclusion of year dummies in our regression specifications should control for this change.
22
There are 18 chapters of internal causes in the ICD-10. Since deaths falling under a handful of chapters
are extremely rare among children, we chose the 11 chapters with the highest number of deaths in our
sample and grouped the remaining 7 chapters into an “other” category for a total of 12 categories.

19

tabulation list developed by the National Center for Health Statistics for use with
mortality data classified by ICD-10.23 To aid in constructing comparable measures over
time, we draw on the assignment of ICD-9 codes to the ICD-10 tabulation list presented
in Anderson et al. (2001).24
Table 6 gives the average rates of death under each subcategory for cohorts born prior
to September 30, 1983 by race and age group. Among all children, the most common
causes of internal death are neoplasms (tumors), diseases of the nervous system (which
include meningitis, epilepsy, and cerebral palsy), cardiovascular diseases, respiratory
diseases, and congenital malformations and chromosomal abnormalities. With the
exception of neoplasms, deaths from these causes are more frequent among black
children than white children. Additionally, infectious and parasitic diseases are also a
major cause of death among black children.
A common cause of deaths due to external causes is transport-related accidents,
particularly among older children. Accidental drowning and submersion is also a
frequent cause of death. Among older children, deaths due to suicide and homicide are
prevalent with suicide almost twice as likely among white children than black children
and homicide over six times more likely among black children.

23

We follow the List of 113 Selected Causes of Death (113-cause list) to create our subcategories for
external causes. We have omitted deaths due to “Operations of war and their sequelae” since there were no
deaths in our sample falling under this subcategory.
24
Anderson et al. (2001) provide detailed information on the classification and rule changes between the
ICD-9 and ICD-10 revisions and construct comparability ratios by case of death. They find substantial
discontinuities in mortality trends resulting from implementing the ICD-10. Again, the inclusion of year
dummies in our regression specification should serve to control for this change.

20

V. Mortality Results
Table 7 presents estimates of the effect of the eligibility expansions on rates of
mortality by age and race. Each cell reports the estimated discontinuity for children at the
September 30, 1983 birthdate cutoff, or coefficient  in equation (1), from a regression
for the specified sample. The first set of rows in the table present our estimates for all
children. Our results, and the visual evidence presented in Figures 6 and 7, show no
evidence of an improvement in mortality under the eligibility expansions. In fact, we see
a slight jump in the rate of deaths due to external causes for children at 15-18 years of
age. The coefficient estimates indicate an increase of 0.26 to 0.27 deaths per 10,000
children in the first three specifications, but the effect is not significantly different from
zero in the quadratic spline specification. This increase represents approximately a 5
percent change over the baseline rate of 5.16 external-cause deaths per 10,000 children.
Next we examine mortality separately for black and white children. Figures 8-10
accompany the estimates presented in the bottom two panels of Table 7 for these groups.
For black children, there is evidence of a decline in mortality at the September 30, 1983
cutoff during the period of extended Medicaid coverage (ages 8 to 14). With a baseline
rate of 3.31 deaths per 10,000, the coefficient estimates for the first three specifications
suggest approximately a 7-8 percent decline in the total mortality rate for black children
at these ages. However, the estimate under the quadratic spline specification is not
statistically significant. The coefficient estimates for internal and external mortality
suggest that declines in deaths due to both types of causes are behind any change in
mortality, although these results are not significant. The visual evidence of a
discontinuity in either measure of mortality for black children ages 8-14 is not obvious.

21

When we examine the long-term impact of the expansions on black children at
ages 15-18, we find evidence of a substantial decline in deaths due to internal causes. Our
estimates show a 13-20 percent decrease in the internal mortality rate for black children
at these ages. The coefficient estimates indicating a discontinuous fall in mortality are
significantly different from zero in all four specifications. Figure 8 gives strong visual
evidence to support this decline in internal mortality for older black children. With no
evidence of a baseline discontinuity at ages 4 to 7, these findings indicate improvement in
the health of black children under expanded Medicaid eligibility.
For white children, we find no evidence of improvements in mortality.
Surprisingly, we find some indication of an increase in external mortality beginning at
ages 8-14. Our estimates suggest up to a 5-8 percent increase in external mortality over
the baseline of 1.22 deaths per 10,000 children but are not consistently significant. At
ages 15-18, we find evidence of an increase of approximately 5 percent under the first
three specifications. The estimate under the quadratic spline is smaller and not
statistically significant. The visual evidence is presented in Figure 10. Presumably, this
change for white children is driving the increase in external mortality we saw among all
children of ages 15-18.
Table 8 provides additional evidence by examining differences in mortality rates
for children born just one year before and after the birthdate cutoff. Again, we find strong
evidence of a decline in internal-cause deaths for black children at ages 15-18. Using a
simple difference-in-difference estimate that compares this change to that experienced by
white children, we estimate a decline of 0.37 deaths per 10,000 black children. This
estimate is within the range of our earlier RD regression results. It is also worth noting

22

that the comparison of the external mortality rate of older white children born before and
after the birthdate cutoff reveals no significant difference. This last finding suggests the
absence of a robust relationship between Medicaid eligibility and white external
mortality.

State Eligibility Groups
We next examine changes in mortality by state eligibility group.25 The results of
our earlier simulation indicated that children residing in high eligibility gain states on
average received 5 times the number of additional years of coverage of those in low
eligibility gain states. We showed that the high eligibility gain states had less generous
AFDC and Medicaid eligibility rules prior to the expansions and fewer children eligible
for these programs. This meant that a larger share of children stood to gain coverage in
these states under the federally-mandated OBRA90 expansion.
Table 9 presents the estimation results for children residing in the high eligibility
gain states. Looking at all children, we find no evidence of improvements in internal
mortality and an increase in external mortality among older children. This increase
appears to be driving an increase in the total mortality rate for children residing in these
states. When we examine the results separately by race, we find that evidence of an
increase in external mortality at ages 15-18 is particularly strong for white children,
although there is some suggestion of an increase among black children as well. There
also appears to be some indication of an increase in total mortality for white children at
ages 8-14. Among black children, there is some evidence of decreases in internal and

25

The RD graphs for each of the state eligibility groups are included in the Appendix.

23

external mortality at ages 8-14 and a decrease in internal mortality at ages 15-18 but the
estimates are not statistically significant.
Table 10 presents the estimation results for the low eligibility gain states. There is
no evidence of a change in mortality in either direction for the children residing in these
states. It appears that the increase in external mortality was confined to the high
eligibility gain states only. When we examine the results by race group, there is again
some evidence of an improvement in mortality for black children at ages 8-14 but the
estimates are not statistically significant. There is a modestly significant decline in
internal mortality for black children at ages 15-18. The evidence of any change in
mortality for whites is not strong.
It is somewhat surprising that we do not see major differences in the mortality
trends across state groups. Specifically, we find no significant evidence that children
residing in the high eligibility gain states saw greater improvements in health. If
anything, our results are more indicative of an improvement in black mortality in the low
eligibility gain states. Furthermore, the increase in external mortality for white teens
appears to be confined to the high eligibility gain states.
One potential explanation for not finding stronger improvements in health in the
high eligibility gain states is that larger expansions in eligibility do not directly translate
into higher levels of enrollment or improvements in access to medical care for children.
Increases in enrollment require outreach by states and the dissemination of eligibility
information to parents. In addition, larger numbers of new beneficiaries may strain
limited supply-side resources, particularly if physicians opt not to accept Medicaid clients
due to low reimbursement rates or slow payment. Finally, we should emphasize that this

24

source of identification is not sharp and not clearly exogenous like the variation due to
birthdate.

Specific Causes of Death
Our results indicate changes in the mortality rates of black and white children
born after September 30, 1983 at older ages. We find strong evidence of a 13-20 percent
decrease in the internal mortality rate among black children. We also find some evidence
of a 5 percent increase in the external mortality rate among white children at ages 15-18,
but this increase is not robust to specification choice nor is it apparent in the differences
for children born the year before and after the discontinuity. To better understand the
potential role of expanded Medicaid eligibility in these changes, we study the more
specific underlying causes of death for each racial group using the classification
described earlier.
Specific cause mortality is often very low, leading to little information being
available in the months that are relied upon by the regression discontinuity method, those
that immediately surrounding the September 1983 cutoff. The paucity of the data
encouraged us to focus on differences in mortality between those born the year before
and after the discontinuity. Comparisons of internal-cause deaths of children born one
year before and after the September 30, 1983 cutoff reveal no significant differences in
the rates of death due to any of these causes among black or white children (see Table
11). There are moderate sized but statistically insignificant declines for black children
spread across many causes. In the aggregate, however, these estimates still support a
large decline in the total number of internal-cause deaths occurring among older black

25

children. Thus, although we provide evidence of a decline in deaths related to disease, we
are unable to definitively say what were the underlying causes for which health insurance
coverage mattered most. This is an important question and area for future work. With
access to Medicaid claims data from this period, researchers might be able to learn more
regarding the nature of health care and services accessed by children benefiting from the
eligibility expansions. This information would provide valuable insight into the role of
public health insurance in preventing child mortality.
Estimates comparing mortality from external causes for white children born one
year before and after the birthdate cutoff provide no support for a change at the birthdate
cutoff (Table 12). This agrees with our earlier result indicating that the discontinuity in
external mortality is not present among older white children born closest to the cutoff.
The estimates for black children in Table 12 do, however, suggest the presence of
changes in several external causes at the birthdate cutoff at different ages. However,
when compared to similar estimates for white children, they are not statistically
significant. We should also note, as can be seen in Figure 10, that external mortality for
each of the age and race groups has a pronounced trend decline over time. The presence
of such a trend makes the year-to-year differences over time in external mortality less
sensible as a summary measure because they at least partly reflect that trend.

Robustness and Additional Results
Earlier we show that the decline in internal mortality for black teens born after the
September 30, 1983 cutoff is largely robust to the choice of functional form of the
regression discontinuity specification. In addition, we also test the sensitivity of this

26

result to the use of narrower windows of observations around the birthdate cutoff. When
we restrict the sample to children born within 36 of the cutoff date, the estimated decline
in internal mortality for black teens remains strong under the first three specifications
(Appendix Table 3). In addition, the evidence of an increase in external mortality for
white teens at ages 15-18 is no longer significant, although there remains some evidence
of an increase at ages 8-14. When further limiting the sample to children born within 24
months of the cutoff date, the coefficient estimates mostly indicate a decline in internal
mortality for black teens but they are no longer statistically significant (Appendix Table
4). Surprisingly, there is a significant decline in internal mortality for black children ages
4-7 in most specifications.
We also expand our analysis to examine the impact of the Medicaid expansions at
older ages to the extent possible. Not enough time has passed for us to observe mortality
for our entire RD sample at early adult ages but we are able to construct simple
differences that compare mortality at ages 19-22 of children born 12 months before and
after the birthdate cutoff. These results do not indicate any change (increase or decrease)
in internal mortality for blacks at these later ages (Appendix Table 5). This result
suggests that the improvement in internal mortality observed at ages 15-18 for black
children is not reversed during the early adult years. Our results for ages 19-22 also
suggest a decline in deaths due to external causes among black children, primarily from a
reduction in accidents (Appendix Table 6). However, a visual examination of the data
suggests that these declines are the result of preexisting trends.

27

VI. Interpreting the Estimates: Comparisons to Past Work and Cost per Life Saved
In this paper, we our point estimates suggest a 13-20 percent decrease in the
internal mortality rate of older black teens as a result of increased childhood eligibility for
Medicaid. We find no evidence of a similar effect among white children, although the
implied 95 percent confidence intervals for three of our four estimates allow us only to
rule out a decline greater than 3.1 percent over the baseline for white teens. This finding
is supported by previous work examining the Medicaid expansions of 1984-1992. In their
working paper, Currie and Gruber (1995) estimate that an increase in the fraction of
children eligible for Medicaid at the state-level had a much larger impact on mortality for
blacks (more than four times as big) than for whites, although neither estimate is
significantly different from zero and they are not significantly different from each other.26
The authors explain that black children are poorer and more likely to be affected by
Medicaid expansions. In the first stage of our analysis, we estimated that black children
born at the September 30, 1983 cutoff on average gained 2 times the total years of public
health insurance eligibility as white children. Currie and Gruber also provide suggestive
evidence that newly covered black children under the Medicaid expansions used more
health care than their white counterparts.
Using back-of-the-envelope calculations, we can further interpret the magnitude
of our estimates. In our regression analysis, we estimate a decline in the annual internal
mortality rate of older black children ages 15-18 of between 0.30 deaths and 0.47 deaths
per 10,000 children. Meanwhile, we estimated an average gain in years of eligibility of

26

Howell, et al. (2010) report testing for whether black and white children were differentially affected by
the public expansions with the use of an interaction term and finding a nonsignificant coefficient. However,
the estimates are not reported in the paper so we are unable to determine if they are small and precisely
estimated or imprecise and potentially large.

28

0.8 for black children. When we consider the more conservative estimate of a decline of
0.30 deaths among all black teens, it suggests that 0.30 times four (for the four years
between ages 15-18) divided by 0.8 = 1.5 deaths were avoided for each 10,000 black
children made newly Medicaid eligible for a year. Furthermore, with black children
representing approximately 15.6 percent of all children and our calculation of 0.43 years
of eligibility gain on average for all children, our estimates imply an overall decline of
(0.30 x 4 x 0.156) ÷ 0.43 = 0.435 deaths per 10,000 children of all races made eligible.27
This mortality derivative with respect to eligibility can be compared to that found
by Currie and Gruber (1996a) for children 1-14. They found that 1.277 deaths in a year
were avoided for every 10,000 children of all races made eligible for that year. While our
estimate is somewhat lower than that found by Currie and Gruber, we should emphasize
that their estimate is for children 1-14, while ours is for children ages 15-18. Maybe
more importantly, their estimate is based on variation in eligibility from one year to the
next and is for contemporaneous mortality, while our estimate is for eligibility that likely
lasts for several years and is for mortality during the years following the change in
eligibility.
To further interpret our results, we estimate the approximate cost to the Medicaid
program of each child life saved. By its nature, this calculation ignores any effects of the
expansions on morbidity or quality of life. To calculate the cost of provision of Medicaid
services for every 10,000 children, we use the 8 percent take-up rate among newly
eligible children under the OBRA90 expansion estimated by Card and Shore-Sheppard
(2004). With the average gain in eligibility of 0.43 years among all children, this rate
27

We consider only the reduction to black mortality observed at ages 15-18 in our calculation and assume
that the expansions had no effect on mortality at other ages or for other race groups. In 2000, 15.6 percent
of all children in the U.S. were black.

29

implies an increase in Medicaid coverage of 0.43 x .08 = 0.034 years per child. We
estimate the average cost of Medicaid coverage per child during this time period at
approximately $891 (in 1992 dollars). 28 Thus, the Medicaid program pays $891 x 0.034 x
10,000 = $302,940 for every 10,000 children.
With our estimate that 0.30 x 4 x 0.156 = 0.187 deaths per 10,000 children were
prevented by the expansions, this implies that it cost $302,940 ÷ 0.187 = $1.62 million
(in 1992 dollars) to save one life. This estimate is extremely similar to the $1.61 million
cost per child life saved calculated by Currie and Gruber (1996) under the Medicaid
expansions in 1984-1992. Both estimates are much lower than the Environmental
Protection Agency statistical value of life of $7.9 million (1996 dollars).
These calculations rely on the large decline in black internal mortality observed at
ages 15-18. Once we take into consideration the potentially low takeup rate of Medicaid
coverage, the plausibility of our estimates requires that pre-OBRA internal-cause deaths
among black children be highly concentrated among those groups gaining coverage.
Using information on deaths for children ages 15-18 prior to the expansions available in
the 1993 National Mortality Followback Study, we estimate that 64 percent of the deaths
occurring among black children at these ages were to decedents with household incomes
below the poverty line. Combining this estimate with our measured 13-20 percent decline
in internal mortality among blacks under the expansions, this implies a 20-31 percent (1320 divided by 0.64) decline in the internal mortality rate for poor blacks.29 This is not
implausible given that our first stage estimates indicate that 31 percent of poor black

28

The per capita Medicaid payment for categorically needy AFDC children in FY 1992 was $891 (Source:
1996 Green Book).
29
This assumes that the share of internal-cause deaths for black children aged 15-18 with incomes under
poverty is similar to the share for all deaths.

30

children at the birthdate cutoff gained eligibility under the expansions. Furthermore, it is
reasonable to hypothesize that the children who do takeup Medicaid coverage are most in
need of medical care. In their study of takeup and the utilization of health care under
OBRA90, Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) estimate that children with new Medicaid
coverage are 60 percent more likely to have an annual doctor visit. It is worth also noting
that even if the typical newly eligible child is not enrolled in Medicaid, upon
commencing any costly hospital or physician care it is likely that an eligible child would
be enrolled.

VII. Conclusions
This paper provides new evidence on the mortality effects of expansions in public
health insurance eligibility for children in the mid 1980s to early 1990s. Our
identification strategy exploits a unique feature of several early Medicaid expansions that
extended eligibility only to children born after September 30, 1983. This feature led to a
large cumulative difference in public health insurance eligibility for children born on
either side of this birthdate cutoff. Children in families with incomes at or just below the
poverty line gained close to five additional years of eligibility if they were born in
October 1983 rather than just one month before. Black children were more likely to be
affected by the Medicaid expansions and gained twice the years of eligibility on average
as white children at this birthdate cutoff. The average gain in eligibility also varied by
state of residence due to differences in state Medicaid eligibility rules prior to and during
the expansions, as well as differences in the demographic characteristics of state
residents.

31

Using a regression discontinuity design, we examine the impact of public health
insurance eligibility during childhood on mortality by comparing outcomes for cohorts of
children born just before and after the September 30, 1983 cutoff. The discontinuity in
public health insurance eligibility under the expansions occurred between the ages of 8
and 14. We measure mortality outcomes for this period as well as through age 18 to
gauge any longer-term impacts. We also examine differential effects of the expansions by
the race and state of residence of the child.
The results provide strong evidence of an improvement in mortality for black
children under the Medicaid expansions. Although there is some evidence of a decline in
mortality rates during the period of coverage (ages 8-14), we find a substantial decline in
the later life mortality of black children at ages 15-18. The regression estimates indicate a
13-20 percent decrease in the internal mortality rate of black teens born after September
30, 1983. Because deaths due to internal causes are more likely to be influenced by
access to medical care, this result supports an improvement in the underlying health of
black children under the eligibility expansions. Early evidence indicates that this gain in
health is not reversed during the early adult years. We find no evidence of an
improvement in the mortality of white children under the expansions. Furthermore, we
are unable to detect mortality improvements among children residing in those states with
the largest gains in public health insurance eligibility under the expansions.
The effectiveness of public health insurance in the long-term improvement of the
health of children has important policy implications. Despite drastic expansions in public
health insurance over the last thirty years, the evidence connecting this expanded
coverage to improved child health remains hard to come by. However, the payoffs from

32

health insurance coverage during childhood might not be fully evident until later in life.
A major focus of pediatric care is prevention and the early diagnosis and treatment of
health conditions. Without considering the long-term effects of these types of
interventions, we may be missing an important component of program benefits. Even in
our study, one limitation is that not enough time has passed to look at longer-term adult
outcomes for the cohorts of children affected by the change in Medicaid policy. With
time (and further study), we may be able to evaluate both the persistence of the mortality
improvements for black children and whether there are additional gains to childhood
coverage.

33

References
American Academy of Pediatrics. 2008. “Recommendations for Pediatric Preventive
Health Care.” American Academy of Pediatrics Policy Statement.
Anderson, Robert N., Arialdi M. Minino, Donna L. Hoyert, and Harry M. Rosenberg.
2001. “Comparability of Cause of Death Between ICD-9 and ICD-10: Preliminary
Estimates.” National Vital Statistics Reports 49(2): 1-32, May 18.
Becker, Gary. 2007. “Health as human capital: synthesis and extensions.” Oxford
Economic Papers 59(3): 379-410.
Buckles, Kasey and Daniel M. Hungerman, 2008. “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes:
Old Questions, New Answers,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series No. 14573.
Card, David, C. Dobkin, and N. Maestas. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124, no. 2: 597–636.
Card, David, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2004. “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to
Identify the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Economic status and health
in childhood: The origins of the gradient.” The American Economic Review 92(5): 13081334.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The lasting impact of childhood
health and circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24: 365-389.
Cassedy, Amy, Gerry Fairbrother and Paul W Newacheck. 2008. “The impact of
insurance instability on children’s access, utilization, and satisfaction with health care.”
Ambulatory Pediatrics 8(5): 321-328.
Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has public health insurance for
older children reduced disparities in access to care and health outcomes?” Journal of
Health Economics 27: 1567-1581.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1995. “Health insurance eligibility, utilization of
medical care, and child health.” NBER Working Paper No. 5052.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health insurance eligibility, utilization of
medical care, and child health.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431-466.

34

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving babies: the efficacy and cost of recent
changes in the Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women.” The Journal of Political
Economy 104(6): 1263-1296.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2003. “Socioeconomic status and child health: Why is the
relationship stronger for children?” The American Economic Review 93(5): 1813-1823.
Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does public insurance crowd out private
insurance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.
Cutler, D.M., and R. J. Zeckhauser. 2000. The Anatomy of Health Insurance. In
Handbook of Health Economics, ed. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Vol. 1.
North Holland: Elsevier.
Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public insurance and child hospitalizations:
access and efficiency effects.” Journal of Public Economics 89: 109-129.
De la Mata, Dolores. 2012. “The effect of Medicaid eligibility on coverage, utilization,
and children’s health.” Health Economics, published online July 16.
Franks, Paul W., Robert L. Hanson, William C. Knowler, Maurice L. Sievers, Peter H.
Bennett, and Helen C. Looker. 2010. “Childhood obesity, other cardiovascular risk
factors, and premature death.” The New England Journal of Medicine 362(6): 485-493.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health.”
The Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223-255.
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The human capital model.” Handbook of Health Economics,
vol. 1. Edited by A.J. Cuyler and J.P. Newhouse.
Howell, Embry, Sandra Decker, Sara Hogan, Alshadye Yemane and Jonay Foster. 2010.
“Declining child mortality and continuing racial disparities in the era of the Medicaid and
SCHIP insurance coverage expansions.” American Journal of Public Health 100(12):
2500-2506.
Howell, Embry M. and Genevieve M. Kenney. 2012. “The Impact of the Medicaid/CHIP
expansions on children: A synthesis of the evidence.” Medical Care Research and
Review 20(10): 1-25.
Joyce, Ted and Andrew Racine. 2005. “CHIP shots: Association between the State
Children’s Health Insurance Programs and immunization rates.” Pediatrics 115: e26e534.
Kaestner, Robert, Ted Joyce, and Andrew Racine. 2001. “Medicaid eligibility and the
incidence of ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations for children.” Social Science and
Medicine 52: 305-313.

35

Lee, David S., and David Card. 2008. “Regression discontinuity inference with
specification error.” Journal of Econometrics 142 (2) (February): 655-674.
Leininger, Lindsey. 2009. “Partial-year insurance coverage and the health care utilization
of children.” Medical Care Research and Review 66(1): 49-67.
Lo Sasso, Anthony T. and Thomas C. Buchmueller. 2004. “The effect of the state
children's health insurance program on health insurance coverage.” Journal of Health
Economics 23(5): 1059-1082.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and Arleen
Leibowitz. 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment.” The American Economic Review 77 (3) (June 1): 251-277.
Minino, Arialdi M., Jiaquan Xu, and Kenneth D. Kochanek. 2010. “Deaths: Preliminary
Data for 2008.” National Vital Statistics Reports 59(2): 1-71.
Racine, Andrew D., Robert Kaestner, Theodore J. Joyce and Gregory J. Colman. 2001
“Differential impact of recent Medicaid expansions by race and ethnicity.” Pediatrics
108: 1135-1142.
Shi, Lei Yu, Michael E. Samuels, Mary Pease, Walter P. Bailey and Elizabeth H. Corley.
1999. “Patient Characteristics Associated with Hospitalizations for Ambulatory Care
Sensitive Conditions in South Carolina.” Southern Medical Journal 92(10): 989-998.
Valdez, R. Burciaga, Robert H. Brook, William H. Rogers, John E. Ware, Emmett B.
Keeler, Cathy A. Sherbourne, Kathleen N. Lohr, George A. Goldberg, Patricia Camp, and
Joseph Newhouse. 1985. “Consequences for Cost-Sharing for Children’s Health.”
Pediatrics 75(5): 952-961.

36

Table 1. Federal Legislation Expanding Medicaid Eligibility for Children Using September 30, 1983 Birthdate Cutoff
Legislation

Date
Effective

Mandatory Expansion

State Option

Deficit Reduction Act, 1984 (DEFRA)

Oct. 1, 1984 Made eligible children under age 5 born after
September 30, 1983 whose families were income
and resource eligible for AFDC

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1987
(OBRA87)

Jul. 1, 1988

Gave states the option of making eligible
children under age 2, 3, 4, or 5 and born after
September 30, 1983 in families with incomes
below 100% FPL
Oct. 1, 1988 Made eligible children under age 7 born after
Gave states the option of making eligible
September 30, 1983 whose families were income children under age 8 born after September 30,
and resource eligible for AFDC
1983 with incomes below 100% FPL
Gave states the option of making eligible
children under age 8 born after September 30,
1983 whose families were income and resource
eligible for AFDC

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1990
(OBRA90)

Jul. 1, 1991 Made eligible children under age 19 born after
September 30, 1983 with incomes below 100%
FPL

Sources: Congressional Research Service (1988) and Kaiser Family Foundation (2010).

Table 2. Ranking of States by Gain in Eligibility at September 30, 1983
Rank

State

Average Difference in Years of Eligibility
Child Born in Oct. vs. Sept. 1983
1
Maryland
1.68
2
Louisiana
0.91
3
Nevada
0.84
4
Arkansas
0.82
5
Colorado
0.82
6
Alabama
0.79
7
Texas
0.79
8
Indiana
0.78
9
Montana
0.69
10
Wyoming
0.69
11
Idaho
0.68
12
Connecticut
0.65
13
Arizona
0.64
14
Florida
0.63
15
Ohio
0.63
16
District of Columbia
0.61
17
Nebraska
0.57
18
South Dakota
0.53
19
Mississippi
0.51
20
Illinois
0.50
21
Rhode Island
0.49
22
Oklahoma
0.47
23
New Hampshire
0.46
24
South Carolina
0.45
25
Kentucky
0.43
26
New Mexico
0.42
27
Iowa
0.40
28
Wisconsin
0.39
29
West Virginia
0.39
30
New Jersey
0.37
31
Oregon
0.35
32
Tennessee
0.32
33
Virginia
0.31
34
Pennsylvania
0.31
35
Kansas
0.29
36
Michigan
0.26
37
Hawaii
0.26
38
Missouri
0.23
39
Washington
0.19
40
North Dakota
0.18
41
Minnesota
0.16
42
Alaska
0.16
43
New York
0.13
44
North Carolina
0.13
45
Utah
0.13
46
Delaware
0.13
47
Massachussetts
0.11
48
Georgia
0.10
49
Vermont
0.03
50
California
0.03
51
Maine
0.02
Notes: Horizontal line separates the high and low eligibility gain states. Average
difference in years of eligibility is calculated usinga fixed sample of children of ages
0-17 in the 1981-1988 March CPS. See text for more information.

Table 3. Characteristics of Children in State Eligibility Groups, 1983

Nonwhite
Married family
Family size
At least one employed parent
Family with income below 100% FPL
Eligible for AFDC
Eligible for Medicaid
N

Low eligibility High eligibility
gain
gain
0.186
0.186
0.761
0.757
4.363
4.356
0.880
0.897
0.203
0.201
0.151
0.111
0.151
0.112
21,113

Difference
0.000
-0.004
-0.007
0.017 ***
-0.002
-0.040 ***
-0.039 ***

22,762

Notes: Weighted means are calculated for children ages 0-17 using the 1984 March Current
Population Survey. Asterisks denote p-value for difference, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 4. Difference in Years of Eligibility by Race and State Group for a Child Born in October vs. September 1983
All children

Black children

White children

All states

0.43

0.80

0.37

States with high eligibility gain

0.71

1.33

0.59

States with low eligibility gain

0.14

0.24

0.13

Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of children of
ages 0-17 in the 1981-1988 March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is indexed using the
CPI-U and assumed to be constant over the child's lifetime. For each race category, states are classified as
having a high eligibility gain by first ranking state-level estimates of the difference in years of eligibility for
a child of that race born in October versus September 1983 and then selecting the number of states with the
largest average gain in eligibility that comprises 50% of the national population of children of that race. See
Appendix Table 2 for the ranking of states by eligibility gain for all children.

Table 5. Average Rate of Death for Children Born Before September 30, 1983 By Race, Age and State Group

All
causes

All states
Internal External
causes causes

Low eligibility gain states
All
Internal External
causes causes causes

High eligibility gain states
All
Internal External
causes causes causes

N

All children
Age 4-7
2.58
1.24
1.34
2.50
1.21
1.29
2.66
1.27
1.38
90
Age 8-14
2.37
1.06
1.32
2.25
1.03
1.22
2.49
1.09
1.41
135
Age 15-18
6.70
1.54
5.16
6.19
1.47
4.72
7.18
1.60
5.58
90
Black children
Age 4-7
3.62
1.53
2.09
3.64
1.53
2.11
3.61
1.53
2.08
90
Age 8-14
3.31
1.47
1.85
3.20
1.46
1.74
3.44
1.47
1.96
135
Age 15-18
8.90
2.35
6.55
8.50
2.30
6.21
9.34
2.40
6.94
90
White children
Age 4-7
2.39
1.20
1.19
2.33
1.17
1.16
2.44
1.22
1.22
90
Age 8-14
2.21
0.99
1.22
2.10
0.97
1.14
2.30
1.00
1.30
135
Age 15-18
6.31
1.39
4.92
5.83
1.34
4.49
6.74
1.44
5.31
90
Notes: Average of annual rates of death per 10,000 children calculated for each birth month cohort between January
1980 and September 1983. Mortality rates constructed using National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death
files for the years 1980 to 2007 and NVSS Birth Date files for the years 1980 to 1987.

Table 6. Average Rate of Death for Children Born Before September 30, 1983 By Underlying Cause of Death By Race and Age

Deaths from all causes

All children
4-7 8-14 15-18
2.58 2.37 6.70

Black children
4-7 8-14 15-18
3.62 3.31 8.90

White children
4-7 8-14 15-18
2.39 2.21 6.31

Deaths due to internal causes
Infectious and parasitic diseases
Neoplasms (malignant and nonmalignant)
Diseases of blood, blood-forming organs, immune forming
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
Mental and behavioral disorders
Diseases of the nervous system
Cardiovascular and circulatory system diseases
Respiratory system diseases
Digestive system diseases
Congenital and chromosomal abnormalities
Symptoms and signs not elsewhere classified
All other diseases

1.24
0.09
0.37
0.03
0.06
0.02
0.16
0.10
0.10
0.04
0.19
0.05
0.03

1.06
0.08
0.29
0.02
0.06
0.01
0.15
0.12
0.10
0.03
0.11
0.05
0.03

1.54
0.09
0.38
0.03
0.10
0.03
0.20
0.25
0.13
0.04
0.11
0.12
0.06

1.53
0.15
0.31
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.21
0.15
0.16
0.06
0.22
0.09
0.04

1.47
0.15
0.29
0.06
0.05
0.01
0.21
0.19
0.21
0.04
0.12
0.08
0.05

2.35
0.17
0.43
0.08
0.10
0.03
0.27
0.48
0.24
0.08
0.17
0.18
0.14

1.20
0.08
0.39
0.02
0.07
0.02
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.04
0.19
0.04
0.03

0.99
0.06
0.29
0.02
0.07
0.01
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.03
0.11
0.04
0.02

1.39
0.07
0.38
0.02
0.10
0.03
0.19
0.21
0.10
0.03
0.10
0.11
0.04

Deaths due to external causes
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Transport accidents
Nontransport accidents
Falls
Accidental discharge of firearms
Accidental drowning and submersion
Accidental exposure to smoke, fire and flames
Accidental poisoning and exposure to noxious substances
Other and unspecified nontransport accidents
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
Assault (homicide)
Legal intervention
Events of undetermined intent
Operations of war and their sequelae
Complications of medical and surgical care

1.34
1.22
0.66
0.56
0.02
0.03
0.17
0.21
0.01
0.12
0.02
0.03
0.17
0.21
0.01
0.12

1.32
0.98
0.62
0.35
0.01
0.06
0.11
0.06
0.01
0.09
0.01
0.06
0.11
0.06
0.01
0.09

5.16
3.31
2.70
0.60
0.04
0.08
0.18
0.04
0.12
0.14
0.04
0.08
0.18
0.04
0.12
0.14

2.09
1.81
0.84
0.97
0.02
0.05
0.26
0.51
0.02
0.12
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.01

1.85
1.24
0.63
0.61
0.01
0.07
0.29
0.14
0.01
0.07
0.09
0.48
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.01

6.55
2.50
1.79
0.71
0.02
0.15
0.31
0.07
0.05
0.11
0.52
3.40
0.03
0.10
0.00
0.01

1.19
1.10
0.62
0.48
0.02
0.02
0.15
0.15
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01

1.22
0.93
0.63
0.31
0.01
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.01
0.10
0.15
0.11
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.01

4.92
3.50
2.91
0.59
0.05
0.07
0.15
0.04
0.14
0.15
0.88
0.47
0.01
0.06
0.00
0.01

Notes: Average of annual rates of death calculated for each birth month cohort between January 1980 and September 1983. Mortality rates
constructed using National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2007 and NVSS Birth Date files for the
years 1980 to 1987.

Table 7. Change in Annual Mortality Rate for Children Born after September 30, 1983 by Age and Race

All
causes
(1)
All children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
Black children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
White children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean

Ages 4-7
Internal External
causes causes
(2)
(3)

All
causes
(4)

Ages 8-14
Internal External
causes causes
(5)
(6)

All
causes
(7)

-0.001
0.026
(0.030) (0.029)
0.000 0.064**
(0.031) (0.031)
0.001 0.061**
(0.030) (0.028)
-0.010
0.033
(0.040) (0.048)

0.268**
(0.106)
0.269**
(0.104)
0.268**
(0.105)
0.039
(0.182)

Ages 15-18
Internal External
causes causes
(8)
(9)

0.050
(0.057)
0.036
(0.058)
0.034
(0.057)
0.060
(0.075)

0.056
(0.043)
0.048
(0.044)
0.047
(0.044)
0.001
(0.066)

-0.006
(0.052)
-0.012
(0.052)
-0.014
(0.052)
0.059
(0.080)

0.025
(0.042)
0.065
(0.042)
0.062
(0.040)
0.023
(0.059)

2.580

1.241

1.339

2.373

1.057

1.316

6.697

1.537

5.160

0.034
(0.163)
-0.018
(0.160)
-0.020
(0.158)
-0.258
(0.195)

0.085
(0.098)
0.076
(0.100)
0.068
(0.099)
0.034
(0.132)

-0.051
(0.155)
-0.094
(0.145)
-0.088
(0.150)
-0.292
(0.181)

-0.275**
(0.128)
-0.237*
(0.131)
-0.237*
(0.128)
-0.286
(0.188)

-0.113
(0.090)
-0.124
(0.091)
-0.118
(0.090)
-0.158
(0.132)

-0.162*
(0.091)
-0.113
(0.095)
-0.119
(0.093)
-0.128
(0.164)

-0.179
(0.287)
-0.110
(0.276)
-0.120
(0.284)
-0.630
(0.402)

-0.296**
(0.140)
-0.303**
(0.145)
-0.309**
(0.142)
-0.467**
(0.230)

0.116
(0.273)
0.193
(0.254)
0.190
(0.262)
-0.164
(0.352)

3.624

1.532

2.092

3.313

1.466

1.847

8.903

2.349

6.554

0.054
(0.060)
0.046
(0.062)
0.044
(0.062)
0.097
(0.079)

0.050
(0.047)
0.041
(0.048)
0.042
(0.047)
-0.030
(0.070)

0.004
(0.050)
0.005
(0.052)
0.002
(0.051)
0.126
(0.079)

0.080*
(0.045)
0.118**
(0.047)
0.115**
(0.044)
0.076
(0.068)

2.390

1.197

1.193

2.207

0.021
0.058*
(0.029) (0.035)
0.024 0.093**
(0.030) (0.038)
0.025 0.090**
(0.030) (0.035)
0.019
0.057
(0.039) (0.060)
0.987

1.220

0.325***
(0.116)
0.313***
(0.116)
0.314***
(0.117)
0.135
(0.192)
6.308

0.008 0.260***
(0.049) (0.095)
0.000 0.269***
(0.051) (0.093)
-0.001 0.269***
(0.050) (0.094)
-0.070
0.109
(0.088) (0.154)

0.058 0.267**
(0.046) (0.101)
0.051 0.262**
(0.048) (0.101)
0.051 0.263**
(0.048) (0.102)
0.003
0.132
(0.083) (0.166)
1.392

4.916

Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions with the specified function in birth cohort, which also includes age,
month, and year dummies. Standard errors reported in parentheses are robust and clustered by birth month cohort,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 8. Comparison of Annual Mortality Rates for Children Born One Year Before and After Cutoff
Black children
Pre
Post-Pre

Total Mortality
Age 4-7
Age 8-14
Age 15-18

Internal Mortality
Age 4-7
Age 8-14
Age 15-18

External Mortality
Age 4-7
Age 8-14
Age 15-18

White children
Pre
Post-Pre

Diff-in-Diff
(Black Post-Pre) (White Post-Pre)

3.888
(0.130)
3.180
(0.118)
8.254
(0.190)

-0.216
(0.181)
-0.293*
(0.163)
-0.480*
(0.264)

2.323
(0.045)
2.021
(0.042)
6.014
(0.072)

-0.085
(0.063)
0.006
(0.059)
0.065
(0.102)

-0.132
(0.230)
-0.299
(0.210)
-0.546
(0.350)

1.572
(0.083)
1.476
(0.080)
2.461
(0.104)

0.049
(0.118)
-0.099
(0.111)
-0.363**
(0.141)

1.191
(0.032)
0.952
(0.029)
1.384
(0.035)

-0.027
(0.045)
-0.011
(0.041)
0.007
(0.049)

0.076
(0.155)
-0.089
(0.144)
-0.370**
(0.179)

2.316
(0.100)
1.705
(0.086)
5.793
(0.159)

-0.265*
(0.138)
-0.194
(0.118)
-0.118
(0.223)

1.133
(0.031)
1.069
(0.030)
4.630
(0.063)

-0.057
(0.044)
0.016
(0.043)
0.058
(0.090)

-0.208
(0.169)
-0.210
(0.153)
-0.176
(0.301)

Notes: Mortality rates for each age group are calculated as the sum of the total number of
deaths divided by the sum of the population at risk for those ages. Counts of deaths are from
the NVSS Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980-2007. The population at risk for
each age is calculated as the population at birth minus the number of deaths for all preceding
ages. Population counts at birth are from the NVSS Birth Data files for the years 1980-2007.
Standard errors are calculated based on the binomial distribution, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

Table 9. Change in Mortality in High Eligibility Gain States for Children Born after September 30, 1983

All
causes
(1)
All children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
Black children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
White children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean

Ages 4-7
Internal External
causes causes
(2)
(3)

All
causes
(4)

Ages 8-14
Internal External
causes causes
(5)
(6)

All
causes
(7)

Ages 15-18
Internal External
causes causes
(8)
(9)

0.011
(0.077)
-0.007
(0.076)
-0.006
(0.076)
-0.164
(0.109)

0.024
(0.056)
0.019
(0.058)
0.021
(0.057)
-0.099
(0.086)

-0.013
(0.065)
-0.026
(0.064)
-0.026
(0.064)
-0.065
(0.103)

0.033
(0.058)
0.095*
(0.053)
0.086
(0.053)
0.022
(0.072)

0.010
(0.040)
0.028
(0.038)
0.023
(0.038)
-0.003
(0.050)

0.023
(0.040)
0.067*
(0.037)
0.063*
(0.036)
0.025
(0.056)

0.464***
(0.133)
0.483***
(0.126)
0.486***
(0.128)
0.258
(0.194)

0.039 0.425***
(0.055) (0.138)
0.038 0.446***
(0.057) (0.133)
0.037 0.449***
(0.056) (0.134)
0.029
0.229
(0.109) (0.209)

2.656

1.271

1.384

2.491

1.086

1.405

7.185

1.603

5.582

0.227
(0.241)
0.181
(0.246)
0.176
(0.242)
-0.419
(0.346)

-0.009
(0.147)
-0.009
(0.147)
-0.013
(0.147)
-0.189
(0.216)

0.236
(0.188)
0.189
(0.187)
0.190
(0.185)
-0.230
(0.279)

-0.294
(0.192)
-0.249
(0.195)
-0.253
(0.194)
-0.146
(0.258)

-0.121
(0.119)
-0.138
(0.123)
-0.132
(0.122)
-0.156
(0.167)

-0.172
(0.143)
-0.111
(0.144)
-0.121
(0.144)
0.010
(0.218)

0.264
(0.405)
0.405
(0.373)
0.402
(0.383)
-0.742
(0.449)

-0.235
(0.195)
-0.229
(0.199)
-0.233
(0.198)
-0.399
(0.325)

0.499
(0.390)
0.635*
(0.365)
0.635*
(0.369)
-0.343
(0.466)

3.610

1.535

2.076

3.437

1.473

1.964

9.344

2.403

6.941

0.016
(0.082)
0.007
(0.082)
0.008
(0.082)
-0.131
(0.118)

0.032
(0.061)
0.026
(0.061)
0.028
(0.061)
-0.130
(0.085)

-0.016
(0.068)
-0.019
(0.069)
-0.020
(0.069)
-0.001
(0.107)

0.079
(0.061)
0.137**
(0.061)
0.128**
(0.060)
0.064
(0.095)

0.039
(0.041)
0.058
(0.040)
0.053
(0.041)
0.030
(0.058)

0.041
(0.050)
0.079
(0.051)
0.075
(0.049)
0.034
(0.079)

0.537***
(0.162)
0.539***
(0.163)
0.543***
(0.163)
0.471**
(0.236)

2.441

1.217

1.224

2.301

1.004

1.296

6.744

0.112* 0.425***
(0.057) (0.151)
0.109* 0.430***
(0.058) (0.151)
0.108* 0.434***
(0.057) (0.150)
0.145
0.326
(0.093) (0.227)
1.438

5.306

Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions with the specified function in birth cohort, which also includes age,
month, and year dummies. Standard errors reported in parentheses are robust and clustered by birth month cohort,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 10. Change in Mortality in Low Eligibility Gain States for Children Born after September 30, 1983

All
causes
(1)
All children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
Black children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
White children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean

Ages 4-7
Internal External
causes causes
(2)
(3)

All
causes
(4)

Ages 8-14
Internal External
causes causes
(5)
(6)

All
causes
(7)

Ages 15-18
Internal External
causes causes
(8)
(9)

0.090
(0.090)
0.080
(0.093)
0.074
(0.092)
0.296**
(0.117)

0.088
(0.057)
0.077
(0.059)
0.074
(0.058)
0.107
(0.085)

0.002
(0.072)
0.003
(0.074)
0.000
(0.074)
0.189*
(0.107)

0.017
(0.055)
0.034
(0.057)
0.038
(0.056)
0.025
(0.080)

-0.012
(0.041)
-0.028
(0.043)
-0.021
(0.043)
-0.017
(0.055)

0.029
(0.045)
0.062
(0.048)
0.059
(0.046)
0.042
(0.073)

0.065
(0.177)
0.048
(0.174)
0.044
(0.175)
-0.185
(0.280)

-0.026
(0.079)
-0.040
(0.081)
-0.041
(0.080)
-0.174
(0.118)

0.091
(0.145)
0.088
(0.146)
0.085
(0.147)
-0.011
(0.224)

2.502

1.211

1.292

6.186

1.467

4.719

6.186

1.467

4.719

-0.131
(0.261)
-0.190
(0.258)
-0.190
(0.257)
-0.119
(0.384)

0.167
(0.154)
0.148
(0.159)
0.137
(0.156)
0.230
(0.235)

-0.298
(0.237)
-0.337
(0.226)
-0.327
(0.232)
-0.348
(0.301)

-0.259
(0.185)
-0.228
(0.192)
-0.224
(0.189)
-0.413
(0.267)

-0.102
(0.118)
-0.109
(0.121)
-0.103
(0.118)
-0.159
(0.183)

-0.157
(0.141)
-0.119
(0.148)
-0.121
(0.147)
-0.255
(0.232)

-0.571
(0.439)
-0.564
(0.441)
-0.579
(0.440)
-0.539
(0.648)

-0.352*
(0.200)
-0.372*
(0.200)
-0.379*
(0.197)
-0.528*
(0.278)

-0.219
(0.359)
-0.193
(0.356)
-0.199
(0.359)
-0.011
(0.531)

3.636

1.530

2.106

3.201

1.459

1.742

8.505

2.298

6.206

0.094
(0.163)
0.068
(0.158)
0.067
(0.159)
-0.228
(0.266)

-0.002
(0.071)
-0.014
(0.073)
-0.013
(0.072)
-0.154
(0.118)

0.095
(0.142)
0.082
(0.140)
0.079
(0.142)
-0.074
(0.231)

5.830

1.342

4.488

0.094
(0.100)
0.088
(0.104)
0.082
(0.103)
0.346**
(0.139)
2.334

0.068
0.026
(0.064) (0.074)
0.058
0.030
(0.065) (0.076)
0.056
0.026
(0.064) (0.076)
0.081 0.265**
(0.100) (0.114)
1.174

1.160

0.082
(0.059)
0.098
(0.062)
0.103*
(0.059)
0.092
(0.087)
2.104

0.003
0.079
(0.044) (0.048)
-0.012 0.110**
(0.045) (0.052)
-0.004 0.107**
(0.045) (0.049)
0.008
0.084
(0.052) (0.084)
0.968

1.136

Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions with the specified function in birth cohort, which also includes age,
month, and year dummies. Standard errors reported in parentheses are robust and clustered by birth month cohort,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 11. Comparison of Annual Rates of Internal-Cause Death for Children Born One Year Before and After Cutoff for Black and White Children

Deaths due to internal causes
Infectious and parasitic diseases
Neoplasms (malignant and nonmalignant)
Diseases of blood, blood-forming organs, immune forming mechanisms
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
Mental and behavioral disorders
Diseases of the nervous system
Cardiovascular and circulatory system diseases
Respiratory system diseases
Digestive system diseases
Congenital and chromosomal abnormalities
Symptoms and signs not elsewhere classified
All other diseases

Black Children
(Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
0.049
-0.099
-0.363**
(0.118)
(0.111)
(0.141)
0.044
-0.037
-0.052
(0.044)
(0.039)
(0.038)
0.070
-0.035
-0.087
(0.054)
(0.051)
(0.060)
0.031
-0.010
0.009
(0.024)
(0.019)
(0.025)
-0.039**
-0.012
0.018
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.028)
0.017
0.007
-0.026
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.019)
-0.013
-0.017
-0.074
(0.045)
(0.040)
(0.050)
0.026
0.018
-0.022
(0.035)
(0.039)
(0.061)
-0.030
-0.040
-0.057
(0.035)
(0.043)
(0.044)
-0.013
0.007
-0.031
(0.025)
(0.017)
(0.023)
-0.048
0.013
-0.009
(0.045)
(0.033)
(0.039)
0.013
0.003
-0.017
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.040)
-0.009
0.005
-0.013
(0.018)
(0.023)
(0.036)

White Children
(Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
-0.027
-0.011
0.007
(0.101)
(0.091)
(0.110)
0.011
0.000
0.002
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.024)
0.016
-0.004
-0.019
(0.056)
(0.050)
(0.057)
-0.004
0.002
-0.003
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.011)
-0.002
-0.006
-0.010
(0.025)
(0.022)
(0.028)
-0.003
-0.002
-0.003
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.015)
0.007
-0.005
-0.002
(0.037)
(0.034)
(0.041)
-0.023
-0.009
-0.002
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.042)
0.006
0.013
0.002
(0.028)
(0.025)
(0.030)
-0.004
0.007
0.012
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.018)
-0.015
0.004
0.000
(0.041)
(0.030)
(0.033)
-0.011
-0.004
0.017
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.033)
-0.005
-0.005
0.012
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.018)

Difference-in-Differences
(Black Post-Pre) - (White Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
0.076
-0.089
-0.370**
(0.155)
(0.144)
(0.179)
0.033
-0.037
-0.054
(0.051)
(0.046)
(0.044)
0.054
-0.031
-0.068
(0.078)
(0.071)
(0.083)
0.035
-0.012
0.011
(0.027)
(0.022)
(0.027)
-0.037
-0.006
0.028
(0.031)
(0.030)
(0.040)
0.020
0.009
-0.024
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.024)
-0.020
-0.012
-0.072
(0.058)
(0.053)
(0.064)
0.049
0.027
-0.020
(0.046)
(0.049)
(0.074)
-0.037
-0.053
-0.059
(0.044)
(0.050)
(0.054)
-0.009
0.001
-0.043
(0.030)
(0.023)
(0.029)
-0.033
0.009
-0.008
(0.061)
(0.045)
(0.051)
0.024
0.006
-0.035
(0.030)
(0.030)
(0.052)
-0.004
0.010
-0.025
(0.024)
(0.027)
(0.041)

Notes: Mortality rates for each age group are calculated as the sum of the total number of deaths divided by the sum of the population at risk for those ages. Counts of death are from the
National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2007. The population at risk for each age is calculated as the population at birth minus the number of deaths
for all preceding ages. Population counts at birth are from the NVSS Birth Date files for the years 1980 to 2007. Standard errors are calculated based on the binomial distribution, *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 12. Comparison of Annual Rates of External-Cause Death for Children Born One Year Before and After Cutoff for Black and White Children

Deaths due to external causes
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Transport accidents
Nontransport accidents
Falls
Accidental discharge of firearms
Accidental drowning and submersion
Accidental exposure to smoke, fire and flames
Accidental poisoning and exposure to noxious substances
Other and unspecified nontransport accidents
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
Assault (homicide)
Legal intervention
Events of undetermined intent
Operations of war and their sequelae
Complications of medical and surgical care

Black Children
(Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
-0.265*
-0.194
-0.118
(0.138)
(0.118)
(0.223)
-0.234*
-0.164
-0.083
(0.128)
(0.102)
(0.142)
-0.156*
-0.139*
-0.065
(0.084)
(0.072)
(0.122)
-0.078
-0.025
-0.017
(0.096)
(0.072)
(0.073)
-0.004
0.003
-0.022*
(0.014)
(0.010)
(0.013)
-0.009
-0.007
0.004
(0.022)
(0.024)
(0.028)
-0.109**
-0.055
-0.087*
(0.045)
(0.048)
(0.052)
0.057
0.025
0.035
(0.072)
(0.038)
(0.021)
-0.009
0.003
0.004
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.018)
-0.004
0.008
0.048
(0.035)
(0.026)
(0.030)
0.009
0.027
-0.052
(0.006)
(0.025)
(0.060)
-0.017
-0.047
0.026
(0.047)
(0.052)
(0.160)
0.000
-0.002
-0.004
(0.000)
(0.006)
(0.013)
-0.004
-0.015
-0.013
(0.019)
(0.013)
(0.019)
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.017
0.007
0.009
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.006)

White Children
(Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
-0.057
0.016
0.058
(0.098)
(0.097)
(0.201)
-0.040
0.011
0.088
(0.094)
(0.086)
(0.172)
-0.003
0.003
0.044
(0.070)
(0.071)
(0.157)
-0.037
0.008
0.043
(0.063)
(0.048)
(0.070)
-0.002
0.003
-0.010
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.019)
-0.003
-0.007
-0.004
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.022)
-0.004
-0.006
-0.008
(0.035)
(0.024)
(0.032)
-0.019
0.001
0.003
(0.036)
(0.018)
(0.017)
-0.002
0.008
0.045
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.040)
-0.008
0.010
0.018
(0.032)
(0.028)
(0.034)
-0.002
0.005
-0.042
(0.003)
(0.032)
(0.084)
-0.012
-0.004
0.019
(0.024)
(0.028)
(0.058)
0.000
0.000
-0.002
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.007)
-0.007
-0.001
-0.003
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.022)
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.004
0.005
-0.002
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.010)

Difference-in-Differences
(Black Post-Pre) - (White Post-Pre)
4-7
8-14
15-18
-0.208
-0.210
-0.176
(0.169)
(0.153)
(0.301)
-0.194
-0.175
-0.171
(0.159)
(0.133)
(0.223)
-0.154
-0.142
-0.110
(0.110)
(0.101)
(0.199)
-0.041
-0.033
-0.061
(0.115)
(0.086)
(0.101)
-0.003
0.000
-0.012
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.023)
-0.006
-0.001
0.009
(0.026)
(0.030)
(0.036)
-0.105*
-0.049
-0.079
(0.057)
(0.054)
(0.061)
0.076
0.024
0.032
(0.081)
(0.042)
(0.028)
-0.007
-0.005
-0.041
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.044)
0.004
-0.003
0.030
(0.047)
(0.039)
(0.046)
0.010
0.022
-0.010
(0.007)
(0.041)
(0.103)
-0.005
-0.044
0.007
(0.053)
(0.060)
(0.170)
0.000
-0.002
-0.003
(0.000)
(0.006)
(0.015)
0.003
-0.014
-0.010
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.029)
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.021
0.002
0.010
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.011)

Notes: Mortality rates for each age group are calculated as the sum of the total number of deaths divided by the sum of the population at risk for those ages. Counts of death are from the
National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2007. The population at risk for each age is calculated as the population at birth minus the number of deaths
for all preceding ages. Population counts at birth are from the NVSS Birth Date files for the years 1980 to 2007. Standard errors are calculated based on the binomial distribution, *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

18

Figure 1. Average Years of Childhood Eligibility for Medicaid/SCHIP by Birth Cohort and Family Income (%FPL)

16

0−24% FPL

14
12
8

10

50−74% FPL

6

75−99% FPL

2

4

100−124% FPL

125−150% FPL

Oct−87

Jul−87

Apr−87

Jan−87

Oct−86

Jul−86

Apr−86

Jan−86

Oct−85

Jul−85

Apr−85

Jan−85

Oct−84

Jul−84

Apr−84

Jan−84

Oct−83

Jul−83

Apr−83

Jan−83

Oct−82

Jul−82

Apr−82

Jan−82

Oct−81

Jul−81

Apr−81

Jan−81

Oct−80

Jul−80

Apr−80

Jan−80

0

Average Years of Childhood Eligibility

25−49% FPL

Birth Cohort
Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of children of ages 0−17 in the 1981−1988
March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is indexed using the CPI−U and assumed to be constant over the child's lifetime.

5

Figure 2. Average Difference in Childhood Eligibility for October vs. September 1983 Birth, by Family Income

4
3

3.87

1

2

2.17

0.5

0.34

0.19

0

Average Difference in Childhood Years of Eligibility

4.7

0−24% FPL

25−49% FPL

50−74% FPL

75−99% FPL

100−124% FPL

125−150% FPL

Family Income (%FPL)

Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of children of ages 0−17 in the 1981−1988
March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is indexed using the CPI−U and assumed to be constant over the child's lifetime.

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Sept−1983
Oct−1983

Ages 4−7

Ages 8−14

Ages 15−18

0.0

Share of Birth Cohort Eligible for Public Health Insurance

1.0

Figure 3. Average Public Eligibility for Each Age of Childhood by Birth Month Cohort, All Races

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Age in Years
Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of children of ages 0−17 in the
1981−1988 March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is indexed using the CPI−U and assumed to be constant
over the child's lifetime.

Black Children

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Sept−1983
Oct−1983

Ages 4−7

Ages 8−14

Ages 15−18

0.0

Share of Birth Cohort with Public Eligibility

1.0

Figure 4. Average Public Eligibility At Each Age of Childhood by Child Race

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

White Children

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Sept−1983
Oct−1983

Ages 4−7
Ages 8−14

Ages 15−18

0.0

Share of Birth Cohort with Public Eligibility

1.0

Age in Years

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Age in Years
Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of black or white children of
ages 0−17 in the 1981−1988 March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is indexed using the CPI−U and
assumed to be constant over the child's lifetime.

Figure 5. Mortality Rates by Underlying Cause for Children Ages 1−19, 1983

Internal
External

6
4

!

2

!

!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

0

Deaths per 10,000 Children

8

!

5

10

15

Age in Years
Sources: 1983 NVSS Multiple Cause of Death and Census Bureau population estimates.

Figure
6: Child
ChildMortality
Mortalityfrom
from
Causes
Figure.
AllAll
Causes
Ages 4−7
3.0

●

Total Mortality

●
●
● ●

2.8

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●

●

●

●

2.6

●●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2.4

●

●

●

●
●●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2.2

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●●

●

●
●
● ●
●
●

● ●

●
●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●

2.0

Jun−80

Feb−82

Oct−83

Jun−85

Feb−87

Ages 8−14
2.8
●
●

2.6

●

Total Mortality

●

●

● ●
●

●
●

2.4

●

●
●

●

●● ●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

2.2

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●●

●
● ●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

●

●

●
●●

●

2.0

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
● ●
●

●

●

●

●●
●
●

●
●
●

● ●

●
●

●

●
●

●

1.8
Jun−80

Feb−82

Oct−83

Jun−85

Feb−87

Ages 15−18
8.0

●

7.5

●

●

Total Mortality

●
●

7.0

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

6.5

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

6.0

●

●●

●
●

●

●

● ●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●
● ●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

5.5
Jun−80

Feb−82

Oct−83

Jun−85

Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure.
Cause
Figure
7: Child
ChildMortality
MortalitybybyUnderlying
Underlying
Cause
Internal Causes, Ages 4−7

External Causes, Ages 4−7
1.6

1.6

●

●

●

●
●

1.4

●
● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

1.2

●

●

●

●
●
●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

1.4

●●
●

●
●●● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

1.2

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●● ● ●
●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●

●
●●

●

1.0

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

External Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

1.0

●

●●

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Internal Causes, Ages 8−14

External Causes, Ages 8−14
1.6

1.3

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●●

1.1

●

●

●

●
●

1.0

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●
●
● ●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●●

●●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

0.9

●

●

● ●
●●
●

●

●

1.4

●●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

● ●
●
● ●●

● ●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●●

●
● ●●
●● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●
● ●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●●

●●

●

1.0

●

●

●

External Mortality

Internal Mortality

1.2
●

●

●●●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

● ●

●

●●●
●●
●

●

●

●
●

0.8
0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Internal Causes, Ages 15−18

External Causes, Ages 15−18
●

1.8
●

●
●

Internal Mortality

●

●

●
●

1.6

●

●

●
●
●● ●

●●
●

● ●●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●●● ●●

●
●

6.0
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
● ● ●●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●●

External Mortality

●

●

5.5

● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●●

5.0

●●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●

●

●

1.2

●

●

4.5

●

●●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●●
●

●
● ●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

●●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure.
Causes
Race
Figure
8: Child
ChildMortality
Mortalityfrom
fromAllAll
CausesbybyChild
Child
Race
White, Ages 4−7

Black, Ages 4−7

3.0
●
●

2.8

4.5

●

●●

●

●
●
●

●

●
● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●

●

●
●●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●
●

●
● ●
●

●

2.0

●

●

●
●

2.2

●

●

●
●

2.4

●
●●

Total Mortality

Total Mortality

2.6

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●●

●
●

●

● ●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.8

●
●

●

3.0

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●●

●
●

●

●

●●
●●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

3.5

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

4.0

●

●

●

●
●

2.5
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 8−14

Black, Ages 8−14

2.6

4.0

●
●

●
●

●

●●
●

2.4
●

Total Mortality

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

2.2

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

2.0

●
●●●

●

●●

●
●

●●
●
●

●

●
● ●
● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

3.5

●

●
● ●

●

●●

●

●●

●
●

●
●●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●●

●

●●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2.5

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

● ●●

3.0

●●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

1.8

●
●

Total Mortality

●

●

●
●
●
●●
●

● ●
● ●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

1.6
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 15−18
7.5

Black, Ages 15−18
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

10

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●●

●
●

6.5

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●
●
●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●
●● ●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

6.0

●

●
●

Total Mortality

Total Mortality

7.0

●
●●

●

●

●
●
●

5.5

●

●

●

● ●●
●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

7

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●●
●
●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

● ●
● ●
● ●

●

●
●●

●

6

●
●●●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●
●

●

●

8

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●●
●

●
●●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

9

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure
ChildMortality
Mortality
from
Internal
CausesbybyChild
Child
Race
Figure.9:Child
from
Internal
Causes
Race
White, Ages 4−7

Black, Ages 4−7
●

1.6

●

2.0

●

1.4

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●●●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●●
●●

●
●

●

●

1.0

●

●

●
●

● ●●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●
●●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●●

● ●●
●

●
●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

1.2

●

●

1.5

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
● ●●

●

●

●
●

● ●
●
●
● ●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●● ●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

1.0

●

0.8

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 8−14

Black, Ages 8−14

1.3
2.0
1.2

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●

●●
●

1.0

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●
●

●

●●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●●●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●●

0.9

●

●
●

●

●

1.6

●●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

1.2

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

1.8
1.1

●

1.0

●
●

0.7

●

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 15−18

Black, Ages 15−18
3.5
●

1.6

●
●

● ●●

●

●

●

●●

●

1.4

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
● ●

●

●
●

●
●●
●

●

●
●
● ●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●●

●

●

●

●●

●
● ●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

●
●

1.2

●

●

●
●
● ●

●
●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

●

●
●●
● ●

●

2.5

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

2.0

●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
● ● ●●●
●●

●

●
●
●●
●

●

●
●

●

● ●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●● ●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

3.0

●
●

●

●

●
● ●

●

1.5
●

1.0

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure
10:Child
Child
Mortality
from
External
Causes
Child
Race
Figure.
Mortality
from
External
Causes
byby
Child
Race
White, Ages 4−7

Black, Ages 4−7
3.0
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

1.2

● ●●
●

●

●

●

●●●
●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●
●●

●

●

1.0

●

●

2.5

●

●

●

External Mortality

External Mortality

1.4

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●

●●
●

● ●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●
●●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

2.0

●

●
●
● ●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●●

1.5

0.8

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.0
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 8−14

Black, Ages 8−14

1.6
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●
●
●●

●
●●

●

●

●

1.2

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●●

●●
●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●

●●

1.0

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●●
●

●
● ●

●

●

●
●
●

2.0

●

●

●

External Mortality

External Mortality

1.4

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

1.5

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

●
●●

●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●

●●

●

● ●●
●

●

●●

●●
●

●

1.0
●

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

White, Ages 15−18

Black, Ages 15−18

6.0

●
●

8

● ●
●

●
●

●
●

●

External Mortality

External Mortality

●
●

●
●●
● ●

5.0

●
● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

5.5

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●● ●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●●
●

4.5

●
●

● ●
●●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

● ●
● ●●
●

● ● ●
●
●

●
●●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

7

●
●
●

●

●

6

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

● ●

● ●
●

●
●

5

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

● ●
●
●
●

●
●●

●
●

●●

●●
●
●
● ● ●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

4.0

4
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Appendix Table 1. Difference in Years of Eligibility by Type of Expansion, Oct. vs. Sept. 1983
Total Difference
in Years of
Childhood
Eligibility
All incomes
0-25% FPL
25-50% FPL
50-75% FPL
75-100% FPL
100-125% FPL
125-150% FPL

0.52
0.34
2.17
3.87
4.70
0.50
0.19

AFDC Income + Income Above AFDC Standard Up to
Resource Eligible
100% Poverty Line
DEFRA, OBRA87
Oct. 1, 1984
0.03
0.13
0.41
0.13
0.04
0.00
0.00

State Option
OBRA87
Oct. 1, 1988
0.06
0.07
0.21
0.30
0.33
0.19
0.06

Federal Mandate
OBRA90
Jul. 1, 1991
0.40
0.15
1.57
3.44
4.32
0.21
0.03

Notes: Weighted average calculated using the characteristics and state of residence of a sample of
children of ages 0−17 in the 1981−1988 March CPS. See text for more information. Family income is
indexed using the CPI−U and assumed to be constant over the child's lifetime. Coverage under
federally mandated rules is considered to supplant coverage under state optional rules or programs.
Differences in years of eligibility under AFDC- and poverty-related expansions may not always equal
total difference in years of childhood eligibility since optional state expansions under SCHIP are not
included in the table.

Appendix Table 2. State Groupings for Eligibiity Gain by Race
High eligibility gain
AL, AR, AZ, CO, CT, DC, FL, IA,
ID, IL, IN, KY, LA, MD, MT, MS,
NE, NH, NJ, NM, NV, OH, OK, RI,
SC, SD, TX, WI, WV, WY

Low eligibility gain
AK, CA, DE, GA, HI, KS, MA, ME,
MI, MO, MN, NC, ND, NY, OR, PA,
TN, UT, VA, VT, WA

Black children

AL, AR, AZ, CO, CT, DC, FL, IA,
ID, IL, IN, KY, LA, MD, MS, MT,
NE, NV, OH, OK, SC, TX, WY

AK, CA, DE, GA, HI, KS, MA, ME,
MI, MN, MO, NC, ND, NJ, NH,
NM, NY, OR, PA, RI, SD, TN, UT,
VA, VT, WA, WI, WV

White children

AL, AR, AZ, CO, CT, DC, FL, IA, AK, CA, DE, GA, HI, KS, MA, ME,
ID, IL, IN, KY, LA, MD, MS, MT, MI, MO, MN, NC, ND, NY, PA, TN,
NE, NH, NJ, NM, NV, OH, OK,
UT, VA, VT, WA
OR, RI, SC, SD, TX, WI, WV, WY

All children

Notes: For each race category, states are classified as having a high eligibility gain by first
ranking state-level estimates of the difference in years of eligibility for a child of that race
born in October versus September 1983 and then selecting the number of states with the
largest average gain in eligibility that comprises 50% of the national population of children of
that race.

Appendix Table 3. Change in Annual Mortality Rate for Children Born after September 30, 1983 by Age and
Race, Three Year Window (Oct. 1980-Sept.1986)

All
causes
(1)
All children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
Black children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
White children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean

Ages 4-7
Internal External
causes causes
(2)
(3)

All
causes
(4)

Ages 8-14
Internal External
causes causes
(5)
(6)

All
causes
(7)

Ages 15-18
Internal External
causes causes
(8)
(9)

-0.004
(0.058)
-0.007
(0.059)
-0.004
(0.058)
0.040
(0.081)

0.002
(0.048)
-0.001
(0.048)
0.002
(0.048)
-0.039
(0.075)

-0.005
(0.057)
-0.006
(0.058)
-0.005
(0.058)
0.080
(0.100)

0.083
(0.050)
0.100**
(0.047)
0.091*
(0.047)
-0.034
(0.064)

0.037
(0.039)
0.036
(0.040)
0.037
(0.040)
-0.024
(0.044)

0.045
(0.039)
0.063
(0.038)
0.054
(0.037)
-0.010
(0.053)

0.068
(0.123)
0.067
(0.123)
0.068
(0.123)
0.098
(0.224)

-0.057
(0.052)
-0.060
(0.053)
-0.057
(0.052)
-0.013
(0.088)

0.125
(0.110)
0.126
(0.110)
0.125
(0.111)
0.111
(0.204)

2.58

1.24

1.35

2.33

1.06

1.28

6.56

1.53

5.03

-0.109
(0.176)
-0.126
(0.172)
-0.109
(0.168)
-0.199
(0.240)

0.028
(0.114)
0.031
(0.112)
0.028
(0.114)
-0.146
(0.170)

-0.137
(0.169)
-0.156
(0.153)
-0.137
(0.155)
-0.054
(0.241)

-0.187
(0.152)
-0.181
(0.155)
-0.189
(0.154)
-0.413**
(0.182)

-0.022
(0.117)
-0.038
(0.119)
-0.031
(0.117)
-0.224
(0.143)

-0.165
(0.124)
-0.144
(0.125)
-0.158
(0.124)
-0.188
(0.169)

3.67

1.57

2.10

3.29

1.49

1.80

0.011
(0.066)
0.010
(0.067)
0.011
(0.067)
0.060
(0.094)

-0.019
(0.054)
-0.022
(0.054)
-0.019
(0.054)
-0.044
(0.083)

0.030
(0.055)
0.032
(0.056)
0.030
(0.055)
0.104
(0.093)

0.130**
(0.050)
0.148***
(0.051)
0.140***
(0.049)
0.034
(0.076)

2.38

1.19

1.20

2.16

0.051
0.080*
(0.036) (0.045)
0.051 0.097**
(0.038) (0.047)
0.051
0.089*
(0.037) (0.045)
0.010
0.023
(0.046) (0.068)
0.98

1.18

-0.387 -0.400** 0.013
(0.329) (0.157) (0.313)
-0.363 -0.397** 0.034
(0.319) (0.159) (0.299)
-0.387 -0.400** 0.013
(0.321) (0.158) (0.305)
-0.513 -0.173 -0.340
(0.457) (0.268) (0.398)
8.66

2.39

6.27

0.147
(0.140)
0.141
(0.138)
0.147
(0.138)
0.210
(0.232)

0.009
(0.053)
0.005
(0.054)
0.009
(0.052)
0.033
(0.074)

0.138
(0.124)
0.136
(0.123)
0.138
(0.124)
0.177
(0.214)

6.19

1.38

4.82

N
144
216
144
Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions with the specified function in birth cohort, which also includes age,
month, and year dummies. Standard errors reported in parentheses are robust and clustered by birth month cohort,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Appendix Table 4. Change in Annual Mortality Rate for Children Born after September 30, 1983 by Age and
Race, Two Year Window (Oct. 1981-Sept.1985)

All
causes
(1)
All children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
Black children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean
White children
Linear
Linear spline
Quadratic
Quadratic spline

Baseline mean

Ages 4-7
Internal External
causes causes
(2)
(3)

All
causes
(4)

Ages 8-14
Internal External
causes causes
(5)
(6)

All
causes
(7)

Ages 15-18
Internal External
causes causes
(8)
(9)

-0.098
(0.071)
-0.100
(0.070)
-0.090
(0.069)
-0.059
(0.093)

-0.103
(0.072)
-0.103
(0.072)
-0.101
(0.073)
-0.058
(0.087)

0.005
(0.085)
0.003
(0.084)
0.011
(0.087)
-0.001
(0.121)

0.070
(0.058)
0.073
(0.056)
0.070
(0.059)
0.007
(0.084)

0.049
(0.051)
0.048
(0.053)
0.052
(0.052)
0.048
(0.059)

0.021
(0.049)
0.025
(0.050)
0.018
(0.047)
-0.040
(0.052)

0.046
(0.143)
0.046
(0.144)
0.048
(0.147)
0.251
(0.192)

-0.056
(0.069)
-0.054
(0.071)
-0.060
(0.067)
0.113
(0.128)

0.102
(0.148)
0.100
(0.147)
0.109
(0.151)
0.138
(0.180)

2.57

1.24

1.33

2.29

1.05

1.25

6.43

1.55

4.88

-0.446*
(0.266)
-0.470*
(0.236)
-0.372
(0.225)
-0.181
(0.289)

-0.313**
(0.135)
-0.313**
(0.134)
-0.308**
(0.137)
-0.143
(0.188)

-0.133
(0.249)
-0.156
(0.241)
-0.064
(0.240)
-0.038
(0.327)

-0.367*
(0.198)
-0.349*
(0.190)
-0.382*
(0.191)
-0.274
(0.230)

-0.658*
(0.381)
-0.635
(0.408)
-0.717*
(0.400)
0.061
(0.641)

-0.247
(0.223)
-0.238
(0.231)
-0.277
(0.225)
0.137
(0.370)

-0.411
(0.369)
-0.397
(0.383)
-0.441
(0.380)
-0.076
(0.624)

3.72

1.56

2.15

3.28

1.49

1.79

8.42

2.45

5.97

-0.047
(0.087)
-0.046
(0.088)
-0.050
(0.087)
-0.069
(0.109)

-0.072
(0.076)
-0.072
(0.077)
-0.071
(0.077)
-0.064
(0.094)

0.025
(0.080)
0.026
(0.081)
0.021
(0.083)
-0.005
(0.117)

0.144**
(0.063)
0.142**
(0.065)
0.148**
(0.065)
0.047
(0.085)

0.076
(0.047)
0.074
(0.049)
0.079
(0.047)
0.047
(0.056)

0.069
(0.067)
0.067
(0.069)
0.070
(0.065)
-0.001
(0.071)

0.187
(0.154)
0.182
(0.152)
0.202
(0.154)
0.335*
(0.184)

-0.001
(0.061)
-0.001
(0.063)
0.001
(0.060)
0.141
(0.100)

0.188
(0.154)
0.184
(0.152)
0.202
(0.153)
0.194
(0.199)

2.37

1.19

1.18

2.12

0.97

1.15

6.08

1.39

4.70

-0.082 -0.285*
(0.151) (0.158)
-0.084 -0.266*
(0.152) (0.149)
-0.077 -0.305**
(0.155) (0.150)
-0.014 -0.260
(0.174) (0.195)

N
96
144
96
Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions with the specified function in birth cohort, which also includes age,
month, and year dummies. Standard errors reported in parentheses are robust and clustered by birth month cohort,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Appendix Table 5. Comparison of Annual Rates of Internal-Cause Death for Children Born One Year Before and After Cutoff at Ages 19-22 by Race
Black children
Pre
Post-Pre

White children
Pre
Post-Pre

Deaths due to all causes

14.571
(0.252)

-0.643*
(0.352)

9.023
(0.198)

-0.070
(0.280)

Difference-in-Differences
(Black Post-Pre) - (White
Post-Pre)
-0.573
(0.450)

Deaths due to internal causes

3.570
(0.125)
0.312
(0.037)
0.474
(0.045)
0.193
(0.029)
0.220
(0.031)
0.035
(0.012)
0.303
(0.036)
0.738
(0.057)
0.321
(0.037)
0.132
(0.024)
0.167
(0.027)
0.312
(0.037)
0.364
(0.040)

-0.066
(0.175)
0.039
(0.054)
0.004
(0.064)
-0.040
(0.039)
-0.022
(0.043)
0.013
(0.019)
0.000
(0.051)
0.031
(0.081)
-0.048
(0.051)
-0.004
(0.034)
-0.035
(0.036)
-0.040
(0.050)
0.035
(0.058)

1.969
(0.093)
0.081
(0.019)
0.481
(0.046)
0.024
(0.010)
0.154
(0.026)
0.106
(0.021)
0.207
(0.030)
0.312
(0.037)
0.130
(0.024)
0.058
(0.016)
0.131
(0.024)
0.191
(0.029)
0.093
(0.020)

-0.055
(0.130)
-0.015
(0.025)
-0.072
(0.062)
0.005
(0.015)
0.018
(0.038)
0.008
(0.031)
-0.002
(0.042)
0.002
(0.052)
-0.016
(0.033)
0.001
(0.023)
-0.016
(0.033)
0.030
(0.042)
0.001
(0.029)

-0.011
(0.218)
0.054
(0.059)
0.077
(0.090)
-0.045
(0.042)
-0.040
(0.057)
0.005
(0.036)
0.002
(0.067)
0.028
(0.096)
-0.032
(0.060)
-0.006
(0.041)
-0.019
(0.049)
-0.069
(0.066)
0.034
(0.064)

Infectious and parasitic diseases
Neoplasms (malignant and nonmalignant)
Diseases of blood, blood-forming organs, immune forming mechanisms
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
Mental and behavioral disorders
Diseases of the nervous system
Cardiovascular and circulatory system diseases
Respiratory system diseases
Digestive system diseases
Congenital and chromosomal abnormalities
Symptoms and signs not elsewhere classified
All other diseases

Population at Risk (in 10,000s)
227.72
1146.51
Notes: Mortality rates for each age group are calculated as the sum of the total number of deaths divided by the sum of the population at risk for those ages. Counts
of death are from the National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2007. The population at risk for each age is calculated as
the population at birth minus the number of deaths for all preceding ages. Population counts at birth are from the NVSS Birth Date files for the years 1980 to 2007.
Standard errors are calculated based on the binomial distribution, asterisks on differences indicate *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Appendix Table 6. Comparison of Annual Rates of External-Cause Death for Children Born One Year Before and After Cutoff at Ages 19-22 by Race
Black children
Pre
Post-Pre
Deaths due to all causes

Deaths due to external causes

14.571
(0.252)

-0.643*
(0.352)

White children
Pre
Post-Pre
9.023
(0.198)

-0.070
(0.280)

Difference-in-Differences
(Black Post-Pre) - (White PostPre)
-0.573
(0.450)

10.424
-0.577*
7.054
-0.015
-0.561
(0.213)
(0.305)
(0.175)
(0.248)
(0.393)
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
2.977
-0.483***
4.847
-0.036
-0.447*
(0.114)
(0.167)
(0.145)
(0.205)
(0.265)
Transport accidents
2.301
-0.281*
3.478
-0.145
-0.136
(0.100)
(0.146)
(0.123)
(0.172)
(0.226)
Nontransport accidents
0.676
-0.202**
1.369
0.109
-0.311**
(0.054)
(0.082)
(0.077)
(0.111)
(0.138)
Falls
0.018
-0.013
0.072
0.014
-0.027
(0.009)
(0.015)
(0.018)
(0.026)
(0.030)
Accidental discharge of firearms
0.088
-0.070**
0.049
0.002
-0.072*
(0.020)
(0.033)
(0.015)
(0.021)
(0.039)
Accidental drowning and submersion
0.184
-0.004
0.109
0.024
-0.029
(0.028)
(0.040)
(0.022)
(0.032)
(0.052)
Accidental exposure to smoke, fire and flames
0.044
-0.026
0.051
-0.008
-0.019
(0.014)
(0.022)
(0.015)
(0.020)
(0.030)
Accidental poisoning and exposure to noxious substances
0.198
-0.062
0.908
0.070
-0.132
(0.029)
(0.045)
(0.063)
(0.091)
(0.101)
Other and unspecified nontransport accidents
0.145
-0.026
0.181
0.006
-0.032
(0.025)
(0.037)
(0.028)
(0.040)
(0.055)
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
0.821
-0.136
1.292
0.065
-0.201
(0.060)
(0.088)
(0.075)
(0.107)
(0.139)
Assault (homicide)
6.424
0.008
0.686
-0.035
0.043
(0.167)
(0.236)
(0.055)
(0.076)
(0.248)
Legal intervention
0.061
-0.013
0.028
-0.010
-0.003
(0.016)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.028)
Events of undetermined intent
0.119
0.040
0.191
0.002
0.038
(0.023)
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.041)
(0.050)
Operations of war and their sequelae
0.000
-0.004
0.002
0.003
-0.007
(0.000)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Complications of medical and surgical care
0.022
0.013
0.010
-0.003
0.016
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.014)
Population at Risk (in 10,000s)
227.75
1146.51
Notes: Mortality rates for each age group are calculated as the sum of the total number of deaths divided by the sum of the population at risk for those ages. Counts
of death are from the National Vital Statistics System Multiple Cause of Death files for the years 1980 to 2007. The population at risk for each age is calculated as
the population at birth minus the number of deaths for all preceding ages. Population counts at birth are from the NVSS Birth Date files for the years 1980 to 2007.
Standard errors are calculated based on the binomial distribution, asterisks on differences indicate *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Figure.
Child
from Allfrom
Causes
by State
Appendix
Figure
1: Mortality
Child Mortality
All Causes
byGroup
State Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
3.0

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

2.5

●●

●

●
● ● ●●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●● ●

●

●●

●
●

● ●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●

●

●

Total Mortality

Total Mortality

●
●

●

●

3.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

● ●

●
● ●

●

● ●
● ●

● ●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

2.5

●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
● ●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

2.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

2.0

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

●

●

Total Mortality

●

●●

●

2.4

2.8

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

2.2

●

●

2.6

●
●

●●
●●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●●●
●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●●
●

●

●●

●

●
● ●

●

●

2.0

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●●

●
●

●

●

● ●
●

●

1.8

●

●
● ●

●
● ● ●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

2.4

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●
● ●
●

●●

2.2

●

●●

●

●
● ●

●

●●

●

●
●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

● ●
●

●
●

●
● ●● ●

●●

●

●

●

●

Total Mortality

2.6

●

●

●●

●●

●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

2.0

●

●

1.6

●

●

1.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18
8.5

●

●

7.5
●

8.0

7.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

6.5

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●●
● ●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●

5.5

●
●

●

●

●
●

●●●●
●
●

● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●●●●● ●
● ●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

6.5

●

●

●

●●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●
●

●

●●
●

● ●

●

●

●

●

7.0

●

●
●●

●

●●

●●

●

●
●

●

7.5

●

●

●

● ●

●

5.0

●
● ●

Total Mortality

Total Mortality

●
●

6.0

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

6.0
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure.
Child
from Internal
CausesCauses
by State
Appendix
Figure
2: Mortality
Child Mortality
from Internal
byGroup
State Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

1.6

1.8
●
●

●

●
●

●

1.6

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.0

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

1.2

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

1.4

●
●●

●

●
●
●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●●

●

●●

●●●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.0

●

●

●
●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●
●●

1.4

●

●

●
●

0.8

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14
1.4

●

●

●
●●

●
●
●● ●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●●

●

●

●●

0.8

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●
● ●●

●●●

●

●

●

●

●
●●
●

●
●

●

●
●●
●
●

●

●

●●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

● ●

●

●
●

1.0

1.3

●
●

1.2

●
●
●

●●

●

●●
●

1.1

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●

●●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

0.8

0.6

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

0.9

●
●

●
●

●

●●
● ●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.0

●

●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.7
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18
2.0

1.8

●

●

●
●

Internal Mortality

●
●

1.6
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

1.4

●

●
●

●●
●

●●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●●●

●

●
●

●

1.2

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●

●●
●
●

●
●

● ●

●
●

●

●

●

1.8
●

●
● ●●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

●

●●

●
● ●

●

●

●●

●

●
●●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●●

●
●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.0

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●●

●
●

●

●

1.4

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

1.6

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●

●

1.2

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure.
Child
from External
CausesCauses
by State
Appendix
Figure
3: Mortality
Child Mortality
from External
byGroup
State Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
1.8

1.6

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.6
●

●
● ●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●●
●●

●●
●

●●

●

●
●
●

● ● ●

●●
●

●

●

● ●

●

●

1.0

●
●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

1.2

●

●

●

●

1.4

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

External Mortality

External Mortality

●

●●
●

●
●●
●

●

●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●●

●●

●●●●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

1.0

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

0.6

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●●
●

●
●

●●
●

●

●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
● ● ●●

●
●

●

●

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14
1.8

●

External Mortality

●

1.6

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●●

●
●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

1.0

●

●

●
●
●

● ● ●●
●

●

●

●

●

●●●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
● ●
●● ●
●●

●

●●●●

●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●● ●
●
●●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

1.2

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●●

●
●
●

●●
●
●
●

●

1.0

●●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18
●

6.5

5.5

External Mortality

External Mortality

●

●

●
●

●
● ●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●●●
●

●

●

●
●

●●
●●
●

●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●

●●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

4.0

●

●

1.4

●

4.5

●

●

6.0

5.0

●

●
●
●

●●

●

●

●
●
●●

●●

●

0.8

●

●●
●

●

●●

●
●

●

External Mortality

● ●●

1.4

●●

●

●

●●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●
●●
●

●
●

●

●●
●

●
●
●●
●●

6.0

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●
●
●

●
●
●
● ●

●●

5.5

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

● ●●
●

●
●

●●

●

●
● ●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●● ●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

4.5

●
●
●●

● ●
● ●
●

5.0

●

●
●

●

●
●

3.5

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Appendix Figure
4: Mortality
from Internal
Causes
for Black
Children
by State Group
Figure.
Internal Mortality
for Black
Children
by State
Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
●

●

●

2.5

2.5

●
●
●

●

2.0

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●

●●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●●

●
●●

●

1.5

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.5

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●
●

●
●

● ●
●
●

●

●
●

●● ●

●
●

●
●

●

●
● ●

●

1.0

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●●

●●
●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

1.0

● ●

●

●

●

2.0

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

●

●

0.5

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

2.5
●

●

●

●

2.0
●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

1.5

●
● ●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●●
●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

1.0

● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●
● ●● ●
●

●●
●●
● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

2.0

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●●

●

●●
●

●

●
●
●

●●

●

● ●●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

1.5

1.0

●

●

●
●

●

●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18
3.5

●

3.5

●
●
●

●

●

3.0

●

2.5

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

2.0

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

1.5

●

●●

●
●

●
●
●
● ●●
●

●

●
● ●●

●

●●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●●●
●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

●
●

●

●

●

3.0

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

2.5

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●●
●
●
●

2.0

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●●
●
●
●
●

● ●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

●

●
●
●

1.5

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●●

●
●

●

●

1.0

1.0
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Figure.
Internal Mortality
for White
Children
by State
Group
Appendix Figure
5: Mortality
from Internal
Causes
for White
Children
by State Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
1.6

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
1.8

●

●

●
●

1.6

●

●
●●

1.2

●

●

●

●●
● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●●

●

●●

●
●

● ●

●●

●●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●

●

●●
● ●●

●

●

1.0

●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●●

●●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

0.8

1.4

●●

●
●
●

1.2

●●
●●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●●●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
● ●

●
●●
●

●
●

●
●

1.0

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

●

●

●
●

1.4

●

0.8

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

0.6
0.6
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14
1.4

1.2

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

●
●

●

●
●●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●●

●

●
●●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

Internal Mortality

●

●

1.0

1.2

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●
●
●

1.0

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

0.6

●

●

●

●

●

0.6
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

1.8
1.8

●

●
●

●

●

● ●
●

●
● ●
●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
● ●

●
●

●

●
●
●

1.2

●

●

●

●

●● ●

● ●
●

●
●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

1.0

●

●
●

●
●●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●●

●
●

●

●

●●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

Internal Mortality

Internal Mortality

1.6

●●

●

●

1.6
●
●●

●
●
●●
●
●
●●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
● ●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

1.4

1.2

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

1.0

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Appendix Figure
6: Mortality
from External
Causes
for Black
Children
by State Group
Figure.
External Mortality
for Black
Children
by State
Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
3.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●
●

●

2.5

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●
●
●

●●

●
●

●●
●

●

1.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

1.0

●

●

●

●
●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

● ●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

2.0

●

● ●

●

●

●●

●
●

1.0

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

2.5

●

●
●
●●
●

●
●

2.5

●

●

● ●

●

2.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

1.5

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●●● ●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

2.0

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●●

●

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●●

●
●

●
●

●

●

1.0

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

1.5

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18
10

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

● ●●

1.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

External Mortality

●

● ●
● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

1.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●●
●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●

●

2.0

●

●
●

External Mortality

External Mortality

●
●

●

●
●

●

2.5

●

●

●

External Mortality

3.0

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

●
●

8

●

●

9

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

6

●

●

●

●
● ●
●● ● ●●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●●
● ●

●

●

●

5

●

●

●

●

●●

● ●
●
●

●

●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●

●●

● ●
● ●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●

●

● ●
●

External Mortality

External Mortality

●
●
●

7

8

● ●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

7

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

6

●●
●
●

5

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●

●
●

●
●
● ●
●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

●●
●
● ●

●

●
●●

●

●

4

●

●
●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●

4
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

Appendix Figure
7: Mortality
from External
Causes
for White
Children
by State Group
Figure.
External Mortality
for White
Children
by State
Group
Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7
1.6

1.6

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.4

●

●
●

1.2

●
●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●

1.0

External Mortality

External Mortality

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 4−7

●

●●

●●
●

●

0.8

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●●
●
● ●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●

1.0

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●
●●

● ●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

0.6

●

●

●

● ●

●●

1.2

●

●

● ●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 8−14
1.8

1.4

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

External Mortality

●

● ●

●

●

●

1.2

1.6

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●● ●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●●

●●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●●

0.8

●

●●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

● ●

1.0

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●●

●

1.4

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●●●

1.2

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
● ●●● ●
●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●●

●
●

●

●

●
●●

●●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

1.0

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

External Mortality

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

0.6

0.8
Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Low Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

High Eligibility Gain, Ages 15−18

●

●
●

5.5

6.0

●

●

●

●

5.0

●
●

●●

●

4.5

●

●

●

●
●
●
●●

●
●
●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
● ● ●

4.0

●●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●●●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●●●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
● ●

●
●●

●●
●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

5.5

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●

4.5

●

●
●

●

●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

●

●

●

5.0

●

●

●

● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●●
●●

● ●
●

●
●

●

●

●

3.5

External Mortality

External Mortality

●

●

●

●
●●

●
●
●

●●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

Jun−80 Feb−82 Oct−83 Jun−85 Feb−87

Mortality rates by cohort (per 10,000 children) were constructed using Multiple Cause of Death Data files for the years 1980−
2006 and Birth Data files for 1980−1987. Points represent means of the age−specific mortality rates for each birth cohort,
as described in the text. The lines are fitted values from a regression that includes a quadratic in birth cohort
and a dummy variable for children born after September 30, 1983.

