NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALIDITY OF CONSUMPTION DATA:
ARE THE CONSUMER EXPENDITURE INTERVIEW AND DIARY SURVEYS INFORMATIVE?
Adam Bee
Bruce D. Meyer
James X. Sullivan
Working Paper 18308
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18308
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the U.S. Census Bureau. We would like to thank Tom
Crossley, Thesia Garner, Steve Henderson, Clinton McCully, William Passero, and Laura Paszkiewicz
for their help, and participants at the CRIW/NBER Conference on Improving the Measurement of
Consumer Expenditures for their comments. We also thank Kevin Rinz for research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Adam Bee, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Validity of Consumption Data: Are the Consumer Expenditure Interview and Diary Surveys
Informative?
Adam Bee, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 18308
August 2012
JEL No. C81,C82,C83,D12,D31,I32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the quality of data collected in the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey, which
is the source for the Consumer Price Index weights and is the main source of U.S. consumption microdata.
We compare reported spending on a large number of categories of goods and services to comparable
national income account data. We do this separately for the two components of the CE—the Interview
Survey and the Diary Survey—rather than a combination that has been used in past comparisons.
We find that most of the largest categories of consumption are measured well in the Interview Survey
as the ratio to the national account data is close to one and has not declined appreciably over time.
Several other large categories are reported at a low rate or have seen the ratio to the national accounts
decline over time. The results are less encouraging for the Diary Survey. There is no large Diary
category that is both measured well and reported at a higher rate than in the Interview Survey. We
also compare the ownership of and the value of durables, such as homes and cars, in the CE to other
sources. This evidence suggests the CE performs fairly well. Based on observable characteristics,
the CE Survey appears to be fairly representative, although there is strong evidence of under-representation
at the top of the income distribution and under-reporting of income and expenditures at the top. We
then examine the precision of the two surveys and the frequency of no spending overall or for a given
spending category. In the Diary Survey, we find much greater dispersion in spending and the dispersion
relative to the Interview Survey varies across goods and over time. Diary respondents are much more
likely to report zero spending for a consumption category, and a high and increasing fraction of respondents
reporting zero for all categories. These results suggest that using Diary data to assess inequality trends
and other distributional outcomes is likely to lead to biased and misleading results. Our results have
important implications for interpreting and properly using CE data and how best to redesign the CE.
Adam Bee
US Census Bureau
charles.a.bee@census.gov
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu

James X. Sullivan
Department of Economics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

1. Introduction
The Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey is a vital data source. Assessing and improving
the quality of the CE is a major policy and research issue for several reasons. The CE is the
source of weights for the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is used to index for inflation
income tax brackets, government transfer payments such as Social Security benefits, private
labor contracts and other economic variables. The CE is also the only comprehensive source of
consumption information on the U.S. population.1 The survey is used by government agencies
for several purposes and has been extensively used by outside researchers. CE data have been
used to address a long list of research issues that would be difficult or impossible to address with
another source. The survey has been available in some form for almost a century, and in its
current form for over 30 years. This long history allows researchers to examine changes over a
long time period.
Many previous studies have compared the CE to other data sources. Some of these
comparisons report alarming patterns. Several authors have pointed out that the weight on
housing is much higher in the CPI than in the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator.
Bosworth (2010) argues that the housing weight is about twice as large in the CPI as the PCE
because of uneven under-reporting in the CE. Other authors have emphasized that the ratio of
CE expenditures to PCE expenditures has declined from about 0.8 to just above 0.6 in recent
decades (Attanasio et al. 2006). It is important to recognize that these earlier studies often
compare expenditures that are noncomparable.
There are important gaps in our knowledge from these comparisons. A key gap is that
comparisons of CE aggregates to national income account data are generally done with the
integrated data that are a confusing amalgam of the two components of the CE: the Interview
Survey and the Diary Survey. Researchers generally use one or the other of these components,
so the benchmarking of the amalgam cannot be applied to the data that are typically used by
researchers. A better understanding of the quality of spending data in each of these surveys will
also inform efforts to redesign the CE, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is in the midst of
1

There are recent efforts to gather comprehensive, but less detailed expenditure data as part of other surveys (see
Hurd and Rohwedder 2011 or Li, Schoeni, Danziger, and Charles 2010, for example). An interesting aspect of these
papers given the focus of the current paper is that these efforts assess the quality of their data by comparing it to that
of the CE.
1

a multi-year redesign of the surveys. The first reason given for the CE redesign in the BLS
planning documents is under-reporting of expenditures (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2010). To
evaluate the separate components of the survey it is necessary to compare them separately to
outside sources.
In this paper we examine comparisons of CE data to micro and macro data from other
sources. We examine the quality of reported expenditures, which can be roughly thought of as
outlays, as well as parts of consumption, which can be thought of as a flow of resources used,
including the flow of resources from the ownership of durables. The rental equivalent of owneroccupied housing, while not part of expenditures, is used to determine the CPI weights and is an
appropriate measure of housing consumption. In the case of vehicles, an expenditures measure
would include purchases, but consumption should be based on a flow of resources consumed,
which depends on the number and value of vehicles. These durable measures are crucial in
calculating consumption, but their reporting has not been extensively validated. Keeping in
mind that mean squared error is equal to bias squared plus variance, we also examine the
variance of the data and the frequency of reports of no spending. Last, we examine the
representativeness of the Interview Survey along a number of dimensions including income.
We begin by examining ratios of CE aggregate data to national income account data,
looking separately at the Interview Survey and Diary Survey. We rely on information from the
BLS and the Bureau of Economic Analysis as to which expenditure categories are most
comparable and we focus on these. We find that most of the largest categories of consumption
are measured well in the Interview Survey as the ratio to PCE data is close to one and has not
declined appreciably over time. These categories include new vehicles, food and beverages at
home, rent and utilities, the rental equivalent of owner-occupied housing, gasoline and other
energy goods, and communication. Several other large categories are reported at a low rate or
have seen the ratio to the PCE decline over time. These categories include food away from
home, furniture and furnishings, clothing, gambling, and alcohol. There are no large Diary
Survey categories that are both measured well and reported at a higher rate than in the Interview
Survey. Overall, the categories of expenditures that are not reported well tend to be those that
involve many small and irregular purchases. These poorly reported categories also tend to be
private goods (clothing), ones that one may not want to reveal that one buys (alcohol, tobacco),
and certain luxuries (alcohol, food away from home). Large salient purchases like automobiles,
2

and regular purchases like rent, utilities, and groceries, seem to be well reported. We find that
the number and value of cars compare closely to outside sources, and the time pattern of home
values closely follows other data.
We also present evidence on the precision of Interview and Diary Survey data.
Coefficients of variation are noticeably higher in the Diary than in the Interview Survey. Diary
respondents are much more likely to report zero spending for a consumption category, and a high
and increasing fraction of respondents report zero for all categories. 11.9 percent of 2010 Diary
Survey respondents report zero spending for an entire week, up from 4.5 percent in 1991.
We then compare the demographic characteristics and the income distribution reported in
the CE and the Current Population Survey (CPS). The results suggest that the CE Interview
sample is fairly representative along many dimensions. However, Sabelhaus et al. (2012)
provides strong evidence of under-representation at the top of the income distribution and underreporting of income and expenditures at the top. They find that low-income households are well
represented. The under-representation of high income households and their disproportionate
under-reporting of expenditures means that the aggregate reporting rates relative to the PCE
emphasized in the paper likely understate the under-reporting problem for high income
households, but overstate the problem for low income households.
These results have implications for the use of existing CE data and for the redesign of the
CE Survey. The importance of the under-reporting of expenditures in the CE will depend on the
purpose for which the data are used. Uses of the data that rely on aggregates are likely biased.
Our results suggest the CPI is biased because the differential under-reporting means that the
weights do not accurately reflect consumers’ purchases. However, a simple comparison of PCE
and CPI weights overstates the potential bias in consumer prices because much of the PCE is not
intended to be captured by the CPI. Given evidence that the CE may be more likely to miss
spending near the top of the distribution, under-reporting is less of a concern for analyses that do
not rely on spending at the top, such as measures of consumption poverty or median
consumption. And, the high and fairly constant reporting rates for large categories of
consumption in the Interview Survey suggest that, for some purposes, researchers can rely on
these categories to address some of the concerns about under-reporting.
The outline of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we describe the
Interview and Diary components of the CE. Section 3 summarizes past work comparing the CE
3

to other sources. In Section 4 we provide our comparisons of the separate Interview and Diary
Surveys to national income account personal consumption expenditure data. In Section 5 we
provide comparisons of CE data on the ownership and value of durable goods to those from other
sources. In Section 6 we examine the precision of the data and the frequency of no reported
expenditures in the Interview and Diary Surveys. In Section 7 we consider the
representativeness of the CE Survey. We discuss the implications of our results for uses of the
CE Survey and for survey redesign in Section 8, and conclude in Section 9.
2. The Consumer Expenditure Survey
The Consumer Expenditure survey is a national survey designed to represent the
noninstitutionalized population of the U.S. The survey has two parts: the Interview Survey and
the Diary Survey. Both components are based on the same sampling frame, but they have
different questionnaires that are administered to different samples. We examine the data from
both of these surveys.
The Interview Survey took its current form in 1980, though it began much earlier. It
includes about 5,000 families each quarter between 1980 and 1998 and about 7,500 families
thereafter. It is a recall survey that collects information from families (or consumer units) about
their expenditures for the previous three months. The survey is a rotating panel—about 20
percent of the sample is replaced each quarter. Consumer units remain in the sample for up to
five interviews—an initial bounding interview, followed by four quarterly interviews. The
bounding interview collects information on demographic characteristics and ownership of major
durables. Data from the bounding interview are not publicly available. The next four interviews
collect detailed expenditure information in addition to demographic, employment and income
data. The interviews are generally done in person though phone interviews have become more
common in recent years. Starting in 2003, interviewers used a Computer Assisted Personal
Interview (CAPI) instrument. The interview lasts 60 minutes on average.
The Diary Survey collects consumer unit spending through direct recordkeeping. On a
daily expense record consumer units are asked to self-report spending for up to two consecutive
one-week periods. This recordkeeping format is designed to capture spending on small,
infrequent purchases that may be missed in a recall survey. The Diary also includes a
4

questionnaire that collects information on household characteristics. This questionnaire is
administered by an interviewer. Since 2004, a CAPI instrument has been used for this interview.
The Diary Survey includes about 5,000 households annually. See U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics (2012) for more details.
Not all types of spending are collected in both surveys (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
2012). For example, the Interview Survey does not collect spending on housekeeping supplies,
personal care products, and nonprescription drugs, while the Diary Survey does not capture
overnight trips expenses or credit and installment plan payments. The Diary also does not collect
information on the rental equivalent value of owned homes, which is a major component of any
total consumption measure, is one of the largest PCE categories, and is weighted very heavily in
calculations of the CPI. While the Diary is designed to capture other types of spending, in
practice many important categories, such as new vehicle purchases, are rarely reported.
The Diary and Interview Surveys are also designed for different purposes (U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2012). The Interview Survey is designed to capture relatively large expenditures
and those that occur regularly such as rent or mortgage payments. The Diary Survey, on the
other hand, is designed to capture smaller spending categories and those purchased more
frequently. Often the level of detail is much greater in the Diary. For example, in the 2010
survey, the Diary has more than one hundred detailed subcategories that fall under the
classification of food at home, while the Interview Survey has only one spending classification
for food at home.
3. Earlier Consumer Expenditure Survey Comparisons
CE data have been compared to data from many sources, but the most extensive and
heavily cited comparisons are to the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) data from the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). Past research (Gieseman 1987, Slesnick 1992,
Branch 1994, Garner et al. 2006 and 2009, Attanasio et al. 2006, Meyer and Sullivan 2011a) has
emphasized a discrepancy between CE and PCE data. In comparing the CE to the PCE data, it is
important to recognize conceptual incompatibilities between these data sources.2 Slesnick
2

See Deaton and Kozel (2005) for discussion of non-comparabilities between survey and national income account
data for expenditures.
5

(1992), when comparing CE data from 1960-61 through 1989, concluded that “approximately
one-half of the difference between aggregate expenditures reported in the CEX surveys and the
NIPA can be accounted for through definitional differences.” Similarly, the General Accounting
Office in their summary of a Bureau of Economic Analysis comparison of the differences in
1992 reported that “more than half was traceable to definitional differences.”

A key

conceptual difference between PCE and CE spending is that the CE measures out-of-pocket
spending by households, while the PCE definition is wider, including purchases made on behalf
of households by institutions such as employer-paid insurance or free financial services, and
purchases made by nonprofits. The magnitude of this difference in how spending is defined has
increased over time. McCully (2011) reported that in 2009 nearly thirty percent of the PCE was
not intended to be captured by the CE, up from just over seven percent in 1959. In 2009, these
differences include imputations such as those for owner-occupied housing and financial services
(but excluding purchases by non-profit institutions serving households and employer
contributions for group health insurance) that account for over ten percent of the PCE. In-kind
social benefits account for nearly another ten percent. Employer contributions for group health
insurance and workers’ compensation account for over six percent, while life insurance and
pension fund expenses and final consumption expenditures of nonprofits represent almost four
percent. Another important difference between the PCE and CE is that the CE is not intended to
capture purchases by those abroad, on military bases and in institutions.
It is also important to note that the PCE aggregates do not necessarily reflect true total
spending. The PCE numbers are the product of a great deal of estimation and imputation that is
subject to error.3 One indicator of the potential error in the PCE is the magnitude of the revisions
that are made from time to time (Gieseman 1987; Slesnick 1992). An indication of this is the
2009 revisions to the PCE which substantially revised past estimates of several categories.
Notably, food at home, one of the largest categories, decreased by over five percent after the
2009 revision.4
3

The PCE estimates come from business records reported on the economic censuses and other Census Bureau
Surveys. These business surveys are subject to a number of sources of error and are adjusted using input-output
tables to add imports and subtract sales that do not go to domestic households. These totals are then balanced to
control totals for incomes earned, retail sales, and other benchmark data.
4
The 2008 value for food at home was 741,189 (in millions of $2008) prior to revision and 669,441 after, but the
new definition excludes pet food. A comparable pre-revision number excluding pet food is 707,553. The drop from
707,553 to 669,441 is 5.4 percent. Thank you to Clinton McCully for clarifying this revision.
6

One of the first evaluations of the current CE is Gieseman (1987) who reports CE
comparisons to the PCE for 1980-1984.5 He reports separate comparisons of Interview Survey
and Diary Survey estimates, though the Diary estimates are only for food. In these early years,
published tabulations separate Interview and Diary data, while published data for later years are
integrated. Consequently, subsequent comparisons of CE to PCE almost exclusively rely on the
integrated data that combine Interview Survey and Diary Survey data.6,7 Gieseman found that
the CE reports were close to the PCE for rent, fuel and utilities, telephone services, furniture,
transportation, and personal care services. On the other hand, substantially lower reporting of
food, household furnishings, alcohol, tobacco, clothing and entertainment were apparent back in
1980-1984. In separate Interview Survey and Diary Survey comparisons for food at home, he
found that the CE/PCE ratios for the Interview Survey exceeded that for the Diary Survey by ten
to twenty percentage points, but were still below one. For the much smaller category, food away
from home, the Diary Survey ratios exceeded the Interview Survey ratios by about twenty
percentage points, but again were considerably below one. The current patterns have strong
similarities to these from 30 years ago.
Garner et al. (2006) report a long historical series of comparisons for the integrated data
that begins in 1984 and goes up through 2002. Some categories are reported well. Rent,
utilities, etc. and utilities, fuels and related are reported at a high and stable rate relative to the
PCE. Telephone services, vehicle purchases, and gasoline and motor oil are reported at a high
rate that has declined somewhat over time. Food at home relative to the PCE is about 0.70, but
has remained stable over time. The many remaining categories of expenditures have low and
generally falling rates of reporting relative to the PCE, though some small categories such as
footwear and vehicle rentals show increases.
The authors ultimately argue that this historical series can be replaced by a better series
that focuses on categories that are the most comparable. “A more detailed description of the
categories of items from the CE and the PCE is utilized than was used when the historical
comparison methodology was developed. Consequently, more comparable product categories
5

Comparisons of expenditure survey data to national income account data go back at least to Houthakker and Taylor
(1970).
6
Exceptions include Meyer and Sullivan (2010 and 2011a).
7
In cases where the expenditure category is available in both surveys, the BLS selects the source for the integrated
data that is viewed as most reliable. See Steinberg et al. (2010) and Creech and Steinberg (2011).
7

are constructed and are included in the final aggregates and ratios used in the new comparison of
the two sets of estimates.” The authors note that aggregates from the two sources tend to be
more different for noncomparable categories. The new series is reported for every five years
1992 to 2002 in Garner et al. (2006), and updated and extended annually through 2007 in Garner
et al. (2009).
When this new BLS methodology on categories that are comparable between the CE and
the PCE is used, and when the PCE aggregates are adjusted to reflect differences in population
coverage between the two sources, the ratio of CE to PCE is fairly high, but still has tended to
fall over time. The ratio for 1992 and 1997 is 0.88, while in 2002 it is 0.84 and has fallen to 0.81
by 2007 (Garner et al. 2009). The share of the PCE that is comparable to the CE has also tended
to fall somewhat over time, dropping from 0.57 in 1992 to 0.52 in 2007. A much larger share of
the CE is comparable to the PCE, slightly over 70 percent in all years.
For nine of the larger expenditure categories, Meyer and Sullivan (2010, 2011a) report
limited comparisons over time for the Interview Survey only. They find that for most of these
major categories reporting rates are high and stable.
Some research has sharply overstated the discrepancy by comparing noncomparable
categories of CE and NIPA consumption and ignoring definitional differences. In addition,
almost all comparisons are based on the integrated data that combine CE Diary and CE Interview
data, so the results are not applicable to either the CE Interview data or Diary data alone, as they
are typically used in research. Some authors have argued that despite the incompatibilities
between the CE and PCE, in the absence of definitional changes one would expect the
differences between the series to be relatively constant (Attanasio et al. 2006). This conclusion
is not at all obvious; one might still expect a gradual widening of the difference between the
sources given their rapidly growing incompatibility as reported in McCully (2011).
There have been comparisons of the CE to many other sources. Most are summarized on
the BLS Comparisons web page.8 These comparisons include utilities compared to the
Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), rent and utilities compared to that reported in
the American Housing Survey (AHS), food at home compared to trade publications Supermarket
Business and Progressive Grocer, health expenditures compared to the National Health
8

http://www.bls.gov/cex/cecomparison.htm.

8

Expenditure Accounts (NHEA) and the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). With the
exception of health expenditures, the comparisons generally suggest that the CE does a fairly
good job of reporting these types of expenditures. However, except for health expenditures,
these comparisons are to categories for which the comparisons to the PCE have indicated high
and roughly stable reporting, though the reporting of food at home is at a lower rate, especially in
the Diary Survey. See Garner et al. (2009) or Branch (1994) for summaries.
4. Separate Interview and Diary Survey Comparisons to National Income Accounts
For the purposes of assessing CE Survey quality, it is important to examine the Interview
and Diary Surveys separately. Differences in spending across these two data sources provide
evidence on how best to collect spending data. For some important categories there are large
differences between the mean reported values in the Interview and Diary Surveys. For example,
between 1998 and 2003, average spending on food at home in the CE Interview Survey exceeded
the average from the CE Diary Survey by more than 20 percent.9
Recognizing that not all non-comparabilities can be removed, we examine the ratio of CE
Interview and Diary Survey values weighted by population to corresponding categories of PCE
data for select PCE categories.10 We have followed the approach of Garner et al. (2006, 2009)
and Passero (2011) who select categories in the PCE and CE that are most comparable based on
“concepts and comprehensiveness”. These comparable categories are 56 percent of the PCE in
2010. To align each CE spending subcategory with the comparable PCE category, we have
heavily relied on a concordance supplied to us by the BLS. The data appendix notes the cases
where expenditure subcategories are not available in either the Interview or Diary Survey, and
Appendix Table 1 provides our concordance of Universal Classification Codes (UCCs) in the
Diary and Interview Survey for each of these comparable PCE categories. In Tables 1 and 2, we
9

The fact that food at home from the Interview Survey compares more favorably to PCE numbers than does food at
home from the CE Diary Survey does not necessarily imply that the former is reported more accurately. For
example, the CE Interview Survey numbers may include non-food items purchased at a grocery store. Battistin
(2003) argues that the higher reporting of food at home for the recall questions in the Interview component is due to
over-reporting, but as Browning et al. (2003) state, this is open to question. We stick to the presumption that more is
better as the CE is almost always below the PCE and this criteria is largely used by the BLS in selecting which
source, Interview or Diary, is preferred for a particular expenditure category (see Creech and Steinberg 2011).
10
We do not correct for differences in population coverage. Such corrections have averaged two to three percentage
points in past analyses (Garner et al. 2006, 2009).
9

report CE/PCE ratios for categories of expenditures for which we can define reasonably
comparable CE and PCE categories for either the Interview or the Diary Survey alone.11 Table 1
summarizes the findings for the largest categories in 2010. Table 2 reports the results for 46
comparable categories for 1986 and 2010. Additional years are available in Appendix Table 2.
Among the ten largest categories in Table 1 (combining the BLS subcategories of
clothing into one so that it is large enough to be in the top ten) six are reported at a high rate in
the Interview Survey and that rate has been roughly constant over time. These well-measured
categories are the imputed rent on owner-occupied nonfarm housing, rent and utilities, food and
nonalcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption (food at home), gasoline and
other energy goods, communication, and new motor vehicles. These six categories are all among
the eight largest. In 2010, the ratio of Interview Survey to PCE exceeds 0.94 for imputed rent,
rent and utilities, and new motor vehicles. It exceeds 0.80 for food at home and communication
and is just below 0.80 for gasoline and other energy goods. The 2010 ratios for both the
Interview and Diary Surveys are just over 0.50 for purchased meals and beverages (food away
from home) and close to 0.43 for furniture and furnishings. For clothing and alcohol, the
Interview Survey ratios are both low and below the Diary Survey ratios, which are below half
themselves.
While the Diary is designed to capture most types of spending, in practice many
categories are missed, including some of the largest categories. For example, no spending on
new trucks, pick-ups, vans, or jeeps is captured in the Diary Survey between 2007 and 2010. For
this reason, we do not report a Diary/PCE ratio for new motor vehicles in Table 1. The
Diary/PCE ratio for imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing (the largest PCE
category we examine) is also missing because the Diary does not collect information on the
rental equivalent of owned homes.
Looking at the full 46 categories reported in Table 2, among the remaining categories
outside the top ten in size, only six in the Interview and five in the Diary have a ratio of at least
0.80 in 2010. The largest of these categories reported well in the Interview Survey are motor
vehicle accessories and parts, household maintenance, and cable and satellite television and radio
services. In the Diary Survey household cleaning products and cable and satellite television and
11

A larger set of categories can be examined of course with the union of the Interview and Diary data.
10

radio services are reported well in 2010, though the historical pattern for both exhibits substantial
variation (also see Appendix Table 2). The remaining categories that are reported poorly in both
surveys with ratios below one half include glassware, tableware, and household utensils, and
sporting equipment. Gambling and alcohol are especially badly reported with ratios below 0.20
and 0.33, respectively, in both surveys in most years.
While the ratios for selected years are shown in Table 2, the patterns for the ten largest
categories of expenditures can be more easily seen in a series of figures. We discuss the
categories in order of their size beginning with the largest. Figure 1a reports the ratio of CE to
PCE imputed rent from 1984 onward and new motor vehicles from 1980 onward.12,13 These two
large categories are available for the Interview Survey, but not the Diary Survey.14 Both
categories compare favorably to the PCE—they have ratios near one that have not declined
appreciably over time. The imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing in the Interview
Survey typically exceeds the PCE equivalent by about ten percent, slightly more so in the most
recent years. While some analyses of CE to PCE aggregates omit housing because the ratio
exceeds one (Sabelhaus et al. 2012), we include it because selecting only those categories with
low ratios would necessarily bias the overall picture. The CE/PCE ratio for new motor vehicles
is overall very close to one, approximately 1.05 in the 1980s, approximately 0.97 in the 1990s,
and right around one in the 2000s.
Figure 1b reports Diary and Interview comparisons for rent and utilities. In the Interview
Survey the CE/PCE ratio is just below one, averaging around 0.95, while the Diary Survey ratio
is about ten percentage points lower. Food at home in the Interview and Diary Surveys is
reported in Figure 1c. Interview food at home has a ratio just under 0.90 in nearly all years
except the period from 1981 to 1987 when a different wording of the food at home question was
employed.15 The Diary Survey ratio is about twenty percentage points lower at 0.70. Food away
12

Information on the rental equivalent of the home is not available in the Interview Survey in 1980 and 1981.
For the surveys administered in the fourth quarter of 1981 through the fourth quarter of 1983, the CE sampling
frame only covered urban areas. For this reason, we exclude data from the 1982 and 1983 surveys. In addition, the
1981 estimates we report are not entirely nationally representative, because part of this spending comes from the
fourth quarter of 1981 survey and the first quarter of 1982 survey.
14
The Diary does collect data on new vehicle purchases, but we do not report ratios for this category for the Diary
because these data appear to capture a small share of purchases. See the discussion in the Data Appendix for more
details.
15
The effect of this change in wording has been known for a long time (see Gieseman 1987). During 1980-1981 the
Interview Survey asked usual weekly expenditure on food over the past three months, while from 1982-1987
spending on food over the previous month was asked. In 1988, the survey returned to the earlier question. Because
11
13

from home is reported in Figure 1d. This category has a low ratio in both surveys and one that
has declined since the 1980s. The Diary Survey ratio is also about ten percentage points higher
than the Interview Survey ratio, although the two surveys give similar numbers following a
change in the wording of the food away question in the Interview Survey in 2007.16 The ratio for
the Diary Survey is biased downward somewhat because the Diary does not collect data on food
away from home spending that occurs during out-of-town trips. The Interview Survey does
collect these data; in 2010 spending on food during out-of-town trips was about 6 percent of the
PCE aggregate for food away. Ratios for spending on gasoline and other energy goods are
displayed in Figure 1e. The ratio is nearly always above 0.80 in the Interview Survey and about
five to ten percentage points lower in the Diary Survey. The Interview Survey ratio did fall over
the 1980s. Clothing is shown in Figure 1f, combining the categories of women’s and girl’s
clothing, men’s and boy’s clothing, and shoes and footwear. This category is the first one that is
reported poorly. The reporting ratio has declined from about 0.60 to less than one-half, for the
Diary Survey, with the Interview Survey consistently lower. The ratio for communication is
shown in Figure 1g. The Interview Survey shows a ratio of about 0.80 for most years, though
there is a dip to nearly 0.70 for much of the 1990s and early 2000s. The Diary ratio has been 5 to
10 percentage points lower since about 1996. Furniture and furnishings in Figure 1h is badly
reported with a ratio in the Interview Survey that falls over time from about 0.75 to 0.45. The
ratio for this category is more variable in the Diary Survey, at about 0.50 in the early years, high
in the middle years and then near the Interview Survey numbers in the most recent years.
Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption in Figure 1i is a very badly
reported category, with both Interview and Diary ratios that drop from 0.33 to just over 0.20.
The overall pattern indicates much better reporting in the Interview Survey than the Diary
Survey. Household cleaning products is the only category among the 46 we report where the
Diary Survey reports expenditures at a higher rate than the Interview Survey and reports them
well, i.e. at a high absolute rate that has not declined appreciably over time. This fairly small
category has a ratio of 1.15 in 2010 in the Diary Survey and has not declined appreciably in the
the January to March 1982 surveys collected data for part of 1981, the change in questionnaire is partly reflected in
the 1981 totals.
16
Starting with the second quarter of 2007, the question on food away from home changed from a query about usual
monthly spending to usual weekly spending. This change resulted in a noticeable increase in reported food away
spending.
12

past 20 years. On the other hand, there are many categories of expenditures, in particular most of
the largest ones, that are reported at a higher rate in the Interview Survey and which have
maintained high and roughly stable rates.
This finding of higher reporting in an interview survey is consistent with other evidence.
There is a long history of papers that have noted the presence of “diary fatigue” meaning that
respondents tire of completing the diary and omit purchases. Evidence of this pattern in the CE
Diary Survey that is frequently cited is the fact that reported expenditures fall noticeably in the
second diary week (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 1983; Silberstein and Scott 1991; Stephens
2003). See Crossley and Winter (2012) for a nice discussion of diary fatigue and other problems
with collecting expenditure data with a diary.
This pattern of lower reporting in diary surveys than interview surveys is also evident in
other North American data. Statistics Canada conducted in parallel two versions of the Canadian
Survey of Household Spending in 2009. One version was a 12-month recall interview survey,
while the second was the redesigned survey that gathers spending on many items through two
week diaries. The interview spending on average exceeds the diary spending for comparable
categories by 9 percent for frequent expenses and 14 percent for less frequent expenses (Dubreuil
et al. 2011). The authors believe the difference between the modes is not due to other features of
the survey that changed, such as the elimination of balance editing. For example, balance
editing tends to affect income and savings rather than expenditures. Possible reasons that this
difference might arise are that insufficient motivation may lead diary respondents to omit many
items to reduce the burden of the process. Consistent with this hypothesis, the Canadian Food
Expenditure Survey (Ahmed et al. 2010) finds that the second diary week tends to have lower
reported expenditures (by 11 percent) than the first, as respondents tire of the process. A recall
measure from this same survey has food expenditures 14 percent higher than the two-week diary
average.
In principle an attentive, motivated respondent could report better data in a diary than in a
recall survey, but the evidence shows that the typical respondent does not fit this profile. The
diary task also requires respondent effort at many distinct times during the two weeks, whereas
an interview survey requires a single short (albeit taxing) interview. These results suggest that
the presence of an interviewer may be helpful in coaxing greater compliance with the survey.
13

The categories of expenditures that are not reported well tend to be those that involve
many small and irregular purchases. These poorly reported categories also tend to be private
goods (clothing), ones that one may not want to reveal that one buys (alcohol, tobacco), and
certain luxuries (alcohol, food away from home). Large salient purchases (like automobiles),
and regular purchases like rent, utilities, and groceries, seem to be well reported. These patterns
have been largely evident since the 1980s or even earlier. However, over the past three decades
there has been a slow decline in the quality of reporting of many of the mostly smaller categories
of expenditures in both the Interview Survey and the Diary Survey.
5. Durables in the CE
Reporting ownership of houses and vehicles is very different from reporting the small,
discretionary purchases that seem to be badly reported in the CE. We begin by examining how
the reported stock of cars matches that from other sources. This information does not enter
expenditures, but enters consumption when we calculate a value of the services of owned cars.
In Table 3, we compare reported car and truck ownership in the Interview Survey to
administrative data on motor vehicle registrations.
These comparisons are complicated by a number of issues. First, the CE is intended to
capture only vehicles owned by households, but the registration data include commercial and
publicly owned vehicles including farm trucks. We were able to obtain an estimate of the
number of two types of commercial vehicles, taxis and rental cars, for four states. The taxi share
ranged from 0.04 percent (Arizona in 2003) to 0.68 percent (New York in 1998). The rental car
share ranged from 0.30 percent (Mississippi in 2004) to 1.54 percent (Arizona in 1998). We do
not have an easy way to estimate the prevalence of corporate cars and other commercial vehicles.
Second, the registration data include leased vehicles and motor homes which are not included in
the CE Survey numbers. We were able to obtain estimates of the motor home shares for seven
states. The share of motor homes ranged from 0.3 percent (Maine in 2007) to 1.8 percent
(Oregon in 2000). The total number of leased cars and trucks in the CE Survey for 2002 was
6.96 million, or about 3.75 percent of all cars and trucks. These first two complications imply
that we understate the share of vehicles owned by households that are reported in the CE. Third,
our survey count of vehicles will not include those that have been disposed of by the household,
14

but have not been reported as disposed to the state or have not had their registrations expire.
Conversely, registrations will not include vehicles that have not been registered. This issue,
which is likely less important, could bias the measure of reporting either up or down. Fourth,
prior to 1985, personal passenger vans, minivans and utility vehicles were included in
automobile registrations, while subsequently they were included in trucks. For this reason, we
generally report comparisons for cars and trucks combined so that we have a consistent concept
over time.
Bearing these caveats in mind, ratios of cars and trucks in the CE to those in the
administrative records are reported in the bottom line of Table 3. The ratios are consistently well
above 0.80. Given that a large share of cars and trucks are commercially owned as the numbers
in the previous paragraph suggest, these numbers indicate a very high reporting rate. In similar
comparisons (Appendix Table 3), we find that the total number of reported trucks owned in the
CE lines up closely with data from the Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey (VIUS)—all of the
ratios of CE counts to VIUS counts are slightly over one.
We have also verified that the purchase price of vehicles in the CE Interview Survey is
reported fairly well. Purchase prices are directly part of expenditures and also are used to
determine the rental value of car ownership which enters flow consumption. We validate the
reported purchase price of new and used vehicles in the Interview Survey by comparing the
reported values to published values in National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA)
bluebook guides. For a sample of 100 cars with a reported purchase price in each of the years
1990 and 2000, we compare the reported vehicle values in the Interview Survey to bluebook
data. We match these cars from the Interview Survey to a bluebook price based on the reported
make, model, year and number of doors for each car. We report the correlations in Table 4. The
comparisons are probably most relevant for cars that have been recently purchased. For those
that have been owned six months or less the correlations are very high, 0.956 and 0.912 in 1990
and 2000, respectively. This is especially impressive given that there are many characteristics of
cars that are not reported in the CE or cannot be matched to bluebook features.
Some past work has found that respondents seem to report home values fairly accurately
in household surveys (Kiel and Zabel 1999; Bucks and Pence 2006). We have compared the
reported rental equivalent of homes to the reported house values. The rental equivalent and
home value are highly correlated, at around 0.6 in a typical year. The ratio of the rental
15

equivalent to home value has been fairly stable, though it declined appreciably in the mid-2000s,
as one might expect during a period of rising home prices. To see whether the general pattern
over time in reported home values in the CE is sensible, we plotted in Figure 2 the average home
value reported in the CE Interview Survey compared to the Case-Shiller house price index. The
average CE rental equivalent has the same qualitative time pattern as the Case-Shiller index, but
it rises faster over time. The Case-Shiller index holds housing characteristics fixed, while the CE
average does not. Because many characteristics of houses are improving over time such as
square footage, presence of air conditioning, and other home amenities (see Meyer and Sullivan
2011b), the CE rise should be more pronounced, which is what is evident in Figure 2.
6. Precision and the Frequency of Reported Purchases in the Interview and Diary Data
We next examine the precision of expenditure reports from the Interview and Diary
Surveys. The precision of these estimates is of interest for several reasons. First, the precision
of the consumer unit reports determines the precision of statistics calculated from the data.
Second, by comparing the precision of the Interview and Diary components of the survey, one
can determine how many diary responses are needed to obtain the same precision as one
interview response. This point is important in choosing between interview and diary forms of
survey administration and the appropriate sample sizes. Third, the dispersion of the various
components of expenditures is informative if either of the CE Survey components is going to be
used to estimate distributional characteristics of expenditures, as when one is using the CE to
assess inequality or poverty or in calculating percentiles for use in setting poverty thresholds as
is done with the new Supplemental Poverty Measure.
To assess the precision of the CE, we examine the same 46 categories of expenditures
from Table 2 that align closely with the PCE. We use these categories because we have verified
their consistency over time. For 35 of these categories we have comparable data for both the
Interview and Diary Surveys. In Table 5 we report the coefficient of variation (CV) of the
quarterly interview reports and the weekly diary reports for these categories of expenditures.17, 18
17

We calculate the CV as the square root of the sample size times the standard error of the mean divided by the
mean. The standard error is calculated following the Balanced Repeated Replications (BRR) procedure used by the
BLS to calculated standard errors for official CE tables. This BRR procedure is used to account for the CE Survey’s
16

CVs for additional years are reported in Appendix Table 4. We focus on comparisons of
quarters to weeks since a substantial share of respondents to both surveys do not complete the
entire four quarters or two weeks. For example, typically about ten percent of consumer units
only respond for one of the Diary weeks. For a given year Table 5 reports the Diary CV, the
Interview CV, and the ratio of Diary to Interview. Several patterns are apparent. First, the Diary
CVs tend to be much larger than those for the Interview Survey. In 2010, the weighted average
of the CVs across comparable categories is 1.58 times as large in the Dairy Survey as in the
Interview Survey. We expect the Interview Survey to be more precise because it captures 13
weeks of expenditures, as compared to just one week for the Diary Survey. If we make the
extreme and implausible assumptions of no error in either survey, that weekly observations are
independent, and simple random sampling, we would expect a ratio of CVs equal to the square
root of 13 or 3.6.
Second, the Diary/Interview ratios vary sharply across expenditure categories. For 2010,
the Diary CV is over three times that of the Interview CV for accounting and other business
services, but the Diary CV is slightly lower than the Interview CV in the case of glassware,
tableware, and household utensils. The ratios vary considerably, even for some of the largest
categories of expenditures. For food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises
consumption (food at home) the Diary CV is nearly twice as large as the Interview CV, but it is
smaller than the Interview CV for purchased meals and beverages (food away from home).
Third, there are also noticeable changes in the CVs over time. For the Diary, the
weighted average for comparable categories falls slightly throughout the period. For the
Interview Survey, the weighted average falls between 1987 and 1991 and then rises between
1991 and 2010. The CVs for the largest categories—food at home, purchased meals and
beverages, gasoline and other energy products, rent and utilities, and imputed rent—in the
Interview Survey tend to rise between 1987 and 1991 and then fall between 1991 and 2010,
although the CV for rent and utilities rises throughout this period and the CV for purchased
meals and beverages falls between 1987 and 1991. All of these categories except food away
multi-stage sample selection process. See http://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/rr93-6.pdf for details on this
procedure. The CVs that we report are about 10 percent larger than those estimated assuming simple random
sampling design for the Diary Survey, and about 40 percent larger for the Interview Survey.
18
We report CVs for 1987 instead of 1986 (the first year that data are available for most spending categories)
because a complete set of replicate weights is not available in the public use version of the 1986 Interview Survey.
17

were reported at a high rate in the Interview Survey relative to the PCE and, and these rates did
not decline much over time. Looking at these same categories for the Diary Survey (except for
imputed rent, which is not available) the CVs tend to fall between 1987 and 1991, and then rise
between 1991 and 2010, except for gasoline and other energy products which falls throughout
this period.
To understand what is behind these differences in the coefficients of variation across
expenditure categories, surveys and time, we look at the share of respondents who report no
expenditures in a given category. It is first important to note that a substantial share of Diary
respondents indicate that they had no expenditures at all in a given week, and this share has been
sharply increasing over time. As recently as 1991 the share of valid respondents for whom at
least one of the week’s expenditures was zero was 4.5 percent, but it reached 11.9 percent in
2010 (Appendix Table 5). In 2010, 9.4 percent of diary weeks have zero reported expenditures
for the entire week. There are three reasons why a family in the Diary Survey would have zero
expenditures for an entire week. First, the family may be on a trip for the entire week and the
Diary Survey explicitly does not capture spending on trips. About three-quarters of the families
with zero spending for an entire week in the 2010 Diary Survey fall into this group. Second, the
family may truly have zero spending for that week, and third, the family may fail to report actual
spending that occurred during the interview week. As we explain in Section 8, regardless of the
reason, the prevalence of zero expenditures, and more generally the greater dispersion of
spending in the Diary, has important implications for certain uses of the Diary data.
In Table 6, we report the share of reports that are zero for the 46 categories of
expenditures that we have previously considered. For each year, we report the share of zeros in
the Diary Survey, the Interview Survey and the difference between the surveys. See Appendix
Table 6 for additional years. Looking at the 35 categories of expenditures available for both
Interview and Diary Surveys, 24 of the Diary Survey categories are zero more than 90 percent of
the time, while 14 of these same categories in the Interview Survey are zero for 90 percent or
more of the consumer units. In 2010, 72 percent of Diary Survey respondents reported no
spending on rent and utilities, as compared to 2 percent of Interview Survey respondents.
Clearly these higher rates of zero reports are one reason for the higher CVs for the Diary Survey.
The rate of reports of zero has also been rising for both surveys. Between 1986 and 2010 the
18

majority of Diary categories saw increases in the share of zeros. While not as pronounced, the
rise in zeros is also apparent in the Interview Survey.
These results on CVs and frequency of period without any purchases have several
implications for distributional analyses. In particular, the greater dispersion of weekly
expenditures than quarterly expenditures, the extent to which this varies across expenditure
categories and time, and the changing frequency of purchases suggest that the use of Diary data
to examine poverty or inequality is problematic. We discuss these implications in more detail in
Section 8.
7. Representativeness of the CE
There are concerns that the CE misses certain types of households. The main method
used in past studies that have assessed the bias due to unit nonresponse in the CE is comparisons
of respondents contacted through more intensive methods to the remainder of respondents
(Chapova et al. 2008; King et al. 2009). These studies suggest little bias. However, these
analyses are not without their drawbacks, as those contacted through more intensive efforts may
not be representative of those who are never contacted at all or are unwilling to respond.
To directly examine the representativeness of the CE we compare the distribution of
household characteristics in the CE to those in the Current Population Survey (CPS).19 While the
distribution of characteristics in the CPS does not necessarily reflect the true distribution in the
U.S. population, the CPS is a large survey (about 100,000 households annually in recent years)
that is relied upon for many official statistics. Our results indicate that the characteristics of
those in the CE line up quite closely with those of CPS respondents. These results do not
necessarily confirm that the CE is representative of the U.S. population. Rather, they indicate
that any concerns about representativeness in the CE are shared with the CPS.
In addition to a base weight to account for sampling probabilities, the CE has two stages
of post-stratification adjustment to weights. The first stage is a “non-interview” adjustment
based on region of country, household tenure (owner or renter), consumer unit size, and race of
the reference person. The second stage is a “calibration factor” that accounts for frame under19

For these comparisons we use the Annual Social and Economic Supplement, formerly called the Annual
Demographic File or the March CPS.
19

coverage by adjusting the weights to 24 “known” population counts for region, race, tenure, age,
and urban/rural status. Thus, we do not focus on these characteristics of households.
In Appendix Table 7, we report a number of demographic characteristics of the Interview
Survey respondents for the years 1980-2010, as well as corresponding CPS values. We examine
characteristics at the individual level, rather than at the level of the family or household to
facilitate comparability. The educational attainment distributions match quite closely, though the
CE has slightly greater representation of those without a high school degree and this tendency
has increased slightly over time. Marital status, weeks and hours worked, and age match very
closely, though the CE has somewhat fewer young children. The share that owns a home
matches very closely, but that should not be surprising given that housing tenure is used to
weight the CE data.
One of the principal concerns about unit nonresponse is that the CE may
disproportionately miss households with either high or low income. Sabelhaus et al. (2012)
examine the representativeness of the CE Interview Survey by income. They match CE
respondent and non-respondent households to income at the zipcode level. They find that there
is a small under-representation of those from the top four or five percentiles of zipcode level
income and no under-representation (maybe a slight over-representation) at the bottom of the
zipcode level income percentiles. Much more important quantitatively they find that the income
reported in the survey, either because high income people are missing or because income is
under-reported at the top, is much lower than that from other sources such as the Survey of
Consumer Finances and tax records. Furthermore, reported spending relative to income is very
low at the top.
This evidence suggests that much of the under-reporting of expenditures occurs at the
very top of the income distribution, implying that the aggregate under-reporting statistics
emphasized in this paper likely overstate the weakness of the CE for a typical household. If
much of the under-reporting is due to high income households understating spending, then
spending by the vast majority of consumers is better than the averages that the aggregate
numbers indicate. These results combined with those in the current paper have several
implications for various uses of the data that we discuss below.

20

8. Implications for Uses of the Current CE and for Redesign of the Survey
The results in this paper have implications for the uses of existing CE data. Underreporting of expenditures is a first order problem, particularly because it differs substantially
across spending categories. In addition to the level of under-reporting, the changes in the extent
of under-reporting over time have also varied across type of good. The result of these patterns is
that uses of the data that rely on aggregates are likely biased. In particular, the CPI is biased
since the differential under-reporting means that the weights do not accurately reflect consumers’
purchases. For example, as mentioned earlier, one of the principal concerns about the CE is that
it causes too much weight is be put on housing in the CPI. The changes in the relative reporting
of different types of good means that changes in the CPI are likely biased as well.
Fortunately, the quantitative importance of this problem may not be as severe as it first
seems. A simple comparison of PCE and CPI weights overstates the potential bias in consumer
prices because, as noted above, much of the PCE is not intended to be captured by the CPI.
There is also research that has directly examined using PCE weights in a consumer price index
(Blair 2012), finding only a modest bias that goes in different directions depending on how the
index is constructed. It should also be noted that much of the bias may come from the
plutocratic (dollar weighted as opposed to person weighted) nature of the CPI. While dollar
weighting is appropriate when deflating national accounts, for many purposes of the CPI, such as
indexing tax parameters and government benefits, person weighting may be more appropriate.
Much of the aggregate under-reporting in the CE appears to come from under-reporting by high
income households who are under-represented in the survey to begin with. While overall, the
sample appears fairly representative, the dollar weighted nature of the CPI weights means that
potentially missing a small share of households that account for a large share of expenditures
could significantly bias the total expenditure based weights.
The results also indicate that certain categories of expenditures are well-measured on
average, especially in the Interview Survey, and have not seen their reporting deteriorate. For
researchers, emphasizing well-measured components may be a successful strategy to reduce bias
when relying on the CE. For example, Meyer and Sullivan (2012) examine consumption poverty
using “core consumption” which is based on well-measured spending categories from the
Interview Survey: food at home, rent plus utilities, transportation, gasoline, the value of owner21

occupied housing, rental assistance, and the value of owned vehicles. An important advantage of
the Interview Survey relative to the Diary Survey is that the former has many more large, wellmeasured categories of expenditures.
One could reasonably estimate total expenditures or consumption from these wellmeasured categories, relying on the constancy of the relationship between these categories and
total spending as measured in the 1980s, when these categories in the CE were more comparable
to the PCE. For example, see Meyer and Sullivan (2010). Such a procedure will give a
consistent series over time, but is unlikely to deliver an unbiased measure of the level of
consumption because of under-reporting that was present in the 1980s. Alternatively, scaling up
total expenditures using CE/PCE ratios for all categories would be suspect given that so much of
the CE is not comparable to the PCE. Methods that use CE data recognizing the nature of underreporting need to be further developed and validated.
Some uses of the CE Survey rely on the distribution of expenditures. Examples include
the construction of poverty thresholds for the new Supplemental Poverty Measure, and the
calculation of poverty rates and inequality measures. For most of these uses, the
representativeness of the CE through most of the income distribution and the concentration of
under-reporting among the highest income households is largely favorable for the use of the CE
Interview Survey. Conversely, the data are ill-suited for examining the highest income
households. As a corollary, analyses of inequality using CE data should focus on statistics that
are not heavily dependent on spending by the top few percentiles of the distribution such as
90/10 ratios, rather than variances, Gini coefficients, or spending shares at top percentiles.
The Interview Survey is the more appropriate data source for studies of consumption
inequality or other distributional analyses. The goal of distributional analyses is typically to
measure consumption rather than expenditures. Consumption differs from expenditures because
one pays infrequently for goods and services that one is continuously consuming like rent and
utilities. Durable goods like cars are purchased very infrequently, but their services are received
over a long period of time. Even much of food is in cans or boxes that may be purchased at a
very different time from when it is consumed. To closely approximate consumption, average
spending over a long period of time is needed. The much higher variability of weekly
expenditures than quarterly expenditures is an indication of the greater deviation of weekly
expenditures from consumption. The higher observed variability of weekly expenditures than
22

quarterly expenditures could be the result of greater true variance or greater variance. Neither
higher true variability nor measurement error is helpful in approximating longer-term
consumption.
One might think even though one or two weeks of expenditures are not ideal for
measuring the longer-term distribution of expenditures or consumption, they have a simple,
maybe even time-constant, relationship to longer-term distributions. However, such a
relationship is unlikely for several reasons. Because distributional measures such as percentiles,
poverty measures, and variances inherently depend on dispersion, the differing dispersion in the
Diary Survey spending relative to longer-term spending, the differing relative dispersion across
expenditure categories, and the changes in the relative dispersion over time mean that both levels
and changes in distributional measures based on weekly Diary data are biased. Previous studies
have assumed a constant relationship between the weekly and quarterly data in order to infer
longer-term distributional patterns or have not addressed the issue of the relationship between
two weeks of expenditures and longer-term measures of consumption (Attanasio et al. 2007,
2012). The changing dispersion of the weekly data relative to the quarterly data for many
categories indicates that this assumption is not valid. Furthermore, because aggregate spending
is the sum of spending in different categories, the relationship between a given percentile in the
weekly data and that of longer-term expenditures will change as spending shifts between
categories with different degrees of dispersion. That the distribution of weekly expenditures
differs in complicated and changing ways from the distribution of longer-term expenditures,
suggests there is no simple, time-invariant way to convert one to the other.
That nearly ten percent of Diary respondents report no spending at all in a week is also
problematic. As discussed above, a family might report zero expenditures for an entire week
because they are on a trip for the entire week, they have zero spending for that week, or they fail
to report actual spending. However, even if these zero reports of spending are accurate, such
spending is unlikely to reflect consumption accurately. The large fraction of families with zero
total spending suggests that any inequality measure that depends heavily on spending at low
percentiles will be misleading.
The results also have implications for the redesign of the CE Survey. In deciding which
type of survey, Interview or Diary, to emphasize in the future it is important to recognize how
the current versions perform. The Interview Survey does well at recording many large categories
23

of expenditures, but does poorly at others. The Diary Survey does better than the Interview
Survey for some categories, particularly some small categories that the Interview captures
poorly, but rarely does the Diary do well on both an absolute basis and compared to the
Interview Survey. These results are also consistent with the evidence on diary and interview
reporting from the Canadian Survey of Household Spending as well as the Canadian Food
Expenditure Survey. Diary reporting seems to capture less spending than is obtained through an
interview.
The greater dispersion in the Diary Survey means that larger samples sizes are required to
obtain the same level of precision as in the Interview Survey. For categories of expenditures that
can be compared across the two surveys, the weighted average of the coefficients of variation in
the Diary Survey is 58 percent greater than that of the Interview Survey in 2010. In terms of
precision, this result indicates that about 2.5 independent weekly Diary Survey observations
approximately equal one quarterly Interview Survey observation.
9. Conclusions
In this paper we examine the quality of consumption data in the CE Interview and Diary
Surveys. While some categories of spending are significantly under-reported, our results
indicate that the Interview Survey, in particular, does quite well in terms of a high and roughly
constant share of expenditures relative to the national accounts for some of the largest
components of consumption. These components include imputed rent on owner-occupied
housing, rent and utilities, food at home, gasoline and other energy goods, new motor vehicles,
and to a lesser extent, communication. The Interview Survey does poorly for food away from
home, clothing, furniture and furnishings and alcoholic beverages. Our results are less
encouraging for the Diary Survey which does poorly overall. There is no major category for
which the Diary Survey both has a higher ratio to the PCE than the Interview Survey and the
ratio is high and stable. We also find that the number and value of cars in the Interview Survey
compares closely to outside sources, and the time pattern of home values closely follows other
data.
Overall, the categories of expenditures that are not reported well tend to be those that
involve many small and irregular purchases. These poorly reported categories also tend to be
24

private goods (clothing), ones that one may not want to reveal that one buys (alcohol, tobacco),
and certain luxuries (alcohol, food away from home). Large salient purchases like automobiles,
and regular purchases like rent, utilities, and groceries, seem to be well reported.
While the evidence on the relative bias of the Interview and Diary data is compelling, the
evidence on precision of the data also favors the Interview Survey. Coefficients of variation are
noticeably higher in the Diary Survey than in the Interview Survey. We also find that Diary
respondents are much more likely to report zero spending for a consumption category. In 2010,
72 percent of Diary Survey respondents reported no spending on rent and utilities, as compared
to 2 percent of Interview Survey respondents. The rate of reports of zero has been rising for both
surveys. For the Diary Survey, we also find a high and increasing fraction of respondents
reporting zero for all categories. 11.9 percent of 2010 Diary Survey respondents report zero
spending for an entire week, up from 4.5 percent in 1991.
The CE Interview sample appears to be representative along many dimensions.
However, Sabelhaus et al. (2012) provides strong evidence of under-representation at the top of
the income distribution and under-reporting of income and expenditures at the top. They find
that low-income households are well represented. The under-representation of high income
households and their disproportionate under-reporting of expenditures means that the aggregate
reporting rates relative to the PCE emphasized in the paper likely understate the under-reporting
problem for high income households, but overstate the problem for low income households.
These results have implications for the use of existing CE data and for the redesign of the
CE Survey. The importance of the under-reporting of expenditures in the CE will depend on the
purpose for which the data are used. Uses of the data that rely on aggregates are likely biased.
Our results suggest the CPI is biased because the differential under-reporting means that the
weights do not accurately reflect consumers’ purchases. However, we discuss several reasons
why this problem might not be as worrisome as it first appears.
The evidence that the CE appears to miss spending near the top of the distribution implies
that under-reporting is less of a concern for analyses that do not rely on spending at the top, such
as measures of consumption poverty or median consumption. And, the high and fairly constant
reporting rates for large categories of consumption in the Interview Survey suggest that, for some
purposes, researchers can rely on these categories to address some of the concerns about underreporting.

25

The greater dispersion of spending in the Diary data has important implication for
distributional analyses. The high and increasing fraction of zero reported spending suggests that
the use of Diary Survey data to assess inequality trends and other distributional outcomes is
likely to lead to biased and misleading results. Also, the larger coefficients of variation in the
Diary suggest that larger sample sizes are required for the Diary to obtain the same information
as in the Interview Survey. Furthermore, diary data may not be appropriate to capture the longer
term distribution of expenditures needed to measure consumption for distributional analyses.

References
Ahmed, Naeem, Mathew Brzozowski and Thomas F. Crossley. 2010. “Measurement Errors in
Recall Food Consumption Data.” Working Paper, University of Cambridge.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Andrew Leicester. 2006. “From Micro to Macro, from
Poor to Rich: Consumption and Income in the UK and the US,” working paper,
University College London.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin and Mario Padula, 2010. Inequality in Living Standards
since 1980: Evidence from Expenditure Data. American Enterprise Institute.
Battistin, E. (2003). “Errors in survey reports of consumption expenditures”, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, Working Paper 0307.
Bosworth, Barry (2010). “Price Deflators, the Trust Fund Forecast, and Social Security
Solvency”, WP 2010-12, Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.
Branch, E. Raphael (1994). “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: a comparative analysis,”
Monthly Labor Review, 47-55.
Browning, Martin, Thomas Crossley, and Guglielmo Weber, 2003. "Asking Consumption
Questions in General Purpose Surveys," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society,
vol. 113(491), pages F540-F567, November.
Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence. 2006. “Do Homeowners Know Their House Values and
Mortgage Terms?” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Chopova, Boriana, Jennifer Edgar, Jeffrey M. Gonzales, Susan King, Dave McGrath, and Lucilla
Tan. 2008. “Assessing nonresponse bias in the CE Interview Survey: A summary of
four studies.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
26

Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Creech, Brett J. and Barry P. Steinberg. 2011. “CE Source Selection for Publication Tables.”
Consumer Expenditure Survey Anthology, 2011. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Crossley, Thomas F. and Joachim K. Winter. 2012. “Asking Households about Expenditures:
What Have We Learned?” in Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures,
Christopher Carroll, Thomas Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, editors. Forthcoming from
University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Dalaker, Joe. 2005. Alternative Poverty Estimates in the United States: 2003. U.S. Census
Bureau. Current Population Reports P60-227.
Deaton, Angus and Valerie Kozel (2005), “Data and Dogma: The Great Indian Poverty Debate,”
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 20:2, 177-199.
Dubreuil, Guylaine, Johanne Tremblay, Jenny Lynch, and Martin Lemire. 2011. “Redesign of
the Canadian Survey of Household Spending.” Slide Presentation at the Household
Survey Producers Workshop, June 2011.
Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia.
2006. “The CE and the PCE: A Comparison.” Monthly Labor Review 66 (September),
20-46.
Garner, Thesia I., Robert McClelland, and William Passero. 2009. “Strengths and Weaknesses
of the Consumer Expenditure Survey from a BLS Perspective.” Paper Presented at the
NBER Summer Institute, July 2009.
General Accounting Office. 1996. “Alternative Poverty Measures,” GAO/GGD-96-183R.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Gieseman, Raymond. 1987. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: quality control by
comparative analysis,” Monthly Labor Review, 8-14.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. and Lester D. Taylor. 1970. Consumer Demand in the United States:
Analysis and Projections, 2nd Edition. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder. 2011. “High-Frequency Data on Total Household
Spending: Evidence from the Monthly ALP Surveys. Working paper.
Interagency Technical Working Group (2010). “Observations from the Interagency Technical
Working Group on Developing a Supplemental Poverty Measure.” March.
27

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles (2006): “Household
expenditure and the income tax rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96(5),
1589–1610.
Johnson, David S. 2004. “Measuring Consumption and Consumption Poverty: Possibilities and
Issues” Paper prepared for “Reconsidering the Federal Poverty Measure.”
Kiel, Katherine A. and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1999. “The Accuracy of Owner-Provided House
Values: the 1978-1991 American Housing Survey” Real Estate Economics 27(2): 263298.
King, Susan L., Boriana Chopova, Jennifer Edgar, Jeffrey M. Gonzales, Dave E. McGrath, and
Lucilla Tan. 2009. “Assessing Nonresponse Bias in the Consumer Expenditure
Interview Survey.” Paper presented in Section on Survey Research Methods- JMS 2009.
Li, Geng, Robert F. Schoeni, Sheldon Danziger, and Kerwin Kofi Charles (2010). "New
Expenditure Data in the PSID: Comparisons with the CE," Monthly Labor Review, vol.
133, no. 2, pp. 29-39.
McCully, Clinton. 2011. “Trends in Consumer Spending and Personal Saving, 1959-2009.”
Survey of Current Business, June.
McCarthy, Mary E., Thesia I. Garner, William D. Passero, David S. Johnson and Geoffrey D.
Paulin. 1998. “Construction and Research Use of the Consumer Expenditure Survey.”
Slides for Presentation, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences” NBER working paper
15181, July.
Meyer, Bruce D., and James X. Sullivan. 2012. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income
Poverty.” NBER Working Paper 14827. Revised February 2012.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2011a. Viewpoint: Further Results on Measuring the
Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption, Canadian Journal of
Economics, 44(1), 52-87.
_____. 2011b. “The Material Well-Being of the Poor and the Middle Class Since 1980,”
American Enterprise Institute Working Paper.
_____. 2010. “Consumption and Income Inequality in the U.S. Since the 1960s.” Working
Paper, University of Notre Dame.
_____. 2008. “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single Mother Headed
Families,” American Economic Review, 98(5), December, 2221-2241.
28

. 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
Moran, Larry R. and Clinton P. McCully. 2001. “Trends in Consumer Spending, 1959-2000”
Survey of Current Business, March.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland (2011)
Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” Working Paper.
Passero, William (2011). “Table 1. Summary comparison of aggregate Consumer Expenditures
(CE) and Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE), based on 2002 Benchmark and
restricted to the most comparable categories on the basis of concepts involved and
comprehensiveness, 2003 – 2009.” Revised 11/28/2011. Accessed at
http://www.bls.gov/cex/cecomparison.htm.
Poterba, James M. 1991. “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?” In Tax Policy and the Economy 5,
ed. David Bradford, 145-164. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sabelhaus, John, David Johnson, Stephn Ash, David Swanson, Thesis Garner, John Greenlees
and Steve Henderson. 2012. “Is the Consumer Expenditure Survey Representative by
Income?” in Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, Christopher
Carroll, Thomas Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, editors. Forthcoming from University of
Chicago Press.
Short, Kathleen, Thesia Garner , David Johnson, and Patricia Doyle, "Experimental Poverty
Measures: 1990 to 1997," U. S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, Series P60205, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Silberstein, A.R., and S.Scott (1991): Expenditure Diary Surveys and their Asssociated Errors, in
Biermer, P.P., R.M. Groves, L.E. Lyberg, N.A. Mathiowetz and S. Sudman, Editors,
Measurement Errors in Surveys, Wiley, Hoboken NJ: 1991.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1992. “Aggregate Consumption and Savings in the Postwar United States.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 585-597.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal of
Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Steinberg, Barry, Brett J. Creech, Mary Lynn Schmidt, and Patrick Falwell. 2010. “Source
Selection: Selecting and Evaluating America’s Expenditures.” Paper presented at the
Joint Statistical Meetings 2010, Section on Government Statistics.
29

Stephens, Melvin, Jr. 2003. “3rd of tha Month: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption Between Checks?” American Economic Review 93(1): 406-422.
Triest, Robert. 1998. “Has Poverty Gotten Worse?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12: 1, pp.
97-114.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2010. “Gemini Planning Document,” unpublished
manuscript.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2012. “Consumer Expenditures and Income,” in BLS
Handbook of Methods, U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Department of Labor.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 1983. “Consumer Expenditure Survey: Diary Survey,
1980-81, Bulletin 2173, U.S. Department of Labor, September 1983.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 2004. “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look” in
Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 127-175.

30

Data Appendix
Below is a list of expenditure categories for which we have compared Interview Survey
(IS) and/or Diary Survey (DS) data to PCE aggregates. These categories were selected following
Garner et al. (2006, 2009) and Passero (2011) who identified categories in the PCE and CE that
are most comparable based on “concepts and comprehensiveness”. These comparable categories
are 56 percent of the PCE in 2010. The concordance between PCE categories and the CE
assembled in this previous work is based on integrated data—the combination of data from both
the IS and DS. Our analyses compare the IS and DS to the PCE separately. Consequently, some
additional non-comparabilities will arise when a spending category is only available in one of the
surveys.
For each of the PCE spending categories below, we summarize the compatibility between
the IS and DS (note, we do not comment on the comparability between these surveys and the
PCE) by labeling them as “compatible”, “mostly compatible”, or “not compatible”. A category
is labeled as “compatible” if the same spending subcategories (or Universal Classification Codes,
UCCs) are designed to be captured in both surveys. A category is labeled as “mostly
compatible” if as least one subcategory is missing from either the IS or DS, and the missing
UCCs are not a substantial fraction of PCE spending for that category. Finally, a category is
labeled as “not compatible” if a substantial fraction of spending for that category is not designed
to be captured by either the IS or DS. Except for a few noted categories, data from the DS are
not available prior to 1986, because only a small subset of UCCs are publicly available for the
1980-1985 surveys. Appendix Table 1 provides our concordance of UCCs in the IS and DS for
each of the comparable PCE categories.
Durable Goods
New motor vehicles: Not compatible. The IS reports spending separately for net outlays on new
purchases and the trade-in allowance. The DS does not report these separately, and it is not clear
whether the spending reported in the DS is net of trade-ins. In addition, the value of the “New
trucks, pick-ups, vans, or jeeps” UCC in the DS is zero for 2007-2010, and it is not clear whether
spending on these types of vehicles is reported in another UCC. For this reason, we do not report
DS results for this category.
31

Motor vehicle accessories and parts: Mostly compatible. The Interview Survey (IS) does not
contain “Global positioning devices,” which totaled $628 million in the 2010 DS, or about 2
percent of the PCE aggregate for this category. The DS does not contain “Vehicle accessories
including labor,” which totaled $392 million in the 2010 IS or about 1 percent of the PCE
aggregate for this category. “Vehicle products and services” is only available in the IS beginning
in 2005. Although the IS and DS are mostly compatible for this PCE category, the ratio in in the
DS varies considerably over time. Because we are not able to resolve these sharp changes, we do
not report the ratios for the DS for this category.
Furniture and furnishings: Mostly compatible. “Rental of party supplies for catered affairs” is
included in the IS but not the DS. This UCC is about 1 percent of the PCE aggregate for this
category. The IS’s “Replacement wall-to-wall carpet in owned homes” is represented by
“Installed wall-to-wall carpet” in the DS. “Floor coverings, nonpermanent” in the IS is
represented by “Room-size rugs and other non-permanent floor coverings” in the DS. “Wall-towall carpet” in the IS is included in “Capital improvements--service” in the DS, but the latter
category is too broad, so it is excluded from the DS aggregate. This UCC is less than 1 percent of
the PCE aggregate for this category. In the years 1980 to 1985, only one UCC in this category is
available in the DS, so we do not report DS ratios for those years.
Household appliances: Mostly compatible. “Dishwashers (built-in), garbage disposals, and
range hoods” in both rented and owned homes do not have a unique subcategory in the DS, but
presumably they are included in the “Miscellaneous household appliances” subcategory in the
DS. All other appliances are divided between renter and owned homes in the IS but combined in
the DS.
Glassware, tableware, and household utensils: Mostly compatible. Some UCC titles in the DS
are not listed in IS. For example, “Tableware, nonelectric kitchenware” and “Miscellaneous
household equipment and parts” are not recorded in the IS, but these subcategories may be
captured in “Flatware,” “Glassware,” and “Nonelectric cookware,” which are available in the IS.
In the years 1980 to 1985, only two UCCs in this category are available in the DS, so we do not
report DS ratios for those years.
Outdoor equipment and supplies: Compatible. Although the IS and DS are compatible for this
PCE category, the ratios in both surveys vary considerably over time. Because we are not able to
resolve these sharp changes, we do not report the ratios for this category.
32

Televisions: Compatible.
Audio equipment: Mostly compatible. Beginning in 1999:2 phonographs were replaced by
“Accessories and other sound equipment” in the IS. “Digital audio players” were added in 2005.
Both surveys include “vehicle audio equipment, excluding labor.” Until 2005:2 the IS also
included “vehicle audio equipment including labor,” but it is not clear that this is captured in the
DS. In 2005, this UCC represented about 0.1 percent of the PCE aggregate for this category.
In 1994:1 “Battery replacement, audio equipment, floor mats, seat covers, other accessories,
batteries, and other equipment installed by CU” in the IS was split into two new UCCs: “Parts,
equipment, and accessories,” which is in the Motor vehicle accessories and parts category, and
“Vehicle audio equipment excluding labor,” which is in the audio equipment category. The latter
seems larger, so we assign the pre-1994, combined UCC to the audio equipment category.
Likewise, in 1994:1 “Purchase and installation of vehicle accessories, including audio
equipment, customizing, and items such as luggage racks, fog lamps, and trailer hitches” was
split into “Vehicle accessories including labor” and “Vehicle audio equipment including labor.”
As above, the pre-1994 combined UCC was assigned to the audio equipment category, which
contains the latter UCC. In the years 1980 to 1985, only one UCC in this category is available in
the DS, so we do not report DS ratios for those years.
Recording media: Compatible. In the IS mail-order club purchases were merged into all audio
media purchases beginning in 2005.
Photographic equipment: Mostly compatible. “Photographic equipment” is contained in both
surveys, but “Visual goods” is only contained in the DS. In 2010 “Visual goods” was about 5
percent of the PCE aggregate for this category. In the years 1980 to 1985, “Visual goods” is the
only UCC available in the DS for this category, so we do not report DS ratios for those years.
Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition: Mostly compatible. Only the DS
contains “Fireworks,” but this UCC is very small relative to the PCE aggregate for this category.
There is no DS equivalent to “All other vehicles, trade-in” in the IS. This UCC represents about
0.4 percent of the PCE aggregate for this category. There is also no DS equivalent to “Recreation
expenses, out-of-town trips,” in the IS. This UCC represents about 5 percent of the PCE
aggregate for this category. In 1994:1 in the IS “Motorized camper-coach or other vehicles (net
outlay)” was split into “Purchase of motorized vehicle,” which is in the other recreational
vehicles category described below, and “Purchase of other vehicle” which is in this Sporting
33

equipment category. Because the former UCC is larger in the late 1990s, the pre-1994 UCC was
assigned to the other recreational vehicles category. The same was done for trade-ins, which
were similarly split in 1994:1. In the years 1980 to 1985, “Fireworks” is the only UCC available
in the DS for this category, so we do not report DS ratios for those years.
Bicycles and accessories: Compatible. This category consists of one UCC “Bicycles” that is
consistent across time and recorded in both surveys.
Pleasure boats: Not compatible. “Purchase of boat with motor” in the IS does not have an
analogous category in the DS. These boats might be included in “Powered sports vehicles” in the
DS, but this is a broader subcategory that is included in Sporting equipment above. The IS
contains trade-ins for boats but the DS does not.
Other recreational vehicles: Not compatible. Three UCCs in this category, “Purchase of
motorized camper,” “Trailers, attached campers, trade-in,” and “Motorized campers, trade-in”
are available in the IS but not the DS. Also, the DS does not have a UCC that is analogous to the
IS subcategory “Trailer/other attachable campers”. The DS does have “Unpowered boats,
trailers,” but this is a better match with the “Pleasure boats” category above.
Recreational books: Compatible.
Musical instruments: Compatible.
Jewelry and watches: Compatible.
Telephone and facsimile equipment: Compatible.
Nondurable Goods
Food purchased for off-premises consumption and Nonalcoholic beverages purchased for
off-premises consumption: Mostly compatible when these two categories are combined. A large
set of UCCs in the DS align with a single IS UCC, “Average food and non-alcoholic beverage
expenses.” There were several minor content changes in the DS in 1995 and 1996. In 1994
several DS categories were split and recombined, and a few minor categories (e.g., dried fruit,
vegetable juices) were added. These categories are also available in the DS for years 1980 to
1985.
Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption: Compatible. Several UCCs in
the DS for this category match up with a single UCC in the IS, “Beer, wine, and other alcohol for
34

home use.” Note that spending on non-alcoholic beer and wine is included in this category. This
category is also available in the DS for years 1980 to 1985.
Women's and girls' clothing: Mostly compatible. The DS does not record spending on
“Women’s costumes” or “Girls’ costumes,” but these UCCs are very small.
Men's and boys' clothing: Mostly compatible. The DS does not record spending on “Men’s
costumes” or “Boys’ costumes,” but these UCCs are very small.
Clothing materials: Compatible.
Shoes and other footwear: Compatible.
Gasoline and other energy goods: Mostly compatible. Only the DS contains “Gasohol,” but
this UCC is extremely small. The DS does not contain “Gasoline bought on out-of-town trips” or
“Motor oil bought on out-of-town trips.” Together these UCCs represent about 4 percent of the
PCE aggregate for this category. This category is missing in the 1984 and 1985 DS files, but is
available in the DS across 1980, 1981, and years 1986 and later.
Pets and related products: Not compatible. This category consists of two UCCs: “Pet food”
and “Pet purchases, supplies, and medicine.” The former UCC is missing from the IS; in 2010 it
comprised 70.3 percent of the category in the DS. The latter UCC is also missing from the DS
files in years 1980-1985, so we do not report DS ratios for those years.
Film and photographic supplies: Not compatible. This category consists of two UCCs, “Film”
and “Other photographic supplies.” The latter UCC is not recorded in the IS. In the DS, the latter
UCC is the larger of the two.
Household cleaning products: Not compatible. Out of five UCCs in this category, including
“Soaps and detergents” and “Lawn and garden supplies,” the only UCC contained in the IS is
“Termite/pest control products,” which may differ substantially from its most similar UCC in the
DS, “Miscellaneous household products.”
Household paper products: Not compatible. This category consists of one UCC, “Cleansing
and toilet tissue, paper towels and napkins,” which is only available in the DS.
Household linens: Compatible.
Sewing items: Compatible.
Personal care products: Not compatible. Out of nine UCCs, only three relatively minor UCCs
are available in both surveys.
35

Tobacco: Mostly compatible. “Cigarettes” and “Other tobacco products” are available in both
surveys, but “Smoking accessories” and “Marijuana” are only recorded in the DS. These latter
UCCs in the DS are only about 0.5 percent of the PCE aggregate for this category. This category
is also available in the DS for years 1980 to 1985.
Newspapers and periodicals: Mostly compatible. Only the DS contains “Newsletters,” but this
UCC is extremely small.
Services
Rent and utilities: Mostly compatible. “Rent” is contained in both surveys, but the IS also has
home improvement materials for renters, while the DS does not distinguish between owners and
renters for home improvement materials. “Wall-to-wall carpet (replacement) (renter)” and
“Other repair and maintenance services, renter” are unavailable in the DS, but these UCCs are
very small relative to the PCE aggregate for this category. Only two UCCs in this category,
“Electricity” and “Natural gas” are available in the DS in 1980 and 1981, and no UCC is
available in 1984 or 1985, so we do not report DS ratios in any year before 1986.
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing: Not compatible. Information on the
rental equivalence of owned homes is not available in the DS. For the IS this category includes
the rental equivalence of primary residences and vacation homes, but does not include the rental
equivalence of time shares. The data are reported as a monthly value. For owned homes we
multiply the monthly value by 12, while for vacation homes, we multiply the monthly value by
6, which follows Passero (2011).
Other motor vehicle services: Not compatible. Of the 24 UCCs in this category, only eight are
available in both surveys. We report ratios for this category for the IS only.
Cable and satellite television and radio services: Compatible.
Photo processing: Compatible.
Photo studios: Compatible. This category is only available in the IS beginning in 1999, and it is
also available in the DS in all years including 1980 to 1985.
Gambling: Compatible. Lottery tickets were first mapped to this category in 1996:2. In 2001:1,
this category was split up in the DS from “Miscellaneous fees, lotteries, and pari-mutuel losses”
to just “Lotteries and pari-mutuel losses.” Gambling expenses were not collected in the IS before
36

2001:2. This category is also available in the DS in years 1984 and 1985 but not in 1980 and
1981.
Veterinary and other services for pets: Compatible.
Purchased meals and beverages: Mostly compatible. This category includes spending by the
family on food and beverages (both alcoholic and non-alcoholic) purchased at restaurants, school
or employer cafeterias, and other eating establishments, as well as food or board at school. The
IS also includes food and beverages purchased on out of town trips, but the DS does not collect
these expenses. In 2010, this spending on out of town trips in the IS was about 6 percent of the
PCE aggregate for this category. This category is also available in the DS for years 1980 to 1985.
Food supplied to civilians: Compatible. This category includes meals provided by employers.
Respondents are asked to report spending on “free meals at work as part of your pay”.
Communication: Mostly compatible. “Postage” and “Delivery services” are provided in the DS,
but unavailable in the IS. In 2010 “Postage” is about 3 percent of the PCE aggregate for this
category while “Delivery services” is less than 0.2 percent.
Legal services: Compatible.
Accounting and other business services: Mostly compatible. In the DS, there are three UCCs
that match up with this category: “Accounting fees,” “Miscellaneous personal services,” and
“Employment counseling and fees.” The last of these is unavailable in the IS, but this
subcategory is very small, and it may be captured in the IS by the miscellaneous subcategory.
Funeral and burial services: Compatible.
Personal care services: Mostly compatible. “Shopping club membership fees” is not recorded in
the DS, but this UCC represents only about 1 percent of the PCE aggregate for this category.
“Repair of personal care appliances” was removed from the IS in 1999:2 and not replaced,
although it remained in the DS. In recent years, this UCC in the DS has contained no spending.
In both surveys, “Dating services” was first collected in 2005. This category is mostly available
in the DS for years 1980 to 1985, with the exception that “Watches and jewelry repair” is not
available in these years.
Repair and hire of footwear: Compatible.
Child care: Compatible.
Household maintenance: Mostly compatible. “Other home services” (340903) is available in
both surveys; we assume that in each survey this residual UCC corresponds with several UCCs
37

that are available in one survey but not the other. Two minor UCCs are not available in the DS:
“Rental and installation of dishwashers, range hoods, and garbage disposals” and “Management
fees for management, security, and parking—other properties,” but these categories are small
relative to the PCE aggregate for this category.

38

Table 1: CE PCE Comparisons for 10 Large Categories, 2010 [In millions of dollars]
PCE category
PCE
DS/ PCE
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing
1,203,053
Rent and utilities
668,759
0.797

IS/ PCE
1.065
0.946

Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for
off-premises consumption (food at home)
659,382
0.656
0.862
Purchased meals and beverages (food away from home)
533,078
0.508
0.528
Gasoline and other energy goods
354,117
0.725
0.779
Clothing
256,672
0.487
0.317
Communication
223,385
0.686
0.800
New motor vehicles
178,464
0.961
Furniture and furnishings
140,960
0.433
0.439
Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises
consumption
106,649
0.253
0.220
Notes: The PCE category name for food at home is "Food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased for offpremises consumption." The PCE category name for food away from home is "Purchased meals and
beverages."

Table 2: Aggregate Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey and Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE), 1986 and 2010 [In millions of dollars]

2010
PCE category
Total durables, nondurables, and services
Total

PCE

CE DS

1986

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

$9,965,306

Comparable items (# of categories differ for Interview and Diary)

PCE

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

$2,841,379
2,315,529

3,998,836

0.57

0.74

184,531

376,802

.38

.53

900,434

1,502,609

0.66

293,296

.47

0.85

Durable goods
Total durable goods
Comparable durable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
New motor vehicles
Motor vehicle accessories and parts

1,085,484

421,440

178,464

.96

171,450

83,907
134,047

.88
1.15

154,574

.88

11,446

140,960

61,010

61,859

.43

.44

59,392

26,928

45,494

.45

.77

Household appliances

40,536

27,323

30,034

.67

.74

21,243

10,689

17,644

.50

.83

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

41,545

11,822

3,402

.28

.08

15,142

5,653

2,983

.37

.20

Televisions

37,407

11,730

14,379

.31

.38

11,635

3,772

6,741

.32

.58

Audio equipment

19,019

5,703

3,086

.30

.16

7,247

2,480

10,290

.34

1.42

Recording media

33,077

6,892

4,985

.21

.15

10,429

2,923

3,246

.28

.31

2,844

3,860

2,937

1.36

1.03

2,997

1,488

1,812

.50

.60

53,258

12,733

16,422

.24

.31

13,147

6,329

7,420

.48

.56

Bicycles and accessories

4,257

2,338

1,868

.55

.44

2,114

978

1,195

.46

Pleasure boats

9,779

.71

4,828

Furniture and furnishings

Photographic equipment
Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

26,558

23,474

6,960

.62

7,065

.57
1.02

4,909

.55

5,446

Recreational books

30,412

4,079

5,582

.13

.18

7,771

3,104

4,127

.40

.53

Musical instruments

4,939

1,845

1,848

.37

.37

1,606

271

2,586

.17

1.61

Jewelry and watches

61,485

26,774

14,320

.44

.23

24,333

13,354

11,329

.55

.47

Telephone and facsimile equipment

13,991

3,941

4,126

.28

.29

1,256

1,286

1,089

1.02

.87

1,008,380

1,018,800

.60

.70

424,127

437,329

.66

.77

432,541

568,134

.66

.86

273,849

184,751

217,242

.67

.79

Other recreational vehicles

Nondurable goods
Total nondurable goods
Comparable nondurable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

9,580

5,245

2,301,517
659,382

1.33

7,235

774,189

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

106,649

27,016

23,452

14,252

80,450

49,737

.22
.31

13,899

161,192

.25
.50

41,670

Women's and girls' clothing

77,933

49,664

43,353

.33
.64

.34
.56

95,480

44,532

31,585

.47

.33

44,884

30,115

26,207

.67

.58

4,203

1,227

687

.29

.16

3,057

652

1,059

.21

.35

59,334

36,679

17,896

.62

.30

24,464

15,689

11,896

.64

.49

275,691

.72

.78

91,191

76,406

96,671

.84

1.06

10,021

6,914

.69
.94

Men's and boys' clothing
Clothing materials
Shoes and other footwear
Gasoline and other energy goods

354,117

256,573

Pets and related products

50,068

28,401

.57

Household cleaning products

41,287

47,597

1.15

18,156

16,993

Household paper products

40,325

12,502

.31

11,295

4,087

Household linens

24,288

10,767

7,070

.44

.29

11,020

6,102

4,077

.55

.37

1,213

1,038

1,154

.86

.95

574

1,224

1,030

2.13

1.79

94,357

29,057

43,395

.31

.46

32,157

17,631

21,543

.55

.67

1,122,618

2,603,234

.60

.83

533,202

632,560

.80

.95

225,758

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Total services
Comparable services (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

6,578,305
668,759

.36

1,645,750
392,400

771,984

.72

.92

187,547

217,782

.83

.96

1,203,053

1,281,521

1.07

304,497

Other motor vehicle services

58,612

33,654

.57

9,552

Cable and satellite television and radio services

79,524

64,014

77,063

.97

10,533

4,966

10,032

.47

.95

2,388

1,456

1,383

.58

4,110

1,558

2,265

.38

.55

7,089

2,009

2,527

.36

3,381

709

Photo processing
Photo studios

.80
.28

340,934
.81

7,701

.21

Gambling

99,578

9,517

6,288

.10

.06

15,516

3,458

Veterinary and other services for pets

25,669

19,101

17,401

.74

.68

3,660

2,909

3,578

.79

.98

Purchased meals and beverages

533,078

270,810

281,323

.51

.53

161,472

116,882

104,439

.72

.65

Communication
Legal services

223,385

153,300

178,771

.69

.80

55,600

41,837

44,260

.75

.80

96,788

6,573

15,590

.07

.16

27,348

2,858

7,155

.10

.26

Accounting and other business services

27,745

15,921

7,934

.57

.29

3,729

11,137

3,192

2.99

.86

Funeral and burial services

19,048

1,365

11,442

.07

.60

7,091

1,270

5,824

.18

.82

Repair and hire of footwear

457

416

187

.41

449

296

351

.66

.78

Child care

30,309

9,270

9,629

.31

.32

7,983

8,081

7,126

1.01

.89

Household maintenance

55,216

35,664

45,961

.65

.83

20,539

8,892

17,347

.43

.84

.22

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Reported categories are only those where the CE and PCE are most comparable. Comparable
categories follows Passero (2011). PCE numbers are from Table 2.4.5U. Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product, accessed on November 21, 2011.

Table 3: Comparison of Vehicle Ownership in the CE Interview Survey to Motor Vehicle Registrations (in millions), 1972-2010
1972
1973
1980
1987
1990
1992
1995
1997
2000

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Automobiles
CE Survey

89.6

80.6

105.8

120.7

121.6

120.7

121.2

116.6

113.7

116.2

118.3

114.4

106.8

106.6

107.7

108.3

108.3

State Motor Vehicle Registrations

96.6

101.4

120.7

130.0

132.2

125.1

126.9

128.4

132.2

134.6

134.3

135.0

135.2

134.0

134.5

135.6

133.4

Ratio

0.928

0.795

0.876

0.928

0.920

0.965

0.955

0.908

0.860

0.863

0.881

0.848

0.790

0.795

0.801

0.798

0.812

Trucks
CE Survey

10.1

9.9

25.8

33.2

39.3

42.5

52.1

56.1

63.5

69.6

74.1

86.2

87.6

89.0

90.4

91.8

92.4

State Motor Vehicle Registrations

20.3

22.2

32.3

45.7

53.1

61.6

70.8

75.3

85.0

90.8

92.8

97.9

101.6

105.7

108.2

108.0

108.3

Ratio of CES to SMVR

0.498

0.447

0.801

0.727

0.740

0.690

0.736

0.744

0.747

0.766

0.798

0.881

0.862

0.842

0.835

0.850

0.853

CE Survey

99.7

90.5

131.7

153.9

160.9

163.2

173.2

172.7

177.1

185.7

192.4

200.7

194.4

195.6

198.1

200.1

200.7

State Motor Vehicle Registrations

116.8

123.6

153.0

175.7

185.3

186.7

197.7

203.8

217.3

225.5

227.2

232.9

236.8

239.7

242.7

243.6

241.7

Automobiles & Trucks

Ratio
0.854
0.732
0.860
0.876
0.869
0.874
0.876
0.847
0.815
0.824
0.847
0.862
0.821
0.816
0.816
0.821
0.830
Notes: Motor vehicle registrations are from the U.S. Federal Highway Administration, Highway Statistics. Registration numbers include all commercial cars and trucks. In 1980, personal passenger
vans, passenger minivans, and utility-type vehicles are included in automobile registrations. Starting in 1990 these vehicles are no longer included in automobiles but are included in trucks. Vehicle
Inventory Use Survey data, which are only available through 2002, are from the Census Bureau. "Major Use" denotes the business survey respondents said for which their truck is used. "Primary
Operator Classification" denotes the type of owner. "Personal Transportation" describes a vehicle that is operated for or owned by someone who operates it for personal use, such as pleasure driving,
travel to work, carpool, etc. "Owner/operator" describes an independent trucker driving for his or her own business, or is on lease to a company.

Table 4: Correlation of Reported Vehicle Purchase Price in the
CE Interview Survey to NADA values
Survey Year
1990
2000
Cars owned 6 months or less

0.956

0.912

Cars owned 12 months or less

0.937

0.790

Cars owned 24 months or less

0.879

0.779

Notes: For each of the survey years reported, we compute the
correlation between the reported purchase price of a random
sample of vehicles from the CE Interview Survey and the value
of these vehicles reported in the NADA guides. Values from
NADA guides were identified based on make, model, year,
number of cylinders and number of doors for each vehicle. For
each survey year, we select a random sample of 100 new and
used vehicles with a reported purchase price from the CE
Interview Survey.

Table 5: Coefficient of Variation by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey, 1987-2010

2010
PCE category

CE DS

Durable goods
New motor vehicles
Motor vehicle accessories and parts

CE IS

1991
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

12.34

9.01

4.68

4.71

1987
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ IS

9.93
5.60

Furniture and furnishings

14.67

10.37

1.42

14.25

5.61

2.54

15.39

5.42

2.84

Household appliances

19.05

8.58

2.22

18.62

4.82

3.86

19.03

4.55

4.18

6.32

8.59

0.74

20.61

5.60

3.68

9.10

7.25

1.26

Televisions

17.32

8.84

1.96

33.39

8.15

4.10

30.89

8.55

3.61

Audio equipment

16.32

10.06

1.62

22.91

6.16

3.72

18.98

5.52

3.44

Recording media

9.40

5.99

1.57

7.78

3.80

2.05

8.59

4.85

1.77

Photographic equipment

26.27

11.81

2.22

29.77

16.00

1.86

34.23

16.82

2.04

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

14.03

8.84

1.59

13.33

7.64

1.75

13.86

6.26

2.21

Bicycles and accessories

29.65

17.68

1.68

35.49

14.19

2.50

33.73

10.79

3.13

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

80.78

Pleasure boats

51.70

55.97

Other recreational vehicles

30.23

47.25

26.92

Recreational books

8.91

6.20

1.44

6.89

4.52

1.52

9.41

7.21

1.31

Musical instruments

47.55

23.02

2.07

45.03

22.51

2.00

36.32

27.38

1.33

Jewelry and watches

35.99

12.43

2.90

17.01

8.22

2.07

18.41

8.81

2.09

Telephone and facsimile equipment

19.26

8.57

2.25

18.11

6.51

2.78

14.63

7.63

1.92

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. bev. purchased for off-premises consumption

1.81

0.93

1.93

1.72

1.62

1.06

1.92

1.48

1.30

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

4.46

4.45

1.00

4.51

4.51

1.00

3.97

3.59

1.10

Women's and girls' clothing

4.79

3.69

1.30

5.26

2.52

2.08

3.74

3.50

1.07

Men's and boys' clothing

5.31

4.78

1.11

4.34

2.84

1.53

5.06

3.27

1.54

12.39

17.96

0.69

17.92

10.66

1.68

11.60

7.41

1.57

Shoes and other footwear

5.06

3.10

1.63

3.62

3.15

1.15

5.85

2.84

2.06

Gasoline and other energy goods

2.19

1.73

1.27

2.37

1.98

1.20

2.84

1.83

1.55

Pets and related products

6.56

5.68

5.22

Household cleaning products

3.60

2.86

3.75

Household paper products

3.37

2.96

Household linens

6.18

4.93

1.26

7.66

5.57

1.37

7.08

4.62

1.53

30.73

15.88

1.93

28.75

9.10

3.16

13.69

12.21

1.12

6.04

5.48

1.10

3.75

3.10

1.21

3.23

3.34

0.97

3.80

2.20

1.72

3.44

1.67

2.05

4.07

1.46

2.78

Clothing materials

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

2.08

Other motor vehicle services
Cable and satellite television and radio services

2.85

2.86

7.52

2.76

9.98

8.09

4.14

1.63

2.54

5.82

3.36

1.73

6.48

3.29

1.97

Photo processing
Photo studios

13.81

9.22

1.50

11.62

5.30

2.19

14.18

4.54

3.12

23.57

14.34

1.64

20.98

Gambling

43.18

17.33

2.49

10.69

Veterinary and other services for pets

10.70

6.75

1.59

9.43

8.52

1.11

13.67

5.79

2.36

Purchased meals and beverages

2.12

2.45

0.87

1.97

2.45

0.81

3.53

2.75

1.28

Communication
Legal services

2.63

1.52

1.73

2.72

1.90

1.43

4.67

1.91

2.45

27.21

16.41

1.66

34.45

18.46

1.87

33.79

25.15

1.34

Accounting and other business services

31.94

9.99

3.20

22.34

9.16

2.44

17.46

15.04

1.16

Funeral and burial services

38.27

17.24

2.22

77.21

15.64

4.94

60.41

16.71

3.61

Repair and hire of footwear

29.79

21.05

1.42

19.89

9.66

2.06

17.92

7.18

2.49

Child care

16.46

19.28

0.85

8.34

9.64

0.87

9.94

9.25

1.07

Household maintenance

12.13

5.52

2.20

9.13

5.94

1.54

13.35

6.82

1.96

Weighted Mean (all categories)

7.07

4.32

1.63

6.30

3.67

1.72

6.71

3.75

1.79

Weighted Mean (comparable categories only)

6.18

3.92

1.58

6.24

3.44

1.82

6.62

3.67

1.80

Median ratio

1.63

18.01
12.69

1.86

1.92

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is a
consumer unit-quarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey. The coefficient of variation is the ratio of the standard error of the mean to
the mean times the square root of the sample size, where the standard error is calculated using the Balanced Repeated Replication procedure recommend by the BLS for
variance estimation in the CE Survey.

Table 6: Fraction of Consumer Units with Zero Spending by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey, 1986-2010

2010
PCE category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles

CE DS

Motor vehicle accessories and parts

CE IS

1991
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

0.988

0.980

0.806

0.875

1986
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

DS - IS

0.970
0.874

Furniture and furnishings

0.902

0.777

0.126

0.880

0.688

0.192

0.901

0.667

0.233

Household appliances

0.961

0.816

0.146

0.968

0.799

0.169

0.971

0.783

0.189

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

0.889

0.895

-0.007

0.892

0.867

0.025

0.901

0.846

0.055

Televisions

0.997

0.957

0.040

0.998

0.959

0.039

0.997

0.950

0.046

Audio equipment

0.987

0.968

0.019

0.991

0.777

0.213

0.989

0.750

0.239

Recording media

0.954

0.811

0.142

0.942

0.703

0.239

0.963

0.768

0.194

Photographic equipment

0.994

0.976

0.018

0.995

0.976

0.019

0.996

0.969

0.026

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

0.961

0.827

0.134

0.948

0.767

0.181

0.955

0.773

0.183

Bicycles and accessories

0.995

0.983

0.013

0.995

0.974

0.021

0.995

0.975

0.020

0.998

Pleasure boats

0.996

0.999

Other recreational vehicles

0.996

0.997

0.996

Recreational books

0.964

0.817

0.148

0.944

0.715

0.229

0.944

0.716

0.228

Musical instruments

0.996

0.987

0.010

0.995

0.977

0.018

0.996

0.975

0.021

Jewelry and watches

0.958

0.894

0.065

0.940

0.799

0.140

0.947

0.779

0.168

Telephone and facsimile equipment

0.989

0.934

0.055

0.981

0.938

0.042

0.993

0.951

0.042

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. bev. purchased for off-premises consumption
Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

0.189

0.012

0.177

0.090

0.008

0.082

0.117

0.009

0.108

0.854

0.674

0.810

0.635

0.763

0.572

0.191
0.387

Women's and girls' clothing

0.795

0.531

0.181
0.264

0.722

0.377

0.175
0.345

0.734

0.347

Men's and boys' clothing

0.862

0.623

0.239

0.827

0.502

0.325

0.836

0.479

0.357

Clothing materials

0.983

0.972

0.011

0.963

0.916

0.047

0.966

0.901

0.065

Shoes and other footwear

0.890

0.674

0.216

0.887

0.538

0.349

0.891

0.503

0.388

Gasoline and other energy goods

0.362

0.095

0.267

0.319

0.109

0.210

0.300

0.113

0.187

Pets and related products

0.812

0.784

0.810

Household cleaning products

0.591

0.495

0.517

Household paper products

0.765

Household linens

0.927

0.823

0.104

0.928

0.818

0.110

0.937

0.795

0.141

Sewing items

0.990

0.965

0.024

0.976

0.929

0.046

0.978

0.916

0.062

Tobacco

0.858

0.792

0.067

0.735

0.661

0.074

0.662

0.588

0.074

0.024

0.696

0.629

0.028

0.601

0.708

0.034

0.673

Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities

0.720

Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

0.624

0.341

Other motor vehicle services

0.658

0.368

0.750

0.381

0.748

0.737

Cable and satellite television and radio services

0.895

0.253

0.641

0.916

0.474

0.442

0.956

0.579

0.377

Photo processing
Photo studios

0.985

0.931

0.054

0.973

0.745

0.229

0.974

0.747

0.227

0.994

0.977

0.018

0.991

0.993

Gambling

0.955

0.898

0.057

0.935

Veterinary and other services for pets

0.978

0.859

0.119

0.980

0.865

0.115

0.987

0.867

0.120

Purchased meals and beverages

0.304

0.194

0.110

0.254

0.166

0.088

0.246

0.162

0.084

Communication
Legal services

0.729

0.055

0.674

0.701

0.050

0.652

0.676

0.061

0.615

0.997

0.974

0.023

0.997

0.962

0.035

0.997

0.957

0.041

0.948

Accounting and other business services

0.980

0.944

0.036

0.971

0.932

0.040

0.978

0.933

0.045

Funeral and burial services

0.999

0.987

0.012

0.998

0.944

0.054

0.998

0.960

0.039

Repair and hire of footwear

0.997

0.990

0.007

0.994

0.947

0.047

0.993

0.937

0.056

Child care

0.990

0.974

0.016

0.966

0.942

0.024

0.953

0.931

0.022

Household maintenance

0.955

0.714

0.240

0.939

0.725

0.214

0.951

0.720

0.230

Mean difference

0.133

0.161

0.169

Median difference

0.065

0.110

0.120

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is
a consumer unit-quarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey.

Figure 1a: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, New Motor Vehicles and Imputed Rent
(Interview Only)
1.40
1.20

CE/PCE Ratio

1.00
.80
.60
New motor vehicles
.40

Imputed rental of owner‐occupied nonfarm housing

.20

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

.00

Figure 1b: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Rent and Utilities
1.2

1

CE/PCE Ratio

0.8

0.6

0.4
Diary

Interview

0.2

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1998

1999

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

0

Figure 1c: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Food at Home
1
0.9
0.8

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Diary

0.2

Interview

0.1

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

0
1980

CE/PCE Ratio

0.7

Figure 1d: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Food Away from Home
0.8
0.7

CE/PCE Ratio

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Diary

Interview

0.1

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

0

Figure 1e: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Gasoline and Other Energy Goods
1.2

1

CE/PCE Ratio

0.8

0.6

0.4
Diary

Interview

0.2

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

0

Figure 1f: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Clothing and Shoes
0.8
0.7

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Diary

Interview

0.1

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

0
1980

CE/PCE Ratio

0.6

Figure 1g: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Communication
1
0.9
0.8

CE/PCE Ratio

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Diary

0.2

Interview

0.1
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2000
2000
2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

0

Figure 1h: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Furniture and Furnishings
1
0.9
0.8

CE/PCE Ratio

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Diary

0.2

Interview

0.1

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

1980

0

Figure 1i: Comparisons of CE Diary and CE Interview Aggregates to PCE Aggregates, Alcoholic Beverages
0.45
0.4
0.35

0.25
0.2
0.15
Diary

0.1

Interview

0.05

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1981

0
1980

CE/PCE Ratio

0.3

Figure 2: Reported Value of the Home (CE Interview) Compared to Case‐Shiller Annual Housing
Price Indices (Base Year = 1987)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50

Case‐Shiller

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

0
CE Interveiw

Note: CE data exlcudes the following states because they are not included in the Case-Shiller Index: AL, AK, ID, IN, ME,
MS, MT, SC, SD, WV, and WI. In addition, the following states are exlcuded because of limited state information in the CE
data: DE, GA, MD, and MN.

Appendix Table 1: Concordance of Interview and Diary Survey UCCs for Each PCE Category
PCE Category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles
Motor vehicle accessories and
parts
Furniture and furnishings

Household appliances

Glassware, tableware, and
household utensils

Interview Survey UCCs

Diary Survey UCCs

1980-2010 : 450110 450116 450210
450216
1980-2010 : 480110 480213 490501
2005-2010 : 480212

1986-2010 : 450110
1986-2006 : 450210
1986-2010 : 480110 480212 480213
600903

1980-2010 : 290110 290120 290210
290310 290320 290410 290420
290440 320901 290430 340904
680320 320220 690242 690241
690243 320120 280210
1980-2006 : 320210 320231
2007-2010 : 320233
1980-1998 : 220511 220614 230132
320110 320162
1999-2010 : 220616 230133 320111
1980-2010 : 230117 230118 300111
300112 300211 300212 300221
300222 300311 300312 300321
300322 320150 300331 300332
300411 300412 320511 320512
320522 690245 690244 320521
1980-2010 : 320310 320320 320330
320340 320350 320370 320360

1986-2010 : 290110 290120 290210
290310 290320 290410 290420 290440
320901 290430 340904 320220 690242
690241 690243 230130 320110 320120
280210
1986-2006 : 320210 320231
2007-2010 : 320233

Outdoor equipment and supplies 1980-2010 : 320410
Televisions
Audio equipment

Recording media

Photographic equipment
Sporting equipment, supplies,
guns, and ammunition

Bicycles and accessories
Pleasure boats
Other recreational vehicles

Recreational books
Musical instruments
Jewelry and watches
Telephone and facsimile
equipment

1980-2004 : 310110 310120 310130
2005-2010 : 310140
1980-2010 : 480214 310311 310313
310315 310320 490502
2005-2010 : 310314
1980-1998 : 310312
1996-2010 : 310333
1980-1995 : 310330
1980-1993 : 480211 490500
1980-2010 : 310220
1980-2004 : 310341 310342
2005-2010 : 310340
1980-2010 : 610230
1980-2010 : 600142 600144 600210
600410 600420 600430 610120
1980-1993 : 610900
1994-2010 : 600901 600902
1980-2010 : 600310
1980-2010 : 600121 600132 600110
600138 600127
1980-2010 : 600122 600128
1980-1993 : 600131 600137
1994-2010 : 600141 600143
1980-2010 : 590220 590230 660310
1980-2010 : 610130
1980-2010 : 430110 430120
1980-2010 : 320232 690210

1986-2010 : 230117 230118 300110
300210 300220 300310 300320 320150
300330 300410 320511 320512 300900
320522 320521

1986-2010 : 320320 320340 320350
320905 320370 320380 320310 320330
320360
1986-2010 : 320410
1986-2004 : 310110 310120 310130
2005-2010 : 310140
1986-2010 : 480214 310311 310312
310313 310315 310320 310331 310332
2005-2010 : 310314

1986-2010 : 310340 310220

1986-2010 : 610230 610903
1986-2010 : 600130 600210 600410
600420 600430 600901 610120 610901

1986-2010 : 600310
1986-2010 : 600120 600130 600110
(none)

1986-2010 : 590220 590230 660310
1986-2010 : 610130
1986-2010 : 430110 430120
1986-2010 : 320232 690210

Interview Survey UCCs
PCE Category
Nondurable goods
Food purchased for off-premises 1980-2006 : 790220 790230
consumption
2007-2010 : 790240

Nonalcoholic beverages
purchased for off-premises
consumption

Alcoholic beverages purchased
for off-premises consumption

1980-2006 : 790310 790320
2007-2010 : 790330

Women's and girls' clothing

1980-2010 : 380110 380210 380311
380312 380313 380320 380331
380332 380340 380410 380420
380430 380510 380901 380902
380903 390110 390120 390210
390221 390222 390230 390310
390321 390322 390901 390902
1980-2006 : 380331 380332 390221
390222
2007-2010 : 380333 390223

Diary Survey UCCs
1980-2010 : 010110 010120 010210
010310 010320 020110 020210 020510
020610 020810 020310 020410 020620
020710 020820 030110 030210 030310
030410 030510 030610 030710 030810
040110 040210 040310 040510 040410
040610 050110 050210 050310 050410
050900 060110 060210 060310 070110
070230 070240 090110 090210 100210
100410 100510 160310 080110 160320
160211 160212 100110 160110 110110
110210 110310 110410 110510 120110
120210 120310 120410 130310 140110
140210 140220 140230 140320 140330
140340 140310 130320 150110 150211
150212 150310 180210 180220 180110
180310 180320 180410 180420 180510
180520 180620 180710 180611 180612
1994-2010 : 070210 070220 130120
130210 160210 180610

1980-2010 : 170520 170310 170410
130121 140410 140420 130122 130110
170110 170210 170510 170531 170532
130211 130212
2007-2010 : 170533
2006-2010 : 170530
1980-1994 : 480211
1995-2010 : 480213
1980-2010 : 200210 200410 200533
200310 200523 200111 200513 200112
1986-2010 : 380110 380210 380311
380312 380313 380320 380331 380332
380340 380410 380420 380430 380510
380901 380902 390110 390120 390210
390221 390222 390230 390310 390321
390322 390901
1980-2006 : 380331 380332 390221
390222
2007-2010 : 380333 390223

Interview Survey UCCs
1980-2010 : 360110 360120 360210
360311 360312 360320 360330
360340 360350 360410 360511
360512 360901 360902 370110
370120 370130 370211 370212
370213 370220 370311 370312
370313 370902
1980-2006 : 360511 360512 370312
370313
2007-2010 : 360513 370314
1980-1994 : 370901
1995-2010 : 370903 370904
Clothing materials
1980-2010 : 420110 420120
Shoes and other footwear
1980-2010 : 400110 400210 400310
400220
Gasoline and other energy goods 1980-2010 : 470111 470112 470113
470211 470212 470220 250111
250112 250113 250114 250211
250212 250213 250214 250901
250902 250903 250904 250911
250912 250913 250914 250221
250222 250223 250224
Pets and related products
1980-2010 : 610320
Film and photographic supplies 1980-2010 : 610210
Household cleaning products
1980-2010 : 330511
1980-1998 : 990910
Household paper products
(none)
Household linens
1980-2010 : 280110 280120 280130
280220 280900 320904
Sewing items
1980-2010 : 280230
Personal care products
1980-2010 : 320130 640130 640420

Diary Survey UCCs
1986-2010 : 360110 360120 360210
360311 360312 360320 360330 360340
360350 360410 360511 360512 360901
370110 370120 370130 370211 370212
370213 370220 370311 370312 370313
370901 370904
1986-2006 : 360511 360512 370312
370313
2007-2010 : 360513 370314

Tobacco

1980-2010 : 630110 630210

Newspapers and periodicals

1980-2010 : 590310 590410
1980-1993 : 590110 590210
1994-2010 : 590111 590112 590211
590212

1980-2010 : 630110 630210 630900
630220
1986-2010 : 590110 590210 590900

PCE Category
Men's and boys' clothing

Services
Rent and utilities

1980-2010 : 800710 210110 230121
230141 230150 240111 240121
240211 240221 240311 240321
320611 320621 270211 270212
270213 270214 270411 270412
270413 270414 260111 260112
260113 260114 260211 260212
260213 260214
1980-1998 : 230131
1999-2010 : 230134 320163
1980-1993 : 230111
Imputed rental of owner-occupied 1980-2010 : 910060 910070
nonfarm housing
1980-2006 : 910100
2007-2010 : 910101 910102 910103
1993-2010 : 910050

1986-2010 : 420110 420120
1986-2010 : 400110 400210 400310
400220
1980-1981, 1986-2010 : 470111 470112
470114 470211 470220 250110 250210
250900 250220

1986-2010 : 610310 610320
1986-2010 : 610210 610220
1980-2010 : 320140 330110 330210
330610 330510
1980-2010 : 330310
1986-2010 : 280110 280120 280130
280220 280900 320904
1986-2010 : 280230
1985-2010 : 640110 640120 640130
640210 640220 640410 640310 640420
1986-2010 : 320130

1986-2010 : 800710 210110 270210
270410 260110 260210 270905

(none)

Interview Survey UCCs
1980-2010 : 450312 450412 520511
520512 520521 520522 520902
520905 520904 620907 520541
520542
1980-1993 : 620907
1994-2010 : 620921 620922
1980-1990 : 520530 620902
1991-2010 : 520531 520532 620909
620919 450310 450313 450314
450410 450413 450414
Cable and satellite television and 1980-2010 : 270310 270311
radio services
Photo processing
1980-2010 : 620330
Photo studios
1999-2010 : 620320
Gambling
2001-2010 : 620926

Diary Survey UCCs
1986-2010 : 450310 450410 520511
520521 520902 520904 520531 520541

Veterinary and other services for 1980-2010 : 620410 620420
pets
Purchased meals and beverages 1980-2010 : 190901 190902 190903
790410 790420 790430 200900

1986-2010 : 620410 620420

Food supplied to civilians
Communication

1980-2010 : 800700
1980-2010 : 270104 620930 310350
690116 270105 690114
1980-2005 : 270103
2005-2010 : 310240
1980-1997 : 270510 270610
1980-1990 : 270000
1991-2010 : 270101 270102
1980-2010 : 680110
1980-2010 : 680902 001400 680903

1986-2010 : 800700
1986-2010 : 270000 340110 340120
310241 310242 620930 310351 310352
690116 690114

1980-2010 : 680140 680901
1980-2010 : 440150 620115
1980-1998 : 650110 650210 650900
2005-2010 : 680904
1999-2010 : 650310

1986-2010 : 680140 680901
1980-2010 : 650900 650110 650210
1986-2010 : 440150
2005-2010 : 680904

1980-2010 : 440110
1980-1992 : 340210
1993-2010 : 340211 340212

1986-2010 : 440110
1986-2010 : 340210

PCE Category
Other motor vehicle services

Legal services
Accounting and other business
services
Funeral and burial services
Personal care services

Repair and hire of footwear
Child care

1986-2010 : 270310 270311
1986-2010 : 620330
1980-2010 : 620320
2001-2010 : 620926
1984-2000 : 620911
1980-1981 : 620901

1998-2010 : 190111 190211 190311
190321 190911 190921 190112 190212
190312 190322 190912 190922 190113
190213 190313 190323 190913 190923
190114 190214 190314 190324 190914
190924 190115 190215 190315 190325
190915 190925 190116 190216 19031
190326 190916 190926 200511 200512
200516 200521 200522 200526 200531
200532 200536
1980-1997 : 190110 190210 190310
190320 190901 190902 200510 200520
200530

1986-2010 : 680110
1986-2010 : 680902 680903

Interview Survey UCCs
Diary Survey UCCs
1980-2010 : 340310 340510 440900 1986-2010 : 340310 340510 440900
340630 340620 230142 340901
340630 340620 230140 340901 340907
340907 990900 270901 270902
340913 270900 340903 340410
270903 270904 340420 340903
340914 340911 340912 790640
340915 340410
Notes: UCC refers to Universal Classification Code, which denotes a detailed expenditure category in the Interview or
Diary Survey. Many of these spending categories contain only a few UCCs in the Diary in years before 1986. For those
categories, we do not list the pre-1986 UCCs. See the Data Appendix for details.

PCE Category
Household maintenance

Appendix Table 2: Aggregate Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey and Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE), 1986-2010 [In millions of dollars]

2010
PCE category
Total durables, nondurables, and services
Total

PCE

CE DS

2006

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

$9,965,306

Comparable items (# of categories differ for Interview and Diary)

PCE

2001

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

2,305,155

3,919,463

0.62

0.78

225,679

497,289

.43

.61

$9,061,022
2,315,529

3,998,836

0.57

0.74

184,531

376,802

.38

.53

PCE

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

1,786,178

2,986,027

0.62

0.75

195,895

405,552

.49

.60

$6,962,603

Durable goods
Total durable goods
Comparable durable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
New motor vehicles
Motor vehicle accessories and parts
Furniture and furnishings

1,085,484

1,154,973

946,347

178,464

171,450

.96

233,047

248,551

1.07

230,018

214,367

26,558

23,474

.88

27,316

18,729

.69

25,281

15,091

.93
.60

140,960

61,010

61,859

.43

.44

160,233

75,975

80,770

.47

.50

124,482

70,966

62,428

.57

.50

Household appliances

40,536

27,323

30,034

.67

.74

44,601

31,840

31,439

.71

.70

35,739

28,145

22,261

.79

.62

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

41,545

11,822

3,402

.28

.08

43,295

14,617

4,071

.34

.09

37,115

12,075

3,359

.33

.09

Televisions

37,407

11,730

14,379

.31

.38

34,515

18,759

15,496

.54

.45

16,669

5,708

8,511

.34

.51

Audio equipment

19,019

5,703

3,086

.30

.16

22,414

5,566

4,554

.25

.20

17,944

9,419

3,796

.52

.21

Recording media

33,077

6,892

4,985

.21

.15

37,331

11,881

8,940

.32

.24

36,179

11,171

7,722

.31

.21

2,844

3,860

2,937

1.36

1.03

5,501

3,318

3,870

.60

.70

3,638

3,363

2,379

.92

.65

53,258

12,733

16,422

.24

.31

54,416

15,923

19,590

.29

.36

41,266

15,959

14,862

.39

.36

Bicycles and accessories

4,257

2,338

1,868

.55

.44

3,734

1,330

1,551

.36

.42

3,030

2,244

1,167

.74

.39

Pleasure boats

9,779

6,960

.71

14,248

13,670

.96

10,687

7,530

.70

Other recreational vehicles

9,580

5,245

.55

15,055

11,946

.79

11,471

12,963

1.13

Photographic equipment
Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

Recreational books

30,412

4,079

5,582

.13

.18

28,854

6,086

6,364

.21

.22

24,749

3,914

6,242

.16

.25

Musical instruments

4,939

1,845

1,848

.37

.37

5,641

3,126

1,862

.55

.33

4,932

2,050

2,795

.42

.57

Jewelry and watches

61,485

26,774

14,320

.44

.23

62,334

24,431

17,404

.39

.28

47,577

16,776

13,687

.35

.29

Telephone and facsimile equipment

13,991

3,941

4,126

.28

.29

11,606

4,069

2,577

.35

.22

5,839

4,120

1,750

.71

.30

1,008,380

1,018,800

.60

.70

1,012,313

980,841

.66

.73

400,248

514,347

.69

.88

482,228

Nondurable goods
Total nondurable goods
Comparable nondurable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)

2,301,517

2,069,760

1,587,659
748,694

741,935

.63

.72

335,712

416,927

.70

.86

22,782

18,697

72,636

57,615

.30
.55

.24
.44

43,697

39,438

.53

.47

1,102

504

.26

.12

46,092

33,311

13,791

.72

.30

183,583

143,247

153,922

.78

.84

.57

27,309

14,259

.52

1.22

30,764

35,533

1.16

Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

659,382

432,541

568,134

.66

.86

582,168

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

106,649

27,016

23,452

24,134

49,737

158,903

90,353

56,748

.34
.57

.26
.36

77,193

80,450

.22
.31

31,324

161,192

.25
.50

91,609

Women's and girls' clothing

132,134

95,480

44,532

31,585

.47

.33

93,907

53,735

36,126

.57

.38

83,203

4,203

1,227

687

.29

.16

4,303

2,196

644

.51

.15

4,218

59,334

36,679

17,896

.62

.30

56,606

36,058

18,573

.64

.33

354,117

256,573

275,691

.72

.78

335,246

269,741

281,553

.80

.84

Pets and related products

50,068

28,401

.57

39,084

22,332

Household cleaning products

41,287

47,597

1.15

38,426

47,043

Household paper products

40,325

12,502

35,449

11,848

26,353

8,317

Household linens

24,288

10,767

7,070

.44

.29

25,553

15,872

8,695

.62

.34

23,882

10,903

6,205

.46

.26

1,213

1,038

1,154

.86

.95

1,229

726

1,432

.59

1.16

1,285

833

1,061

.65

.83

94,357

29,057

43,395

.31

.46

72,281

30,837

38,589

.43

.53

69,705

26,362

33,776

.38

.48

1,122,618

2,603,234

.60

.83

1,067,163

2,441,333

.65

.87

841,589

1,838,540

.66

.85

533,202

632,560

.80

.95

553,313

466,860

558,834

.84

1.01

443,912

399,549

425,357

.90

.96

Men's and boys' clothing
Clothing materials
Shoes and other footwear
Gasoline and other energy goods

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Total services
Comparable services (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

.31

6,578,305
668,759

.33

5,836,289

.32

4,428,597

1,203,053

1,281,521

1.07

1,111,028

1,292,026

1.16

829,759

960,176

Other motor vehicle services

58,612

33,654

.57

60,112

46,253

.77

60,943

48,036

Cable and satellite television and radio services

79,524

64,014

77,063

.97

63,722

56,165

64,038

.88

1.00

44,540

35,923

39,013

.81

.88

2,388

1,456

1,383

.58

2,912

1,896

2,125

.65

.73

6,060

2,524

3,115

.42

.51

7,089

2,009

2,527

.28

.36

7,050

4,044

2,667

.57

.38

6,635

1,732

2,139

.26

.32

Gambling

99,578

9,517

6,288

.10

.06

101,052

8,422

6,414

.08

.06

69,990

5,155

6,362

.07

.09

Veterinary and other services for pets

25,669

19,101

17,401

.74

.68

21,490

20,601

15,185

.96

.71

14,541

8,474

9,451

.58

.65

Purchased meals and beverages

533,078

270,810

281,323

.51

.53

477,001

294,234

211,876

.62

.44

359,567

226,785

167,551

.63

.47

Communication
Legal services

223,385

153,300

178,771

.69

.80

195,215

144,195

151,125

.74

.77

165,481

101,759

110,862

.61

.67

96,788

6,573

15,590

.07

.16

91,705

5,152

18,893

.06

.21

70,075

10,274

12,094

.15

.17

Accounting and other business services

27,745

15,921

7,934

.57

.29

26,604

10,264

7,410

.39

.28

18,569

6,953

6,158

.37

.33

Funeral and burial services

19,048

1,365

11,442

.07

.60

18,580

7,770

9,133

.42

.49

17,132

418

8,850

.02

.52

Repair and hire of footwear

457

416

187

.41

441

279

163

.63

.37

461

449

169

.97

.37

Child care

30,309

9,270

9,629

.31

.32

25,592

10,499

9,576

.41

.37

19,924

7,365

7,145

.37

.36

Household maintenance

55,216

35,664

45,961

.65

.83

57,656

36,782

45,617

.64

.79

47,202

34,229

32,062

.73

.68

Photo processing
Photo studios

.80

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Reported categories are only those where the CE and PCE are most comparable. Comparable categories follows Passero (2011).

1.16
.79

Appendix Table 2 (Continued): Aggregate Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey and Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE), 1986-2010 [In millions of dollars]

1996
PCE category

PCE

CE DS

1991

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

PCE

CE DS

1986

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

PCE

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ PCE

IS/ PCE

Total durables, nondurables, and services
Total

$5,157,893

Comparable items (# of categories differ for Interview and Diary)

$3,895,828
1,513,763

2,298,763

0.68

0.78

175,664

331,171

.61

.69

$2,841,379
1,239,830

1,864,751

0.69

0.81

150,334

276,680

.69

.78

900,434

1,502,609

0.66

293,296

.47

0.85

Durable goods
Total durable goods
Comparable durable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
New motor vehicles

676,297

477,185

152,971

149,602

.98

112,903

421,440
126,430

83,907

1.12

134,047

.88
1.15

154,574

Motor vehicle accessories and parts

21,608

.70

13,757

.60

11,446

Furniture and furnishings

88,322

66,124

51,246

.75

.58

67,120

61,505

44,812

.92

.67

59,392

26,928

45,494

.45

.77

Household appliances

26,798

20,714

20,125

.77

.75

23,262

14,074

15,875

.61

.68

21,243

10,689

17,644

.50

.83

15,145

8,262

.62

7,065

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

24,772

8,966

3,222

.36

.13

18,537

9,233

3,077

.50

.17

15,142

5,653

2,983

.37

.20

Televisions

12,211

5,689

7,365

.47

.60

10,894

4,456

6,275

.41

.58

11,635

3,772

6,741

.32

.58

Audio equipment

13,750

8,963

5,387

.65

.39

9,184

3,722

10,466

.41

1.14

7,247

2,480

10,290

.34

1.42

Recording media

21,785

11,280

7,222

.52

.33

15,057

5,242

5,198

.35

.35

10,429

2,923

3,246

.28

.31

3,018

2,172

1,483

.72

.49

2,582

1,512

1,306

.59

.51

2,997

1,488

1,812

.50

.60

28,529

16,658

14,329

.58

.50

20,452

11,645

10,418

.57

.51

13,147

6,329

7,420

.48

.56

Bicycles and accessories

3,029

2,212

1,458

.73

.48

2,531

2,279

1,799

.90

978

1,195

.46

Pleasure boats

7,096

1.48

4,428

Photographic equipment
Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

10,532

8,410

.71

2,114

1.90

4,828

.57
1.02

4,909

1.75

6,051

1.43

5,446

Recreational books

18,116

3,837

5,884

.21

.32

11,041

3,763

5,400

.34

.49

7,771

3,104

4,127

.40

.53

Musical instruments

3,090

1,255

2,088

.41

.68

2,175

926

1,501

.43

.69

1,606

271

2,586

.17

1.61

Jewelry and watches

39,892

15,497

14,531

.39

.36

30,192

18,406

13,449

.61

.45

24,333

13,354

11,329

.55

.47

3,389

2,505

1,924

.74

.57

1,874

5,892

1,742

3.14

.93

1,256

1,286

1,089

1.02

.87

662,452

626,730

.68

.73

567,248

567,088

.69

.78

293,747

352,599

.73

.88

351,488

254,569

315,644

.72

.90

273,849

.32
.67

.25
.46

50,858

15,524

12,861

68,356

51,308

.31
.71

.25
.53

41,670

96,473

77,933

Other recreational vehicles

Telephone and facsimile equipment

8,728

15,282

8,626

1.33

7,235

Nondurable goods
Total nondurable goods
Comparable nondurable goods (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption
Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption
Women's and girls' clothing
Men's and boys' clothing
Clothing materials
Shoes and other footwear
Gasoline and other energy goods

1,241,376
402,756

1,020,250

774,189
424,127

437,329

.66

.77

184,751

217,242

.67

.79

13,899

14,252

49,664

43,353

.33
.64

.34
.56
.58

58,676

18,864

14,735

111,410

74,803

51,325

75,838

45,019

36,018

.59

.47

59,392

39,859

31,409

.67

.53

44,884

30,115

26,207

.67

3,379

1,297

799

.38

.24

3,634

2,190

1,130

.60

.31

3,057

652

1,059

.21

.35

39,496

31,027

14,469

.79

.37

31,328

23,592

14,194

.75

.45

24,464

15,689

11,896

.64

.49

123,743

.80

.85

108,113

.77

.89

96,671

.84

1.06

144,745

115,860

121,129

92,737

91,191

76,406

Pets and related products

20,209

15,019

.74

14,070

9,760

.69

10,021

6,914

Household cleaning products

26,344

28,057

1.07

20,505

24,446

1.19

18,156

16,993

.94

Household paper products

19,723

7,003

.36

15,376

5,741

.37

11,295

4,087

.36

Household linens

21,161

9,321

5,434

.44

.26

14,582

7,232

4,591

.50

.31

11,020

6,102

4,077

.55

.37

1,040

825

1,398

.79

1.34

699

1,555

1,040

2.22

1.49

574

1,224

1,030

2.13

1.79

51,419

21,610

26,209

.42

.51

42,409

21,687

26,798

.51

.63

32,157

17,631

21,543

.55

.67

675,647

1,340,862

.70

.87

522,248

1,020,983

.69

.87

320,550

345,125

.89

.96

291,385

260,557

276,771

.89

.95

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Total services

3,240,220

Comparable services (# of categories differ for IS and DS)
Rent and utilities

358,225

Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

2,398,393

1,645,750

592,467

639,125

1.08

436,687

474,196

Other motor vehicle services

42,622

36,376

.85

15,010

12,946

Cable and satellite television and radio services

27,400

23,108

24,677

.84

.90

19,269

13,415

17,633

6,377

2,590

2,993

.41

.47

5,466

1,862

2,750

6,455

2,431

4,867

1,350

Photo processing
Photo studios
Gambling

.38
.12

.69

225,758

392,400

771,984

.72

.92

187,547

217,782

.83

.96

304,497

340,934

.86

9,552

.70

.92

10,533

4,966

10,032

.47

.95

.34

.50

4,110

1,558

2,265

.38

.55

3,381

709

.28
.17

.81

7,701

.21
.22

50,291

6,279

24,664

4,298

15,516

3,458

9,816

7,411

6,843

.75

.70

5,554

5,203

5,675

.94

1.02

3,660

2,909

3,578

.79

.98

Purchased meals and beverages

279,515

163,818

143,572

.59

.51

237,257

137,351

119,041

.58

.50

161,472

116,882

104,439

.72

.65

Communication
Legal services

104,928

84,820

81,545

.81

.78

71,996

59,018

60,507

.82

.84

55,600

41,837

44,260

.75

.80

50,608

11,179

11,074

.22

.22

41,751

3,339

8,484

.08

.20

27,348

2,858

7,155

.10

.26
.86

Veterinary and other services for pets

Accounting and other business services

10,995

9,190

4,787

.84

.44

7,089

6,253

4,561

.88

.64

3,729

11,137

3,192

2.99

Funeral and burial services

12,721

13,369

11,311

1.05

.89

10,114

2,229

7,268

.22

.72

7,091

1,270

5,824

.18

.82

Repair and hire of footwear

482

434

270

.90

.56

622

445

407

.72

.65

449

296

351

.66

.78

Child care

14,412

7,462

7,696

.52

.53

10,948

7,874

7,528

.72

.69

7,983

8,081

7,126

1.01

.89

Household maintenance

35,817

23,006

25,465

.64

.71

24,732

19,054

23,215

.77

.94

20,539

8,892

17,347

.43

.84

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Reported categories are only those where the CE and PCE are most comparable. Comparable categories follows Passero (2011).

Appendix Table 3: Comparison of Vehicle Ownership in the CE Interview Survey to Motor Vehicle Registrations (in
millions), 1972-2010
1972
1987
1992
1997
2002
Trucks
CE Survey

10.1

33.2

42.5

56.1

69.6

Personal Transportation as Major Use

8.1

29.3

40.4

50.9

65.3

Personal Transportation as Primary Operator Classification
Mixed Personal Transportation and Business as Primary Operator
Classification

NA

29.3

41.1

51.8

65.3

NA

0.5

1.2

1.4

NA

Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey

Owner/Operator as Primary Operator Classification

NA

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.5

All Three as Primary Operator Classification

NA

30.0

42.5

53.3

65.9

1.244

1.135

1.051

1.101

1.065

Ratio of CES to PT as POC

NA

1.133

1.035

1.083

1.065

Ratio of CES to All Three as POC

NA

1.107

1.002

1.051

1.056

Ratio of CES to PT as Major Use

Notes: See notes to 2a.

Appendix Table 4: Coefficient of Variation by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey, 1987-2010

2010
PCE category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles

CE DS

Motor vehicle accessories and parts

CE IS

2006
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

2001
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

12.34

8.39

8.48

4.68

5.34

5.41

DS/ IS

Furniture and furnishings

14.67

10.37

1.42

13.54

10.32

1.31

12.01

11.24

1.07

Household appliances

19.05

8.58

2.22

16.27

6.11

2.66

14.09

7.11

1.98

6.32

8.59

0.74

7.42

7.80

0.95

12.83

8.52

1.51

Televisions

17.32

8.84

1.96

28.29

9.49

2.98

30.58

11.31

2.70

Audio equipment

16.32

10.06

1.62

14.15

10.64

1.33

27.92

11.36

2.46

Recording media

9.40

5.99

1.57

5.70

5.14

1.11

6.23

5.15

1.21

Photographic equipment

26.27

11.81

2.22

24.83

9.64

2.58

24.59

11.52

2.14

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

14.03

8.84

1.59

17.16

13.98

1.23

24.61

11.04

2.23

Bicycles and accessories

29.65

17.68

1.68

30.51

18.03

1.69

33.54

15.97

2.10

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

Pleasure boats

80.78

47.90

41.06

Other recreational vehicles

55.97

84.70

52.60

Recreational books

8.91

6.20

1.44

7.19

5.28

1.36

9.35

5.74

1.63

Musical instruments

47.55

23.02

2.07

56.66

18.82

3.01

72.70

24.30

2.99

Jewelry and watches

35.99

12.43

2.90

20.80

12.30

1.69

14.55

12.70

1.15

Telephone and facsimile equipment

19.26

8.57

2.25

15.50

7.27

2.13

14.12

8.21

1.72

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

1.81

0.93

1.93

1.41

1.20

1.18

1.70

1.04

1.64

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

4.46

4.45

1.00

5.12

5.54

0.92

4.08

4.49

0.91

Women's and girls' clothing

4.79

3.69

1.30

3.22

3.93

0.82

4.20

4.14

1.01

Men's and boys' clothing

5.31

4.78

1.11

5.10

3.51

1.46

5.73

4.43

1.29

12.39

17.96

0.69

22.00

21.25

1.04

14.99

15.64

0.96

Shoes and other footwear

5.06

3.10

1.63

4.70

3.00

1.57

5.18

4.64

1.12

Gasoline and other energy goods

2.19

1.73

1.27

1.80

1.56

1.15

2.06

1.73

1.19

Pets and related products

6.56

4.62

5.24

Household cleaning products

3.60

3.36

5.00

Household paper products

3.37

2.54

Household linens

6.18

4.93

1.26

6.91

6.74

1.03

6.95

7.04

0.99

30.73

15.88

1.93

14.54

13.50

1.08

18.55

12.35

1.50

6.04

5.48

1.10

4.90

4.05

1.21

3.69

5.51

0.67

3.80

2.20

1.72

3.49

1.94

1.80

3.29

2.28

1.44

Clothing materials

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

2.08

Other motor vehicle services
Cable and satellite television and radio services

2.99

2.14

7.52

3.02

7.61

8.40

4.14

1.63

2.54

3.77

2.47

1.53

3.91

2.24

Photo processing
Photo studios

13.81

9.22

1.50

10.01

7.68

1.30

11.74

5.11

2.30

23.57

14.34

1.64

27.39

20.42

1.34

19.14

16.45

1.16

Gambling

43.18

17.33

2.49

17.37

9.39

1.85

15.81

14.79

1.07

Veterinary and other services for pets

10.70

6.75

1.59

13.38

8.35

1.60

12.37

7.80

1.59

Purchased meals and beverages

2.12

2.45

0.87

2.21

3.06

0.72

2.64

2.83

0.93

Communication
Legal services

2.63

1.52

1.73

2.81

1.37

2.05

3.54

1.74

2.03

27.21

16.41

1.66

40.36

20.02

2.02

36.79

12.92

2.85

Accounting and other business services

31.94

9.99

3.20

14.25

11.45

1.25

17.33

12.97

1.34

Funeral and burial services

38.27

17.24

2.22

88.08

18.01

4.89

64.78

14.10

4.59

Repair and hire of footwear

29.79

21.05

1.42

36.57

15.96

2.29

26.49

14.82

1.79

Child care

16.46

19.28

0.85

13.06

12.49

1.05

15.51

18.21

0.85

Household maintenance

12.13

5.52

2.20

10.70

5.02

2.13

15.35

14.71

1.04

Weighted Mean (all categories)

7.07

4.32

1.63

6.40

4.16

1.54

6.53

4.49

1.46

Weighted Mean (comparable categories only)

6.18

3.92

1.58

6.18

4.05

1.52

6.34

4.19

1.51

Median ratio

1.63

1.35

1.75

1.49

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is a
consumer unit-quarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey. The coefficient of variation is the ratio of the standard error of the mean to the
mean times the square root of the sample size, where the standard error is calculated using the Balanced Repeated Replication procedure recommend by the BLS for variance
estimation in the CE Survey. The weighted means are calculated using as the weights the PCE values for each category for 2010 reported in Table 2.

Appendix Table 4 (Continued): Coefficient of Variation by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey, 1987-2010

1996
PCE category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles

CE DS

Motor vehicle accessories and parts
Furniture and furnishings

CE IS

1991
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

8.82

9.01

3.85

4.71

1987
DS/ IS

CE DS

CE IS

DS/ IS

9.93
5.60

9.34

7.66

1.22

14.25

5.61

2.54

15.39

5.42

15.19

5.33

2.85

18.62

4.82

3.86

19.03

4.55

4.18

7.89

9.27

0.85

20.61

5.60

3.68

9.10

7.25

1.26

Televisions

26.64

8.28

3.22

33.39

8.15

4.10

30.89

8.55

3.61

Audio equipment

21.58

9.55

2.26

22.91

6.16

3.72

18.98

5.52

3.44

Recording media

7.20

4.18

1.73

7.78

3.80

2.05

8.59

4.85

1.77

Photographic equipment

36.30

14.60

2.49

29.77

16.00

1.86

34.23

16.82

2.04

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

25.13

7.38

3.41

13.33

7.64

1.75

13.86

6.26

2.21

Bicycles and accessories

23.74

16.03

1.48

35.49

14.19

2.50

33.73

10.79

3.13

Household appliances
Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

60.25

Pleasure boats

51.70

86.73

Other recreational vehicles

2.84

30.23

47.25

26.92

Recreational books

8.24

4.33

1.90

6.89

4.52

1.52

9.41

7.21

1.31

Musical instruments

59.89

22.09

2.71

45.03

22.51

2.00

36.32

27.38

1.33

Jewelry and watches

11.31

9.15

1.24

17.01

8.22

2.07

18.41

8.81

2.09

Telephone and facsimile equipment

15.28

5.19

2.94

18.11

6.51

2.78

14.63

7.63

1.92

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

1.35

0.99

1.36

1.72

1.62

1.06

1.92

1.48

1.30

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

4.47

4.45

1.00

4.51

4.51

1.00

3.97

3.59

1.10

Women's and girls' clothing

6.20

2.83

2.19

5.26

2.52

2.08

3.74

3.50

1.07

Men's and boys' clothing

6.41

2.42

2.65

4.34

2.84

1.53

5.06

3.27

1.54

11.97

8.55

1.40

17.92

10.66

1.68

11.60

7.41

1.57

6.07

2.43

2.50

3.62

3.15

1.15

5.85

2.84

2.06

2.60

1.85

1.41

2.37

1.98

1.20

2.84

1.83

1.55

1.53

Clothing materials
Shoes and other footwear
Gasoline and other energy goods
Pets and related products

13.49

5.68

5.22

Household cleaning products

2.74

2.86

3.75

Household paper products

3.51

2.96

Household linens

8.39

4.80

1.75

7.66

5.57

1.37

7.08

4.62

19.37

14.06

1.38

28.75

9.10

3.16

13.69

12.21

1.12

4.55

4.35

1.05

3.75

3.10

1.21

3.23

3.34

0.97

3.37

2.16

1.56

3.44

1.67

2.05

4.07

1.46

2.78

Sewing items
Tobacco
Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

1.76

Other motor vehicle services
Cable and satellite television and radio services

2.85

2.86

7.99

2.76

9.98

8.09

4.53

2.18

2.07

5.82

3.36

1.73

6.48

3.29

1.97

Photo processing
Photo studios

12.63

3.82

3.31

11.62

5.30

2.19

14.18

4.54

3.12

Gambling

14.88

2.36

43.80

20.98

18.01

10.69

12.69

Veterinary and other services for pets

9.19

5.62

1.63

9.43

8.52

1.11

13.67

5.79

Purchased meals and beverages

2.00

2.71

0.74

1.97

2.45

0.81

3.53

2.75

1.28

Communication
Legal services

3.38

2.17

1.56

2.72

1.90

1.43

4.67

1.91

2.45

47.12

12.36

3.81

34.45

18.46

1.87

33.79

25.15

1.34

Accounting and other business services

32.15

7.61

4.23

22.34

9.16

2.44

17.46

15.04

1.16

Funeral and burial services

75.48

15.95

4.73

77.21

15.64

4.94

60.41

16.71

3.61

Repair and hire of footwear

33.98

8.80

3.86

19.89

9.66

2.06

17.92

7.18

2.49

Child care

8.52

13.07

0.65

8.34

9.64

0.87

9.94

9.25

1.07

Household maintenance

8.64

4.82

1.79

9.13

5.94

1.54

13.35

6.82

1.96

Weighted Mean (all categories)

6.69

3.46

1.93

6.30

3.67

1.72

6.71

3.75

1.79

Weighted Mean (comparable categories only)

6.40

3.42

1.87

6.24

3.44

1.82

6.62

3.67

1.80

Median ratio

1.85

1.86

1.92

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is a consumer
unit-quarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey. The coefficient of variation is the ratio of the standard error of the mean to the mean times the
square root of the sample size, where the standard error is calculated using the Balanced Repeated Replication procedure recommend by the BLS for variance estimation in the CE
Survey. The weighted means are calculated using as the weights the PCE values for each category for 2010 reported in Table 2.

Appendix Table 5: Diary Response Statistics, Select Years 1986-2010

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

Number of CUs with at least one valid week

2010
7,457

2006
7,557

2001
7,931

1996
5,761

1991
6,319

1986
6,897

Number of valid week one diaries

7,063

7,101

7,722

5,522

6,001

6,439

Number of valid week two diaries

7,233

7,354

7,682

5,254

5,918

6,378

6,839
91.7%
885
11.9%
445
6.0%
6.5%
689
9.8%
641
8.9%

6,898
91.3%
766
10.1%
343
4.5%
5.0%
572
8.1%
537
7.3%

7,473
94.2%
572
7.2%
253
3.2%
3.4%
398
5.2%
427
5.6%

5,015
87.1%
431
7.5%
175
3.0%
3.5%
298
5.4%
308
5.9%

5,600
88.6%
285
4.5%
106
1.7%
1.9%
187
3.1%
204
3.4%

5,920
85.8%
472
6.8%
165
2.4%
2.8%
284
4.4%
353
5.5%

Number of CUs completing diaries for both weeks
Fraction of all CUs: (4)/(1)
Number of CUs reporting at least one week of no spending
Fraction of all CUs: (6)/(1)
Number of CUs reporting no spending for both weeks
Fraction of all CUs: (8)/(1)
Fraction of those completing diaries for both weeks: (8)/(4)
Number of CUs completing a week one diary that has no spending
Fraction of week one diaries: (11)/(2)
Number of CUs completing a week two diary that has no spending
Fraction of week two diaries: (13)/(3)
Note: A completed diary may have no spending.

Appendix Table 6: Fraction of Consumer Units with Zero Spending by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview andDiary Survey, 1986-2010

2010
PCE category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles

CE DS

Motor vehicle accessories and parts

CE IS

2006
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

0.988

0.982

0.806

0.814

2001
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

DS - IS

0.981
0.810

Furniture and furnishings

0.902

0.777

0.126

0.861

0.747

0.114

0.875

0.736

0.138

Household appliances

0.961

0.816

0.146

0.957

0.818

0.139

0.959

0.821

0.138

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

0.889

0.895

-0.007

0.872

0.889

-0.016

0.902

0.902

0.000

Televisions

0.997

0.957

0.040

0.996

0.956

0.040

0.998

0.960

0.038

Audio equipment

0.987

0.968

0.019

0.984

0.955

0.029

0.986

0.954

0.032

Recording media

0.954

0.811

0.142

0.920

0.727

0.193

0.921

0.723

0.199

Photographic equipment

0.994

0.976

0.018

0.992

0.970

0.022

0.993

0.976

0.017

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

0.961

0.827

0.134

0.952

0.820

0.132

0.960

0.804

0.156

Bicycles and accessories

0.995

0.983

0.013

0.996

0.985

0.011

0.995

0.985

0.010

0.998

Pleasure boats

0.997

0.999

Other recreational vehicles

0.998

0.999

0.999

Recreational books

0.964

0.817

0.148

0.948

0.795

0.153

0.960

0.769

0.191

Musical instruments

0.996

0.987

0.010

0.995

0.986

0.009

0.997

0.980

0.017

Jewelry and watches

0.958

0.894

0.065

0.950

0.880

0.070

0.958

0.877

0.081

Telephone and facsimile equipment

0.989

0.934

0.055

0.987

0.941

0.046

0.987

0.942

0.045

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

0.189

0.012

0.177

0.158

0.012

0.146

0.149

0.012

0.136

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

0.854

0.674

0.820

0.673

0.672

0.795

0.531

0.759

0.498

0.147
0.260

0.812

Women's and girls' clothing

0.181
0.264

0.795

0.471

0.140
0.324

Men's and boys' clothing

0.862

0.623

0.239

0.835

0.597

0.238

0.863

0.569

0.293

Clothing materials

0.983

0.972

0.011

0.976

0.971

0.004

0.977

0.965

0.012

Shoes and other footwear

0.890

0.674

0.216

0.884

0.646

0.238

0.888

0.671

0.217

Gasoline and other energy goods

0.362

0.095

0.267

0.310

0.098

0.213

0.308

0.107

0.201

Pets and related products

0.812

0.794

0.830

Household cleaning products

0.591

0.546

0.581

Household paper products

0.765

0.732

Household linens

0.927

0.823

0.104

0.904

0.814

0.090

0.922

0.840

0.082

Sewing items

0.990

0.965

0.024

0.986

0.961

0.025

0.990

0.957

0.032

Tobacco

0.858

0.792

0.067

0.808

0.774

0.034

0.803

0.755

0.048

0.720

0.024

0.696

0.721

0.020

0.701

0.712

0.031

0.681

Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

0.341

Other motor vehicle services

0.747

0.325

0.750

0.333

0.737

0.764

Cable and satellite television and radio services

0.895

0.253

0.641

0.880

0.268

0.612

0.873

0.323

0.550

Photo processing
Photo studios

0.985

0.931

0.054

0.976

0.884

0.092

0.971

0.784

0.187

0.994

0.977

0.018

0.991

0.974

0.017

0.992

0.963

0.029

Gambling

0.955

0.898

0.057

0.942

0.873

0.069

0.961

0.847

0.114

Veterinary and other services for pets

0.978

0.859

0.119

0.975

0.873

0.102

0.981

0.874

0.107

Purchased meals and beverages

0.304

0.194

0.110

0.247

0.185

0.062

0.276

0.171

0.104

Communication
Legal services

0.729

0.055

0.674

0.695

0.048

0.648

0.707

0.043

0.664

0.997

0.974

0.023

0.997

0.974

0.023

0.997

0.967

0.029

Accounting and other business services

0.980

0.944

0.036

0.977

0.944

0.033

0.972

0.939

0.033

Funeral and burial services

0.999

0.987

0.012

0.999

0.983

0.015

0.999

0.974

0.026

Repair and hire of footwear

0.997

0.990

0.007

0.998

0.990

0.009

0.996

0.986

0.010

Child care

0.990

0.974

0.016

0.988

0.969

0.019

0.984

0.967

0.017

Household maintenance

0.955

0.714

0.240

0.951

0.716

0.235

0.940

0.736

0.204

Mean difference

0.133

0.128

0.138

Median difference

0.065

0.069

0.082

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is a consumer
unit-quarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey.

Appendix Table 6 (Continued): Fraction of Consumer Units with Zero Spending by Spending Category, Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview and Diary Survey, 1986-2010

1996
PCE category
Durable goods
New motor vehicles

CE DS

Motor vehicle accessories and parts

CE IS

1991
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

1986
DS - IS

CE DS

CE IS

0.983

0.980

0.970

0.768

0.875

0.874

DS - IS

Furniture and furnishings

0.874

0.707

0.167

0.880

0.688

0.192

0.901

0.667

0.233

Household appliances

0.965

0.800

0.165

0.968

0.799

0.169

0.971

0.783

0.189

Glassware, tableware, and household utensils

0.901

0.882

0.019

0.892

0.867

0.025

0.901

0.846

0.055

Televisions

0.997

0.957

0.040

0.998

0.959

0.039

0.997

0.950

0.046

Audio equipment

0.988

0.939

0.049

0.991

0.777

0.213

0.989

0.750

0.239

Recording media

0.917

0.677

0.240

0.942

0.703

0.239

0.963

0.768

0.194

Photographic equipment

0.995

0.979

0.016

0.995

0.976

0.019

0.996

0.969

0.026

Sporting equipment, supplies, guns, and ammunition

0.953

0.759

0.194

0.948

0.767

0.181

0.955

0.773

0.183

Bicycles and accessories

0.994

0.980

0.014

0.995

0.974

0.021

0.995

0.975

0.020

0.998

Pleasure boats

0.996

0.998

Other recreational vehicles

0.996

0.997

0.996

Recreational books

0.949

0.726

0.223

0.944

0.715

0.229

0.944

0.716

0.228

Musical instruments

0.998

0.978

0.020

0.995

0.977

0.018

0.996

0.975

0.021

Jewelry and watches

0.953

0.833

0.120

0.940

0.799

0.140

0.947

0.779

0.168

Telephone and facsimile equipment

0.991

0.930

0.061

0.981

0.938

0.042

0.993

0.951

0.042

Nondurable goods
Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

0.121

0.007

0.115

0.090

0.008

0.082

0.117

0.009

0.108

Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises consumption

0.804

0.644

0.810

0.635

0.572

0.769

0.399

0.722

0.377

0.175
0.345

0.763

Women's and girls' clothing

0.160
0.370

0.734

0.347

0.191
0.387

Men's and boys' clothing

0.852

0.513

0.339

0.827

0.502

0.325

0.836

0.479

0.357

Clothing materials

0.976

0.944

0.032

0.963

0.916

0.047

0.966

0.901

0.065

Shoes and other footwear

0.880

0.594

0.286

0.887

0.538

0.349

0.891

0.503

0.388

Gasoline and other energy goods

0.314

0.106

0.209

0.319

0.109

0.210

0.300

0.113

0.187

Pets and related products

0.804

0.784

0.810

Household cleaning products

0.555

0.495

0.517

Household paper products

0.697

0.624

Household linens

0.930

0.829

0.101

0.928

0.818

0.110

0.937

0.795

0.141

Sewing items

0.985

0.942

0.043

0.976

0.929

0.046

0.978

0.916

0.062

Tobacco

0.769

0.702

0.067

0.735

0.661

0.074

0.662

0.588

0.074

0.714

0.025

0.689

0.629

0.028

0.601

0.708

0.034

0.673

Services - household consumption expenditures
Rent and utilities
Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing

0.361

Other motor vehicle services

0.658

0.368

0.735

0.381

0.748

0.737

Cable and satellite television and radio services

0.884

0.401

0.483

0.916

0.474

0.442

0.956

0.579

0.377

Photo processing
Photo studios

0.970

0.752

0.218

0.973

0.745

0.229

0.974

0.747

0.227

0.993

0.991

Gambling

0.949

0.935

Veterinary and other services for pets

0.979

0.866

0.113

0.980

0.865

0.115

0.987

0.867

0.120

Purchased meals and beverages

0.285

0.158

0.127

0.254

0.166

0.088

0.246

0.162

0.084

Communication
Legal services

0.716

0.040

0.676

0.701

0.050

0.652

0.676

0.061

0.615

0.996

0.965

0.031

0.997

0.962

0.035

0.997

0.957

0.041

Accounting and other business services

0.976

0.935

0.040

0.971

0.932

0.040

0.978

0.933

0.045

Funeral and burial services

1.000

0.965

0.034

0.998

0.944

0.054

0.998

0.960

0.039

Repair and hire of footwear

0.996

0.972

0.024

0.994

0.947

0.047

0.993

0.937

0.056

Child care

0.979

0.958

0.021

0.966

0.942

0.024

0.953

0.931

0.022

Household maintenance

0.944

0.737

0.208

0.939

0.725

0.214

0.951

0.720

0.230

0.993
0.948

Mean difference

0.158

0.161

0.169

Median difference

0.113

0.110

0.120

Notes: Data are from the Interview and Diary Consumer Expenditure Surveys. Spending categories are the same as those reported in Table 2. The unit of observation is a consumer unitquarter for the Interview Survey and a consumer unit-week for the Diary Survey.

Appendix Table 7: Comparison of Demographic Characteristics, CE Interview Survey and CPS, 1980-2010

1980
1981
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

No High School Degree
CE
CPS
Diff
0.319 0.298 0.021
0.293 0.289 0.004
0.263 0.258 0.005
0.264 0.254 0.009
0.261 0.246 0.015
0.248 0.240 0.007
0.253 0.235 0.018
0.241 0.230 0.011
0.238 0.224 0.014
0.231 0.216 0.015
0.235 0.208 0.027
0.217 0.202 0.015
0.207 0.194 0.013
0.207 0.189 0.018
0.192 0.189 0.003
0.190 0.186 0.004
0.177 0.179 -0.002
0.168 0.174 -0.006
0.171 0.169 0.002
0.166 0.169 -0.003
0.165 0.169 -0.004
0.168 0.164 0.004
0.162 0.158 0.004
0.173 0.157 0.016
0.173 0.154 0.020
0.171 0.151 0.019
0.165 0.142 0.022
0.158 0.141 0.017
0.167 0.137 0.030

High School Degree
CE
CPS
Diff
0.333 0.349 -0.016
0.340 0.355 -0.015
0.342 0.359 -0.017
0.328 0.356 -0.028
0.339 0.358 -0.019
0.351 0.358 -0.007
0.344 0.360 -0.015
0.339 0.355 -0.015
0.332 0.351 -0.019
0.336 0.354 -0.018
0.326 0.355 -0.028
0.337 0.347 -0.010
0.340 0.339 0.001
0.339 0.335 0.004
0.334 0.332 0.002
0.316 0.334 -0.018
0.315 0.335 -0.020
0.316 0.331 -0.014
0.319 0.328 -0.009
0.310 0.320 -0.010
0.305 0.318 -0.014
0.295 0.318 -0.022
0.289 0.317 -0.029
0.282 0.319 -0.036
0.284 0.316 -0.032
0.282 0.315 -0.033
0.279 0.309 -0.031
0.281 0.309 -0.028
0.279 0.310 -0.032

Some College
CE
CPS
Diff
0.200 0.202 -0.002
0.209 0.204 0.004
0.211 0.213 -0.002
0.217 0.216 0.000
0.219 0.221 -0.002
0.218 0.221 -0.004
0.218 0.221 -0.003
0.226 0.224 0.002
0.231 0.230 0.001
0.232 0.234 -0.002
0.234 0.243 -0.009
0.238 0.253 -0.015
0.239 0.264 -0.025
0.235 0.266 -0.031
0.258 0.264 -0.006
0.270 0.263 0.008
0.281 0.265 0.017
0.282 0.266 0.016
0.280 0.271 0.009
0.289 0.272 0.017
0.289 0.270 0.019
0.293 0.271 0.021
0.295 0.273 0.022
0.293 0.273 0.020
0.291 0.275 0.016
0.284 0.272 0.012
0.292 0.279 0.013
0.294 0.280 0.014
0.284 0.280 0.004

College Graduate
CE
CPS
Diff
0.148 0.151 -0.003
0.159 0.151 0.007
0.184 0.170 0.014
0.192 0.174 0.018
0.181 0.175 0.006
0.184 0.180 0.004
0.185 0.185 0.001
0.194 0.192 0.002
0.199 0.194 0.004
0.201 0.195 0.006
0.206 0.195 0.011
0.208 0.199 0.010
0.213 0.203 0.011
0.218 0.210 0.009
0.216 0.215 0.001
0.224 0.217 0.006
0.227 0.222 0.005
0.234 0.229 0.005
0.230 0.232 -0.002
0.235 0.239 -0.004
0.242 0.243 -0.001
0.244 0.247 -0.004
0.255 0.252 0.003
0.252 0.251 0.000
0.251 0.255 -0.004
0.263 0.262 0.001
0.265 0.269 -0.005
0.267 0.271 -0.003
0.271 0.273 -0.002

CE
0.643
0.640
0.621
0.617
0.608
0.618
0.614
0.612
0.609
0.616
0.608
0.597
0.602
0.594
0.594
0.598
0.602
0.595
0.587
0.581
0.579
0.579
0.585
0.579
0.575
0.578
0.579
0.572
0.563

Married
CPS
0.632
0.623
0.607
0.604
0.603
0.604
0.598
0.596
0.593
0.588
0.585
0.584
0.581
0.584
0.576
0.571
0.572
0.572
0.573
0.573
0.567
0.566
0.565
0.564
0.559
0.560
0.550
0.551
0.541

Diff
0.011
0.017
0.014
0.013
0.005
0.014
0.015
0.016
0.016
0.027
0.023
0.013
0.021
0.011
0.017
0.027
0.029
0.023
0.014
0.008
0.012
0.013
0.020
0.015
0.016
0.018
0.028
0.022
0.021

Weeks Worked
CE
CPS
Diff
35.345 35.713 -0.368
35.559 35.459 0.100
35.670 35.300 0.371
36.820 36.136 0.684
37.186 36.348 0.838
37.192 36.867 0.325
37.350 37.284 0.066
38.129 37.829 0.300
38.326 38.319 0.006
38.120 38.241 -0.121
37.708 37.991 -0.282
37.916 37.929 -0.013
37.910 37.897 0.013
38.221 38.400 -0.179
38.151 38.677 -0.526
38.572 38.989 -0.417
38.833 39.295 -0.463
39.224 39.510 -0.286
39.462 39.822 -0.360
39.451 39.750 -0.299
39.161 39.335 -0.173
38.414 38.879 -0.465
38.450 38.537 -0.087
38.191 38.613 -0.422
38.550 38.737 -0.186
38.840 38.945 -0.106
38.478 38.969 -0.492
37.664 38.314 -0.651
36.394 37.061 -0.667

Hours Worked per Week
CE
CPS
Diff
31.408 31.185 0.223
31.509 30.859 0.651
31.873 30.526 1.347
32.436 31.258 1.178
32.666 31.525 1.141
32.937 31.988 0.949
33.174 32.258 0.916
33.855 32.561 1.294
33.707 33.091 0.615
33.590 33.098 0.492
33.384 32.893 0.490
33.378 32.830 0.548
33.521 32.914 0.607
33.545 33.235 0.309
33.398 33.390 0.008
33.625 33.566 0.059
34.145 33.726 0.419
34.167 33.861 0.306
34.193 34.163 0.030
34.220 33.908 0.312
33.854 33.499 0.355
33.423 33.049 0.374
33.628 32.699 0.929
33.558 32.627 0.931
34.068 32.794 1.273
34.140 32.881 1.259
33.530 32.804 0.726
32.854 32.288 0.567
31.853 31.289 0.564

CE
0.288
0.282
0.273
0.265
0.271
0.274
0.269
0.269
0.271
0.269
0.278
0.271
0.276
0.272
0.273
0.275
0.271
0.266
0.265
0.264
0.262
0.258
0.257
0.255
0.254
0.252
0.251
0.247
0.249

Under 18
CPS
Diff
0.283 0.005
0.280 0.002
0.268 0.004
0.267 -0.002
0.266 0.005
0.264 0.010
0.263 0.005
0.262 0.008
0.261 0.010
0.262 0.007
0.262 0.016
0.267 0.005
0.267 0.009
0.268 0.004
0.268 0.005
0.265 0.009
0.265 0.007
0.263 0.003
0.262 0.003
0.257 0.006
0.256 0.007
0.255 0.003
0.254 0.003
0.252 0.002
0.250 0.004
0.249 0.004
0.248 0.003
0.246 0.001
0.245 0.003

CE
0.075
0.077
0.078
0.074
0.075
0.077
0.075
0.078
0.080
0.076
0.081
0.078
0.079
0.075
0.075
0.072
0.073
0.068
0.069
0.068
0.070
0.069
0.068
0.066
0.067
0.069
0.066
0.066
0.068

Under 5
CPS
0.086
0.088
0.092
0.091
0.091
0.091
0.091
0.091
0.091
0.092
0.092
0.094
0.093
0.093
0.092
0.089
0.088
0.086
0.085
0.083
0.082
0.082
0.082
0.082
0.082
0.082
0.083
0.083
0.084

Diff
-0.011
-0.012
-0.014
-0.017
-0.017
-0.014
-0.016
-0.013
-0.011
-0.016
-0.012
-0.015
-0.014
-0.018
-0.017
-0.018
-0.015
-0.018
-0.017
-0.014
-0.013
-0.013
-0.014
-0.016
-0.015
-0.013
-0.017
-0.017
-0.015

Hispanic Origin
CE
CPS
Diff
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
0.145 0.140 0.005
0.153 0.143 0.010
0.155 0.147 0.008
0.156 0.151 0.005
0.158 0.154 0.004

Live in Owned Home
CE
CPS
Diff
0.705 0.725 -0.020
0.705 0.720 -0.015
0.689 0.685 0.004
0.688 0.680 0.008
0.679 0.675 0.004
0.675 0.676 -0.001
0.665 0.675 -0.010
0.672 0.674 -0.001
0.669 0.670 -0.001
0.678 0.668 0.010
0.653 0.667 -0.014
0.661 0.667 -0.006
0.671 0.667 0.003
0.675 0.674 0.001
0.670 0.677 -0.007
0.677 0.682 -0.006
0.686 0.689 -0.003
0.684 0.694 -0.010
0.690 0.699 -0.010
0.697 0.702 -0.005
0.697 0.705 -0.008
0.708 0.709 -0.001
0.715 0.713 0.002
0.708 0.720 -0.012
0.708 0.709 -0.002
0.705 0.708 -0.003
0.706 0.704 0.002
0.696 0.694 0.002
0.687 0.685 0.001

Notes: All means are reported at the individual level and weighted using population weights. Education and marital status are reported for all individuals 18-64. Work hours and weeks worked are reported for all individuals 18-64. The remaining variables are reported for all individuals. For
both surveys, the years refer to the year of the interview. The reference period for work hours and weeks worked are for the previous 12 months for the CE survey and for the previous calendar year for the CPS. For all other variables, the information is reported as of the interview date.
Interviews for the CE occur throughout the year. Interviews for the CPS are conducted in primarily in March, although since 2003 interviews are also conducted in February and April.

Appendix Table 8: Comparison of Before-Tax Money Income, CE Interview Survey and CPS, 2004-2010
Share $15,001 Share $30,001 Share $50,001 Share below $15,001
$30,000
$50,000
$75,000
CE
CPS
Diff
CE
CPS
Diff
CE
CPS
Diff
CE
CPS
Diff
2004
0.076 0.082 -0.006 0.139
0.13 0.009 0.190 0.188 0.002 0.202 0.198 0.004
2005
0.072 0.081 -0.008 0.135 0.128 0.007 0.194 0.188 0.006 0.204 0.197 0.006
2006
0.073 0.078 -0.005 0.127 0.126 0.001 0.189
0.19 -0.001 0.203 0.193 0.010
2007
0.067 0.079 -0.011 0.133 0.131 0.003 0.193
0.18 0.013 0.205 0.193 0.012
2008
0.080 0.085 -0.006 0.142 0.135 0.007 0.201 0.185 0.016 0.194 0.195 -0.001
2009
0.083 0.093 -0.010 0.147 0.138 0.009 0.200 0.187 0.014 0.191
0.19 0.000
2010
0.091 0.098 -0.007 0.150 0.141 0.010 0.205 0.188 0.017 0.191 0.188 0.003
Notes: Dollar cutoffs are in 2010 dollars.

Share $75,001 $100,000
CE
CPS
Diff
0.143 0.143 0.000
0.145 0.141 0.003
0.151
0.14 0.011
0.146 0.144 0.002
0.139
0.14 -0.001
0.136 0.138 -0.001
0.135 0.134 0.001

Share above $100,000
CE
CPS
Diff
0.249
0.2588 -0.009
0.251
0.2655 -0.015
0.257
0.2724 -0.016
0.256
0.2734 -0.018
0.245
0.2602 -0.015
0.243
0.2546 -0.012
0.228
0.2514 -0.024

