                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HEIGHT, SKILLS, AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES IN MEXICO

                                                Tom Vogl

                                         Working Paper 18318
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18318


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




I thank David Cutler, Larry Katz, Jeff Liebman, Duncan Thomas, Robert Willis, and seminar participants
at Academia Sinica, Harvard, and the PAA meetings for helpful comments. This research was supported
by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the Multidisciplinary Program on Inequality and Social
Policy (NSF IGERT Grant 0333403) and the NBER Aging Program (NIA Grant T32-AG000186).
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Height, Skills, and Labor Market Outcomes in Mexico
Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 18318
August 2012
JEL No. I15,J24,O15

                                            ABSTRACT

Taller workers are paid higher wages. A prominent explanation for this pattern is that physical growth
and cognitive development share childhood inputs, inducing a correlation between adult height and
two productive skills: strength and intelligence. This paper explores the relative roles of strength and
intelligence in explaining the labor market height premium in Mexico. While cognitive test scores
account for a limited share of the height premium, roughly half of the premium can be attributed to
the educational and occupational choices of taller workers. Taller workers obtain more education and
sort into occupations with greater intelligence requirements and lower strength requirements, suggesting
that the height premium partly reflects a return to cognitive skill.


Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1      Introduction

In a wide range of economies—rich and poor, historical and contemporary—taller work-
ers earn more than their shorter counterparts.1 Given the ubiquity of this relationship,
researchers have devoted considerable effort to determining its origins, setting forth nu-
merous hypotheses. One theory, popular for developing economies, posits that the returns
to stature derive from the greater strength (and health) of taller individuals, which leads
to a productivity advantage in economies that rely heavily on manual labor (Haddad and
Bouis 1991; Thomas and Strauss 1997). For industrialized economies, explanations have
been more varied, typically involving social-psychological pathways such as self esteem
(Freedman 1979), social dominance (Hensley 1993), discrimination (Loh 1993; Hamermesh
and Biddle 1994), and the social consequences of being short in adolescence (Persico et al.
2004). However, more recent research on the U.K. (Case and Paxson 2008) suggests that the
height premium has much to do with a correlation between height and cognitive skill. Like
the strength-based explanation, the cognitive skill theory is rooted in the idea that physical
growth and skill development share many inputs—such as health, nutrition, and care in
early life—so that for a given genetic height potential, people who achieve greater stature
also tend achieve greater skill.
         The extent to which cognitive skill (and human capital more generally) explains
the height premium in contemporary developing economies is an open question. The re-
liance of these economies on manual labor does not necessarily bias them towards a solely
strength-based height premium. Cognitive capacity improves entrepreneurship, the ca-
pacity to adapt to shocks, and general problem-solving skills, which may be valuable even
entirely agrarian economies. For example, the literature on technology adoption in devel-
oping countries has emphasized the abilities of farmers to learn about the optimal uses of
    1 See,
        for example, Persico et al. (2004) and Case and Paxson (2008) on the U.S. and U.K.; Lundborg et al.
(2009) on Sweden; Thomas and Strauss (1997) on Brazil; and Haddad and Bouis (1991) on the Philippines.
The return to height was also high historically, for example among slaves in the antebellum American South
(Margo and Steckel 1982) and among 19th century German workers (Komlos 1990).


                                                    1
new seed varieties and fertilizers (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995; Duflo et al. 2011). Along
these lines, Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) argue that cognitive skill is a fundamen-
tal determinant of individual income, the income distribution, and the rate of economic
growth in developing countries.
        This paper examines the relative roles of strength and intelligence in forging the link
between height and labor market outcomes in Mexico, a country that straddles the line
traditionally dividing economies intensive in manual labor from those intensive in skilled
labor. The term “strength” is meant to encompass physical health, robustness, and en-
durance. The analysis takes advantage of rich data from the the Mexican Family Life Sur-
vey (MxFLS), which includes modules on health, anthropometry, cognitive skill, parental
characteristics, and labor market outcomes. As the first nationally representative survey
from a developing country to administer cognitive tests to working-age adults, the MxFLS
provides a unique opportunity to unpack the height premium in a less industrialized set-
ting.
        Several existing studies explore the relative returns to strength and intelligence in de-
veloping country labor markets. Pitt et al. (forthcoming) focus on body mass endowments
(rather than height) in Bangladesh, showing that larger men are more likely to engage in
energy-intensive activities, while larger women are less likely. They argue that these sort-
ing patterns are consistent with a high return to physical skill; body mass is more strongly
correlated with strength for men than for women. Rosenzweig and Zhang (2012) comple-
ment these results in a study of Chinese twins, finding that female twins with higher birth-
weight attain more education, while male twins with higher birthweight develop greater
adult body mass. On the other hand, Berhmann et al. (2009) use data from Guatemala to
argue that brains, not brawn, have significant wage returns.2 Both studies follow in the
tradition of an earlier paper by Thomas and Strauss (1997), which finds that wages are pos-
itively related to height, body mass, and nutrient intake among Brazilian men. Thomas
   2 Importantly,Behrmann et al.’s (2009) conclusions rest on quite strong exclusion restrictions. Their instru-
ments for cognitive skill and body size include childhood proximity to a health post, class size at age 7, birth
cohort, and parental characteristics.
                                                       2
and Strauss document interesting heterogeneity in the elasticity of wages with respect to
body size. In the market sector, height and earnings are most strongly correlated among
the most educated workers, suggesting a role for cognitive skill. But in the self-employed
sector, the correlation is strongest among the illiterate, who primarily engage in physical
labor, suggesting a role for strength.3 Note that many of these studies’ interesting results
concern sectoral affiliation; Pitt et al. (forthcoming) study the sorting of workers across
sectors, while Thomas and Strauss (1997) glean their conclusions from effect heterogeneity
across sectors.
       This paper also devotes much attention to the sectoral affiliations of taller and shorter
workers. The paper begins with an exploration of the relationships linking height, cogni-
tive skill, education, and earnings, but it then moves on to its primary contribution, an
analysis of height-based occupational sorting. To avoid issues of endogenous labor force
participation, the analysis sample only includes male workers, although unreported re-
sults for women are quite similar. The results indicate that each centimeter of height earns
these men 2 percent higher wages, a premium similar to those observed in other devel-
oping countries but more than twice those observed in most wealthy countries.4 Child-
hood health conditions and parental socioeconomic status explain a substantial share of
this height premium, but the premium remains statistically and economically significant
even after adjustment for these background characteristics. Cognitive test scores account
for only a limited part of the height premium, although the measured scores may provide
either an overestimate or an underestimate of the role of cognitive skill. The test instru-
ment is relatively crude, so its coefficient may be attenuated. At the same time, because
survey respondents took the test in adulthood, their scores may in part reflect job-related
opportunities to practice cognitive tasks, which would tend to (spuriously) inflate the role
of cognitive skill. Regardless, the findings do indicate that roughly half of the premium can
be attributed to the sorting of workers across skill groups or occupations.
   3 Thomas     and Strauss (1997) also find that the returns to body mass are uniformly stronger among the
illiterate.
     4 See the sources listed in footnote 1.

                                                    3
      The rest of the paper focuses on this sorting. Based on a new linkage of Mexican oc-
cupational categories to job characteristics from the U.S. Dictionary of Occupational Titles
(DOT), the paper considers the skill requirements of occupations with greater concentra-
tions of tall workers. In line with the evidence from industrialized countries, taller workers
select into occupations with higher intelligence requirements and lower strength require-
ments. This result is consistent with a Roy (1951) model in which taller workers have a
comparative advantage in intelligence-intensive tasks. Importantly, education mediates
nearly all of the relationship between height and occupational choice; taller workers tend
to have more education, and educated workers tend to work in skill-intensive occupations.
The role of education has two natural interpretations. First, parents’ propensities to in-
vest in child health and education may be correlated, a hypothesis raised by both Haddad
and Bouis (1991) and Strauss and Thomas (1997) as a caveat to their argument that the
height premium reflects a return to strength. Second, the early-life conditions that promote
growth in childhood also promote cognitive development, which may raise the produc-
tivity of educational investments. Either way, the data suggest a strong role for cognitive
skill—or human capital more broadly—in explaining the earnings premium paid to taller
workers.
      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the literature
on the early-life determinants of height and skill, and Section 3 fits this literature into a
conceptual framework to understand the relationship between height and labor market
outcomes. A description of the data sources follows in Section 4. Section 5 then reports
the results of wage regressions, and Section 6 reports the results of occupational choice
analyses. Section 7 concludes.



2    Growth, Cognitive Development, and Adult Achievement

Adult height reflects the interaction of genetic and environmental factors from the womb
to adulthood (Tanner 1979). During this period, an individual experiences two phases of
                                           4
intense growth, the first during gestation and infancy—from ages zero to three—and the
second during adolescence. Good nutrition and freedom from infection during these pe-
riods, particularly the first, are critical to achieving optimal growth. Apart from its direct
effects on growth, nutritional deprivation increases young children’s susceptibility to infec-
tion. Infection, in turn, inhibits nutrient absorption and appetite, leading to a “synergism”
between nutrition and infection (Scrimshaw et al. 1968).
          The prenatal and very early postnatal periods appear to be of particular importance
for adult height. Early-life adversity may alter tissue differentiation and development in
ways that boost short-run survival at the expense of long-run health (Barker 2001). A grow-
ing body of research indicates that deprivation during this period—whether inside or out-
side the womb—has lasting effects on stature. Among identical twins in Norway, those
born with a 10 percent birthweight advantage over their twins gain an extra 0.6 centimeters
in height by age 18 (Black et al. 2007). Results of this type extend as far as rural Indonesia,
where Maccini and Yang (2009) show that women exposed to above average rainfall in their
birth years attain significantly greater heights.5 In a similar vein, among French soldiers in
the 19th and early 20th centuries, childhood exposure to the grape vine parasite phylloxera
reduced adult height, presumably through a reduction in parental income (Banerjee et al.
2010).
          Negative health and nutrition shocks, both in utero and in early childhood, have
similarly detrimental effects on cognition and physical strength later in life. In industrial-
ized countries, a large body of research has documented cognitive deficits among children
born with low birth weight (Breslau 1995).6 The specific effects of low birth weight are
not well-documented in developing countries, but randomized trials have confirmed the
effects of nutrition on cognition in such settings (Grantham-McGregor 1995).7 Evidence
   5 Interestingly, Maccini and Yang do not find similar benefits of early-life rainfall for men.
   6 In Black et al.’s study of Norwegian twins, a 10 percent increase in birth weight increases age 18 IQ by
roughly one third of a standard deviation. Richards et al. (2002) find similarly-sized associations among
young British adults who were born with low birth weight.
   7 In one well-known trial in Jamaica (Grantham-McGregor et al. 1991), administration of milk-based for-

mula to young stunted children led to substantial gains on developmental tests, especially when researchers

                                                     5
linking early-life health and muscle strength in adulthood is somewhat rarer, but a num-
ber of studies in rich and poor countries have shown a positive relationship between birth
weight and muscle strength over the lifecourse (Dodds et al. forthcoming).
       Combined, these results suggest that superior health and nutrition promote both
physical growth and cognitive development.8 Indeed, height is correlated with cognitive
test scores in children from a range of settings.9 This association carries well into adult-
hood, as evidenced in Hawaii (Abbott et al. 1998), the U.K. (Richards et al. 2002; Case and
Paxson 2008); urban Latin America (Maurer 2010); and China (Huang et al. 2011). Taller in-
dividuals’ enhanced cognitive skills may also increase the productivity of schooling, which
may explain the correlation between height and education, observed in such diverse set-
tings as Brazil (Strauss and Thomas 1998), India (Perkins et al. 2010), Sweden (Magnusson
et al. 2006), and the U.S. and U.K. (Case and Paxson 2010). Height is also associated with
physical strength in adults (Tuvemo et al. 1999; Lundborg et al. 2009).



3     Conceptual Framework

The current knowledge on the co-evolution of body size, strength, and cognitive skill fits
nicely into a theoretical framework in the tradition of Roy (1951). In a complementary line
of work, Pitt et al. (forthcoming) and Rosenzweig and Zhang (2012) also use the Roy model
to study strength and cognitive skill in developing economies. For tractability, they use the
functional form assumptions of Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007) and derive predictions for
gender and occupational segregation. In the framework below, I aim to conceptualize key
issues in the relationship between height and labor market outcomes, rather than derive
coupled cognitive stimulation with nutritional supplementation.
   8 Height and intelligence may share common chemical antecedents, including insulin-like growth factor

(Berger 2001) and thyroid hormone (Richards et al. 2002).
   9 Conditional on age, sex, and family background characteristics, the correlation of height and cognitive

test scores is roughly 0.05-0.10 among both British children (Case and Paxson 2008) and Ecuadorian children
(Paxson and Schady 2007). In a cohort of Peruvian children, severe stunting at age two is associated with a
one standard deviation deficit in cognitive test scores at age nine (Berkman et al. 2002). In a cohort of Filipino
children, moderate and severe stunting at age two are associated with a 0.25 and 0.6 standard deviation
decline in cognitive test scores at age eight (Mendez and Adair 1999).
                                                        6
analytic results. As such, I do not assume functional forms.
      Let h, υ p , and υc denote a worker’s height, physical ability (including strength, health,
and robustness), and cognitive ability, respectively. For clarity of exposition, we treat υ p
and υc as endowments that are fixed after early childhood; when we specify the wage func-
tion below, we will allow workers to augment their cognitive ability endowments through
investments after early childhood. The three worker traits have the following production
functions:


                                    h = h( N; B, D, X, ε h )

                                   υ p = υ p ( N; B, D, X, ε p )

                                   υc = υc ( N; B, D, X, ε c )


where N denotes childhood nutrition and health inputs, B denotes childhood background
characteristics, D denotes the childhood disease environment, X is a vector of exogenous
demographic controls, and {ε h , ε p , ε c } are mutually independent error terms. The three
production functions share partial derivatives of the same sign with respect to N, B, and
D. Thus, conditional on X, h, υ p , and υc are positively correlated.
      Upon reaching adulthood, the worker faces a labor market with J sectors, indexed j.
The worker’s potential wage in each sector is given by:


                                     w j = w j (υ p , υc , S; X, ε j )


where S denotes schooling and the other variables are defined as before. For all sectors, the
partial derivatives of wages with respect to υ p , υc , S, and E are positive.
      The simplest formulation of the model would have the worker and his parents choose
{ N, S, j} to maximize a utility function over parental consumption (C) and the worker’s
wage in adulthood:
                                    U C, w j (υ p , υc , S; X, ε j )
                                                                       

                                                    7
Maximization would then be subject to the following budget constraint:


                              I = pC C + p N N + pS − ψ (υ p , υc ; ε ψ ) S
                                                                        



where I is parental income; pC , p N , and pS are the prices of parental consumption, child
nutrition and health inputs, and schooling, receptively; and ψ(·) is the opportunity cost
of schooling. The opportunity cost of schooling can be thought of as wage income from
teenage employment.
          This simple setup with no uncertainty delivers the main predictions of the paper.
First, it leads to an unambiguously positive correlation between height and wages, work-
ing through the production functions for h, υ p , and υc .10 Second, if cognitive ability in-
creases the productivity of schooling in all sectors ∂2 w j/∂υc ∂S > 0 for all j —as the literature
                                                                                

on the returns to schooling typically assumes (Card 2001)—then taller individuals obtain
more schooling. Third, if the sector-specific returns to cognitive ability are large and het-
erogeneous (relative to the returns to physical ability), then taller workers sort into sectors
with higher returns to cognitive ability. At the same time, the fact that parents maximize
their utility suggests a caveat; many of the same patterns may result from heterogeneity in
parental income and preferences. Parents who invest more in their children’s health may
also invest more in their children’s schooling, for reasons unrelated to the cross-partial
∂2 w j/∂υc ∂S.

          A more realistic version of the model would separate the decision process into three
stages—nutrition, schooling, and sectoral choice—and would introduce environment, in-
come, and labor market shocks at each stage. This setup would deliver similar predictions
but would also allow for correlations between height and labor market outcomes after con-
trolling for parental characteristics like income. In either case, the principal results derive
from the fact that h, υ p , and υc share inputs.
  10 On average, taller workers hold an absolute advantage over shorter workers (in both physical and cog-
nitive ability), so the envelope theorem implies that they will earn higher average wages after making their
wage-maximizing choices.

                                                     8
         Much of the empirical analysis focuses on the sorting of workers across sectors,
measured as occupations. Ideally, one would study both occupational choice and within-
occupation skill returns, to verify that taller workers indeed sort into occupations with high
returns to both height and either cognitive or physical skill. However, within-occupation
skill returns are difficult to estimate. The researcher observes only one realized wage per
worker, rather than potential wages in every occupation. As a result, within-occupation es-
timates of based only on realized wages are inconsistent because sorting induces a negative
correlation between the skill and the error term. With adequate panel data and structural
assumptions, one can recover within-occupation skill returns (see, e.g., Gibbons et al. 2005).
However, these methods require substantial movement of workers across occupations, and
too few workers in the Mexican Family Life Survey change occupations between survey
waves. As a result, I focus on occupational choice, and I then compare the observed occu-
pational sorting with estimates of occupational skill requirements from the U.S. Dictionary
of Occupational Titles.



4      Data

The analysis of height and labor market outcomes draws on data from the the Mexican
Family Life Survey (MxFLS), a panel with two waves (so far) in 2002 and 2005. The MxFLS,
a nationally representative household survey, included modules on household economic
decisions and household demographic structure, as well as individual-level questions on
labor market participation, self-reported health, schooling, and the living conditions that
adults experienced while growing up. The survey administered a short cognitive test and
also collected data on the heights and weights of all household members. To avoid sample
selection issues arising from endogenous labor force participation, I employ data on men
aged 25-65.11
    11 The
        sample restrictions have two important dimensions: age and gender. The gender restriction serves
to simplify the interpretation of the results, without the complication of selection bias. Results for working
women are very similar to the results presented here for men. The age restriction is also aimed to minimize
                                                      9
       To measure height and cognitive skill, I use standing height in centimeters and a
cognitive test score based on the short-form Raven’s Progressive Matrices test (Raven et
al. 1983).12 The Raven test, which is intended to measure abstract reasoning, presents
the subject with a series of patterns (called matrices), each with a missing element.13 For
each matrix, the subject selects the missing element from a bank of eight candidates. In
the MxFLS, the adult Raven test comprised 12 matrices. To obtain a composite measure of
test performance, I sum the number of correct responses and then standardize them within
sample to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. In interpreting analy-
ses of the Raven test score, two caveats are worthy of note. First, the test score measures
accumulated cognitive skill over the lifecycle, reflecting early-life cognitive development,
schooling, and cognitive reinforcement learning in adulthood. Second, with only 12 simple
matrices on the Raven test, the test score is a noisy measure of cognitive skill. Both caveats
suggest that the Raven score is not an ideal measure of υc from the theoretical framework
in Section 3. The first caveat might lead us to overstate the role of early-life influences on
cognitive ability because of cognitive reinforcement. On the other hand, the second caveat
might lead us to understate it because of attenuation bias.
       I measure hourly earnings using an individually-administered survey module on la-
bor market outcomes over the previous year. Wages are notoriously difficult to measure in
developing countries, given the prevalence of informal contracting and self-employment.
However, the MxFLS posed a detailed set of questions that enable the calculation of hourly
earnings for a wide variety of individuals, including farmers and small business own-
ers. Every respondent answered questions about the number of weeks worked in his or
her main job, the number of hours worked per week, and post-tax labor earnings. Non-
selection bias. In Mexico, many begin working well before age 25, but the inclusion of individuals under 25
would induce sample selection biases stemming from schooling decisions. 65 is an appropriate age ceiling
for working adults, but it is also in part determined by the data; the MxFLS did not gather detailed data on
individuals above this age.
  12 I trim the top and bottom 0.5 percent of the height distribution to reduce the influence of outliers.
  13 The Raven test exhibits high ‘g-loading,’ meaning that its score correlates strongly with general factor

intelligence, a unidimensional variable that many cognitive psychologists hypothesize underlies cognitive
skills (Carroll 1993).

                                                     10
working individuals reported on their previous jobs if they worked in the previous year. I
compute hourly earnings for individuals who reported working 20 or more hours per week
regularly over the previous year. For wage earners, the survey collected data on earnings
both over the previous month and over the previous year. The appendix describes the
algorithm used to reconcile differences between the monthly and annual reports.
       Occupational classifications are crucial to the analysis. For the wage analysis, I use
the 19-category Mexican Classification of Occupations (MCO), but one cannot merge the
MCO to measures of occupational skill requirements from the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles (DOT). As an alternative, I use the nine civilian occupations in the coarser Interna-
tional Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO), which can be matched to both the
Mexican and the U.S. job classification systems.14 From England and Kilbourne’s (1988)
job characteristics file, which maps DOT measures to the three-digit detailed occupational
classification of the 1980 U.S. Census, I assign measures of occupational skill requirements
to workers in the 1980 U.S. Census (Ruggles et al. 2008). Then, using the 1980 U.S. distri-
bution of occupations, I then aggregate the detailed occupation categories up to the nine-
category ISCO. This procedure assumes that the distribution of detailed occupations and
relative skill requirements within each broad ISCO category is the same in the 1980 U.S.
and 2002 Mexico. Although these assumptions are unlikely to hold exactly, the aggrega-
tion procedure can nonetheless provide a useful guide to the skill content of height-based
occupation sorting.
       In the analysis of the DOT, I use the “intelligence aptitude” and “strength” intensities
of each occupation as measures of cognitive and physical skill requirements. Alternative
measures from the DOT (such as “numerical skills” and “physical demands”) yield results
similar to those reported below. Some of the results are more interpretable with a binary
categorization of occupational skill requirements, so that workers select either the “brains”
sector or the “brawn” sector. Appendix Figure 1 plots intelligence aptitude requirements
  14 Most  of the two-digit MCO categories map perfectly onto the ISCO, but three do not: worker in personal
establishments; worker in domestic services; and protection, monitoring and armed forces. In the analysis of
skill requirements, I omit these occupation groups.
                                                    11
against strength requirements for the civilian occupations in the ISCO, revealing that the
occupations divide naturally into “brains” and “brawn” sectors. I define the two sectors as
indicated in the figure.
       In all analyses, I only use data on individuals who were in the 2002 baseline survey
wave. I use survey weights to estimate population regression parameters, and I cluster
standard errors at the primary sampling unit (PSU) level.15 Because I only study original
members of the 2002 cohort, I use the 2002 survey weights and the 2002 PSUs.16 If an indi-
vidual has two height measurements, I average them.17 If an individual has two measure-
ments for any other covariates (particularly the cognitive test and childhood conditions), I
use the first measurement.18
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for selected characteristics, with one column for
each of the two samples used in the study. Because earnings are missing for many workers,
the sample for the earnings analysis is smaller than the sample for the occupational choice
analysis.19 On average, workers in both samples are about 40 years old, a meter and a two-
thirds tall, and fifteen percent indigenous, and they have eight years of education.20 In the
earnings sample, average hourly earnings is roughly 20 Mexican pesos (or US$2). In the
occupation sample, 90 percent of workers are in “brawn” occupations rather than “brains”
occupations.
  15 Because   the paper aims to describe the relationship between height and labor market outcomes at the
national level, the use of survey weights is appropriate (Deaton 1997).
   16 The MxFLS does not provide survey weights for the 2005 wave.
   17 Slightly fewer than 8 percent of the male respondents to the employment module had missing heights.

The probability of a missing value for height was increasing in education: each year of education reduces the
probability of height measurement by 0.36 percentage points (p-value < 0.01). As a result, my estimates of the
height premium may be biased slightly downward.
   18 Use of the first measurement is important for the cognitive test, since the same test questions were ad-

ministered in both survey waves.
   19 In Section 7 below, I show that the two samples show similar relationships between height and a measure

of imputed earnings based on the worker’s occupation, industry, and education level.
   20 Respondents with post-secondary education did not reply to questions regarding years of schooling, so

I impute years of schooling for them using data from the 2000 Mexican Census. I divide individuals with
post-secondary education into sex-specific, five-year age groups, and I then calculate the average number of
years of post-secondary schooling within each cell. I then merge these data with the MxFLS on the basis of
sex and age group. The five-year age groups in the 2000 census tabulations run from 25 to 64, so they do
not perfectly match the cohorts in the MxFLS, who were aged 25-65 in the year 2002. However, all of the cell
means from the census are extremely close to four years, so this mismatch should not bias the results.

                                                     12
5       The Returns to Height: Graphical Evidence

For four outcomes—log hourly earnings, educational attainment, cognitive test scores, and
self-reported health—Figure 1 documents the returns to height graphically. Each panel
shows local linear regression of an adult outcome on height. The solid curves correspond
to the regression function estimates, while the dotted curves bound pointwise 95 percent
confidence intervals.
             Height bestows advantages in cognitive skill, education, health, and earnings. The
top left panel of Figure 1 shows a positive, monotonic relationship between height and
earnings. A increase in height by ten centimeters is associated with an increase in wages by
roughly one quarter of a log point, implying a semi-elasticity of 2-3 percent per centimeter.
The remaining panels of Figure 1 reveal that taller individuals enjoy other benefits. For
every ten centimeters of height, educational attainment rises more than one year, cognitive
test scores increase by 40 percent of a standard deviation, and self-reported health status
improves by just short of 20 percent of a standard deviation. All regression functions are
precisely estimated, showing no clear evidence of nonlinearity.
             One possible interpretation for the relationships in Figure 1 is ethnic heterogeneity.
This theory posits that indigenous people are both shorter and more disadvantaged, but
for separate reasons.21 However, Figure 2 reveals that ethnic heterogeneity does not ex-
plain the strong relationships in Figure 1. The left-hand panel of Figure 2 plots separate
height-earnings profiles for workers with indigenous and non-indigenous backgrounds;
both curves are steeply positive. Notably, the measure of ethnicity is self-reported and as
such may be measured with error, so Figure 2 does not completely rule out ethnic het-
erogeneity. Nonetheless, the steepness of the curve for indigenous workers suggests that
ethnic heterogeneity is not to blame. The right-hand panel of Figure 2 disaggregates the
sample by sector of birth instead of ethnicity. Again, both curves slope upwards, with a
steeper curve for workers born in rural areas.
    21 For   instance, indigenous people may be genetically short and historically persecuted.

                                                         13
        Both indigenous and rural-born workers have steeper relationships between height
and earnings. Two theories are particularly natural for interpreting the steeper curves for
more disadvantaged groups. First, the variance of the non-genetic determinants of height
may be higher for disadvantaged groups; nutritional inputs and the local disease envi-
ronment may be more volatile. In a simple statistical model in which height is a proxy
for childhood conditions, the estimated return to height is higher when the variance of
childhood conditions is larger.22 Second, the returns to skill may be higher for individu-
als from disadvantaged backgrounds, who may have more to gain from migration. In the
figures, one can see that indigenous and rural workers are most disadvantaged at short
heights. However, at taller heights, these workers are indistinguishable from their more
advantaged counterparts.
        More broadly, the non-parametric regressions in Figure 1 suggest several skill-based
explanations for the covariance of height and earnings. One possibility, in the spirit of
Case and Paxson (2008), is that the inputs to physical growth in childhood coincide with
the inputs to cognitive development, so that height is merely a proxy for intelligence. This
could also explain why educational attainment rises with height, if schooling and cognitive
ability are complimentary. A competing account, more in line with the previous literature
on developing countries, would emphasize the negative association of short stature with
health status and strength (Tuvemo et al. 1999; Lundborg et al. 2009). Note, however, that
the positive associations of height with cognitive skill, education, and health status still
may reflect unobserved family-level heterogeneity—in parents’ tendency to invest in all
forms of child development, for example—which could just as easily explain the height-
earnings gradient.
  22 Suppose    h = αh + βh z + η and ln w = αw + βw z + ζ, where h is height, w is wages, and z is childhood
conditions. Then the slope coefficient from a regression of the log wage on height converges in probability to
                −1
βw        ση2
βh
     1 + β2 σ 2      . Thus, the probability limit of the coefficient increases in σz2 . In words, earnings differences
           z z
between tall and short workers are greatest when childhood conditions are more variable.




                                                          14
6    Height and Earnings

Table 2 reports the main regressions of the logarithm of hourly earnings on height. Much of
the literature on industrialized settings (e.g., Persico et al. 2004; Case and Paxson 2006) has
analyzed height in levels, leading to semi-elasticities, whereas the literature on developing
settings (e.g., Haddad and Bouis 1991; Thomas and Strauss 1997) has used the logarithm
of height, leading to elasticities. For conciseness, I focus exclusively on semi-elasticities,
but unreported results using elasticities show similar patterns. All regressions control for
demographic characteristics including age and indigenous group membership. Column (1)
runs a regression with just the demographic control variables; the remaining columns add
height and a variety of other covariates. Comparing the adjusted R-squared terms from
columns (1) and (2), one learns that the inclusion of height improves the fit of the basic
model by 60 percent. Relative to ethnicity and age, height has substantial explanatory
power for earnings.
      The coefficient on height in column (2), 0.023, implies that each centimeter in height
is associated with wage gains of 2.3 percent. This result contrasts findings from the United
States and Britain (e.g., Case and Paxson 2010), which put the semi-elasticity at roughly
2 percent per inch of height (or 0.8 percent per centimeter). As Section 5 pointed out in
discussing heterogeneity by ethnicity or birthplace, the difference has two interpretations.
First, it may stem from differences in skill returns or the relationships linking child health
with adult height and skill. Second, it may be the result of a higher variance of the non-
genetic determinants of height in Mexico, which would bias upward the return to height.
      Columns (3)-(5) add the Raven score and a vector of childhood covariates to the re-
gression. The inclusion of the cognitive test score results in a 13 percent reduction in the
height premium. Although this change is relatively small, a generalized Hausman test that
allows for clustering indicates that the fall in the height premium is statistically significant
(p < 0.01). Furthermore, the coefficient estimate is probably attenuated. Despite past em-
phasis by (some) cognitive scientists on the existence of a unidimensional factor underlying
                                              15
intelligence, cognitive skill is in fact multifaceted, so one cannot expect an analysis to fully
identify its effects with a single, 12-question matrices test. At the same time, insofar as
high-paying work reinforces workers’ cognitive skills, a cognitive test taken in adulthood
may overstate the role of cognitive skill.
      Meanwhile, columns (4) and (5) show that childhood conditions explain a substantial
part of the returns to height and cognitive skill. The vector of childhood conditions is fairly
comprehensive, including the father’s first job, the father’s and mother’s education, access
to piped water and sanitation at age 12, and urban birthplace. In the fullest model (column
[5]), the vector’s inclusion reduces the coefficient on height to 0.014 and the coefficient on
the Raven score to 0.094. The coefficients on the childhood covariates are jointly significant
at the 0.1 percent level, and the model’s explanatory power is now quite high, with an
R-squared of 0.16.
      Table 3 explores heterogeneity in these results by ethnicity and birthplace, confirm-
ing the patterns in the non-parametric regressions in Figure 2. In particular, column (1)
reveals higher returns to height among indigenous workers and among workers born in
the countryside. The Raven score explains a larger share of the height premium among
the same two groups of workers. On the other hand, childhood covariates explain a larger
share of the premium among the non-indigenous and among those born in cities. This
result may have to due with the larger variances of the observable childhood covariates in
these more advantaged groups of workers. Thus, the higher height premium of workers
from disadvantaged backgrounds may be due to greater idiosyncratic volatility in living
conditions, rather than variation in longer-term, observable living conditions.
      Returning to the full sample, Table 4 investigates whether the returns to height ac-
crue within or between occupation and education groups. This is strictly an accounting
exercise; occupation and education should be interpreted as choice variables. The inclu-
sion of either occupation dummies or educational attainment (as a continuous covariate)
cuts the estimated height premium approximately in half (compared with column [1]), im-


                                              16
plying that a large part of the height premium is attributable to the higher educational
attainment of taller workers or to their sorting into higher-paying occupations.23



7          Height and Occupational Choice

The results of the previous section imply that sorting across occupations contributes to the
returns to height. This finding is interesting, especially in light of Case and Paxson’s (2006)
evidence from the United States that taller individuals sort into occupations with greater
cognitive demands. As discussed in Section 3, if cognitive ability explains the height pre-
mium, then the tallest workers will sort into the most cognitively demanding occupations.
This section assesses height-based occupational selection in two steps. First, it assesses
whether “taller” occupation groups have higher intelligence aptitude or strength require-
ments. Second, it explores the roles of cognitive skill, childhood conditions, and educa-
tional choices in explaining height-based selection into “brains” or “brawn” occupations.
Throughout, it uses a full sample of workers, rather than restricting the sample to workers
with non-missing hourly earnings. The full sample exhibits sectoral sorting that is similar
to the earnings sample in Section 6. Appendix Table 1 assigns each worker the mean hourly
earnings of her occupation-industry-education cell in the 2000 Mexican census, and then
regresses the logarithm of this sectoral earnings score on height and demographic charac-
teristics. The coefficients on height in the full sample and the earnings sample are quite
close.
            For the first step of the occupational choice analysis, I follow Case and Paxson (2006)
in estimating a multinomial logit regression of occupation category (as classified by the
ISCO) on height:
                                          pij
                                             
                                       ln       = γ j heighti + Xi0 Γ j , j > 0                              (1)
                                          pi0

where pij is the probability that worker i selects an occupation in category j, and j = 0 cor-
    23 A   Mincer-style earnings regression that omits height yields a return to schooling of 7.7 percent.

                                                          17
responds to the professional occupation category. To reduce the dimensionality of the like-
lihood maximization problem, I restrict Xi , the vector of control variables, to include only
a constant term, ethnicity, age, and a squared term in age. After estimating the logit regres-
sions, I plot occupational skill measures from the DOT against each occupation category’s
relative risk ratio on height (eγj ). An occupation category’s relative risk ratio measures the
association between height and the risk of selection into that occupation category, relative
to the professional occupation category. By plotting each occupation category’s cognitive
and physical skill intensities against its relative risk ratio on height, one can infer whether
physical or cognitive skill drives height-based occupational sorting.
      The results, which appear in Figure 3, indicate that taller men and women sys-
tematically select into occupations with larger intelligence aptitude demands and smaller
strength demands. The plots are surprisingly similar to the occupational sorting patterns
that arise in industrialized countries (Case and Paxson 2006). Combined with Table 4, we
reach the conclusion that nearly half of Mexico’s height premium can be attributed to the
sorting of taller workers into occupations intensive in cognitive skill. Seen through the lens
of the theoretical framework of Section 3, this result suggests that the return to cognitive
ability (and human capital more broadly) drives a substantial part of the height premium.
      Again, these results are not merely driven by ethnic or birthplace heterogeneity. Fig-
ures 4 and 5 draw the same plots by ethnicity and birthplace. The same patterns emerge,
with “taller” occupations exhibiting higher average intelligence requirements and lower
average strength requirements. Perhaps surprisingly, the patterns appear quite similar for
indigenous, non-indigenous, rural-born, and urban-born workers.
      To further understand these patterns, Table 5 performs an analysis of occupational
choice that is analogous to Table 2’s analysis of the height premium. The table reports
marginal effects from logit regressions in which the dependent variable equals 0 for a
“brains” occupation and 1 for a “brawn” occupation. The marginal effects are multiplied
by 100, so that a marginal effect of 1 corresponds to a 1 percentage point increase in the


                                              18
probability of working in a “brawn” occupation. Each column adds a different set of co-
variates to the basic specification.
      The associations of height with cognitive skill, childhood conditions, and educa-
tional investments account for the lion’s share of the decreased likelihood of taller workers
to select into manual occupations. Column (1) indicates that a centimeter of height de-
creases the probability of working in a “brawn” occupation by 0.63 percentage points. This
association falls to 0.34 percentage points with inclusion of childhood covariates (column
[2]), and further to 0.26 percentage points with the addition of the Raven score (column
[5]). Strikingly, the roles of cognitive skill and childhood conditions pale in comparison to
that of educational attainment. In columns (3) and (6), the inclusion of educational attain-
ment as covariate all but eliminates the negative relationship between height and manual
labor. The logit coefficients on height remain statistically significant, but they are an order
of magnitude smaller than before the inclusion of education as a covariate. That is to say,
the educational investments of taller workers almost entirely explain their selection into
more lucrative, more skilled occupations. Of course, these education investments have an-
tecedents in cognitive ability and childhood conditions. Regardless, the results suggest that
most of the relationship between height and occupational choice in adulthood is set before
labor market entry.



8    Conclusion

Despite the universality of the association between height and labor market outcomes, con-
ventional wisdom holds that its sources differ widely by setting. This paper shows that the
origins of the height premium in developing and industrialized economies may be more
similar than was previously thought. Much of the height premium accrues across broad
occupation and schooling categories. As with Americans and Britons (Case and Paxson
2006), taller Mexicans sort into occupations with greater cognitive skill requirements and
lower physical strength requirements, a pattern almost entirely explained by their greater
                                           19
educational attainment. Cognitive test scores and childhood conditions account for some
of the higher wages and “brainier” occupations of taller workers. These results contribute
to previous work on the relative roles of brains and brawn in the link between body size
and labor market outcomes in developing countries (Thomas and Strauss 1997; Behrmann
et al. 2011; Pitt et al. forthcoming; Rosenzweig and Zhang 2012).
      The occupational sorting identified here may appear to be at odds with the results of
Thomas and Strauss (1997), which show a higher height premium among the self-employed
than among wage laborers. Thomas and Strauss interpret this difference as possible evi-
dence for a strength-based height premium, given the tendency of the self-employed to
engage in manual labor. In fact, unreported analyses reveal similar patterns in the Mexican
data, with a higher height premium among the self-employed. But height is also negatively
associated with self-employment, which suggests that the estimates for the self-employed
may suffer from selection bias.
      Setting aside the relative importance of brains and brawn, the paper has not explored
the possible role of noncognitive skills (Bowles et al. 2001; Heckman et al. 2006). Using
data from Sweden, Lundborg et al. (2009) show that height is correlated with measures
of noncognitive ability and estimate that this correlation explains a non-negligible share of
the height premium. The role of noncognitive ability in explaining the height premium in
developing economies is a fruitful topic for future research.
      Whatever the explanation for the height premium, it lays bare the profound effects
of early-life conditions on later-life outcomes in school and in the labor market. In Mexico
as elsewhere, the children of better-off parents experience superior physical growth and
cognitive development. These dynamics may play an instrumental role in the intergen-
erational transmission of economics status. Research that disentangles the mechanisms
underlying these relationships—including the returns to height—will help guide policies
aimed at improving health and expanding the capability sets of young individuals as they
reach adulthood.


                                             20
Appendix: Reconciliation of Annual and Monthly Earnings

As described in Section 4 of the text, the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS) includes data
on both monthly and annual earnings for wage earners. These data sometimes coincided,
but in many cases they did not correspond perfectly. This short appendix describes the
algorithm used to reconcile any differences and produce a measure of hourly earnings.
      For workers employed in the market sector, I used the following procedure. First,
some respondents simply reported annual income as twelve times their monthly income,
without any adjustment for weeks worked. For individuals in this group who worked at
least 48 weeks in their main occupations over the previous year, I used annual earnings, di-
viding by the product of weeks per year and hours per week. For individuals who worked
less than 48 weeks, I used the monthly data, dividing by 4.35 times hours per week. I re-
peated this process for any individuals whose reported monthly earnings multiplied by
twelve lay within 90 to 110 percent of their reported annual earnings. For remaining in-
dividuals, if the implied hourly wage from the monthly earnings report was within 20
percent of the implied hourly wage from the annual data, I averaged the two. From here,
I settled any remaining discrepancies in individuals who worked less than 48 weeks by
using the monthly data. Among discrepant individuals who worked more than 48 weeks, I
discarded values that implied hourly earnings of greater than 200 pesos or less than 1 peso,
which correspond to the top and bottom 0.5 percent of the wage distribution from census
data. Finally, if remaining discrepant observations were professionals, technical workers,
or directors, I used annual data. For the remaining occupations, I used monthly earnings.
      For self-employed workers, I followed the same procedure, except that in the final
step, I used monthly earnings for all workers, regardless of occupation.




                                            21
References

Abbott, Robert D., Lon R. White, G. Webster Ross, Helen Petrovitch, Kamal H. Masaki,
  David A. Snowdon, and J. David Curb. (1998). “Height as a Marker of Childhood
  Development and Late-Life Cognitive Function: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.” Pe-
  diatrics 102(3): 602-9.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postl-Vinay, and Tim Watts. (2010). “Long-Run
  Health Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phyllozera in Nineteenth-Century France.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4): 714-728.

Barker, David J.P., ed. (2001). Fetal Origins of Cardiovascular and Lung Disease. New York:
   Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Behrmann, Jere R., John Hoddiott, John A. Maluccio, and Reynaldo Martorell. (2009).
  “Brains versus Brawn: Labor Market Returns to Itellectual and Health Human Capi-
  tal in a Poor Developing Country.” Middlebury College Economics Discussion Paper
  No. 0907.

Berger, Abi. (2001). “Insulin-Like Growth Factor and Cognitive Function.” British Medical
   Journal 322:203.

Berkman, Douglas S., Andres G. Lescano, Robert H. Gillman, Sonia L. Lopez and Maureen
   M. Black. (2002). “Effects of Stunting, Diarrhoeal Disease, and Parasitic Infection Dur-
   ing Infancy on Cognition in Late Childhood: A Follow-Up Study.” Lancet 359: 565-571.

Black, Maureen M. (2003). “Micronutrient Deficiencies and Cognitive Functioning.” Jour-
   nal of Nutrition 133(11 S2): 3927S-3931S.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2007). “From the Cradle to the
   Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics 122(1): 409-439.

Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. (2001). “The Determinants of Earn-
  ings: A Behavioral Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature 39(4): 1137-76.

Breslau, Naomi. (1995). “Psychiatric Sequelae of Low Birth Weight.” Epidemiologic Reviews
   17: 96-106.

Caldwell, John C. (1979). “Education as a Factor in Infant Mortality Decline: An Examina-
  tion of Nigerian Data.” Population Studies 3(3): 201-228.

Carroll, John B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor Analytic Studies. Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.

                                             22
Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. (2006). “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor
  Market Outcomes.” Cambridge, MA: NBER. Working Paper No. 12466.

Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. (2008). “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor
  Market Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 116(3): 499-532.

Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. (2010). “Causes and Consequences of Early Life Health.”
  Demography 47(Supplement): 65-85.

Dodds, Richard, H.J. Denison, G. Ntani, R. Cooper, C. Cooper, A.A. Sayer, and J. Baird.
  (Forthcoming). “Birth Weight and Muscle Strength: A Systematic Review and Meta-
  Analysis.” Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging.

Deaton, Angus. (1997). The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
  Development Policy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Duflo, Esther. (2001). “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction
  in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review
  91(4): 795-813.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jon Robinson. (Forthcoming). “Nudging Farmers to
  Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Re-
  view.

England, Paula, and Barbara Kilbourne. (1988). “Occupational Measures from the Dic-
  tionary of Occupational Titles for 1980 Census Detailed Occupations” [Computer file].
  Richardson, TX: Paula England and Barbara Kilbourne [producers]. Ann Arbor, MI:
  Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. (1995). “Learning by Doing and Learning
   from Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of Political
   Economy 103(6): 1176-1209.

Freedman, Daniel G. (1979). Human Sociobiology. New York: Free Press.

Grantham-McGregor, Sally M. (1995). “A Review of Studies of the Effect of Severe Malnu-
  trition on Mental Development.” Journal of Nutrition 125(Supplement): 2238S.

Grantham-McGregor, Sally M., C.A. Powell, S.P. Walker, and J.H. Himes. (1991). “Nutri-
  tional Supplementation, Psychosocial Stimulation, and Mental Development of Stunted
  Children: The Jamaican Study.” Lancet 1991 338: 1-5.

Haddad, Lawrence J. and Howarth E. Bouis. (1991). “The Impact of Nutritional Status on
  Agricultural Productivity: Wage Evidence from the Philippines.” Oxford Bulletin of Eco-
                                           23
   nomics and Statistics 53: 45-68.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Jeff E. Biddle. (1994). “Beauty and the Labor Market.” American
  Economic Review 84(5): 1174-1194.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive Skills in Eco-
  nomic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 46(3): 607-68.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and
  Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
  Economics 24(3): 411-82.

Hensley, Wayne E. (1993). “Height as a Measure of Success in Academe.” Psychology: A
  Journal of Human Behavior 30: 40-46.

Huang, Wei, Xiaoyan Lei, Geert Ridder, John Strauss, and Yaohui Zhao. (2012). “Health,
  Height, Height Shrinkage and SES at Older Ages: Evidence from China.” Mimeo, Har-
  vard University.

Komlos, John. (1990). “Height and Social Status in Eighteenth-Century Germany.” Journal
  of Interdisciplinary History 20: 607-621.

Liebenstein, Harvey. (1957). Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth. New York: John
   Wiley.

Loh, Eng Sang. (1993). “The Economic Effects of Physical Appearance.” Social Science Quar-
  terly 74: 420-438.

Lundborg, Petter, Paul Nystedt, and Dan-Olof Rooth. (2009). “The Height Premium in
  Earnings: The Role of Cognitive Ability and Physical Strength.” IZA Working Paper
  4266.

Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. (2009). "Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Eco-
  nomic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall." American Economic Review, 99(3): 1006-26.

Margo, Robert, and Richard H. Steckel. (1982). “The Height of American Slaves: New Evi-
  dence on Slave Nutrition and Health.” Social Science History 6: 516-38.

Magnusson, Patrik K.E., Finn Rasmussen, and Ulf B. Gyllensten. (2006). “Height at Age
  18 Years is a Strong Predictor of Attained Education Later in Life: Cohort Study of Over
  950 000 Swedish Men.” International Journal of Epidemiology 35:658-663.

Maurer, Jurgen. (2010). “Height, Education and Cognitive Function at Older Ages: Interna-
  tional Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean.” Economics and Human Biology
  8(2): 168-176.
                                           24
Mendez, Michelle A., and Linda S. Adair. (1999). “Severity and Timing of Stunting in the
  First Two Years of Life Affect Performance on Cognitive Tests in Late Childhood.” Jour-
  nal of Nutrition 129(8): 1555-1562.

Ohnsorge, Franziska, and Daniel Trefler. (2007). “Sorting it Out: International Trade with
  Heterogeneous Workers.” Journal of Political Economy 115(5): 868-892.

Paxson, Christina, and Norbert Schady. (2007). “Cognitive Development among Young
  Children in Ecuador: The Roles of Wealth, Health, and Parenting.” Journal of Human Re-
  sources 42: 49-84.

Perkins, Jessica M., Kashif T. Khan, George Davey Smith, and S.V. Subramanian. (2011).
   “Patterns and Trends of Adult Height in India in 2005-2006.” Economics and Human Bi-
   ology 9(2): 184-193.

Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Daniel Silverman. (2004). “The Effect of Ado-
   lescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height.” Journal of Political
   Economy 112: 1019-1053.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan. (Forthcoming). “Human Capital
   Investment and the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy.” American
   Economic Review.

Raven, J.C., J.H. Court, and J. Raven. (1983). Manual for Raven’s Progressive Matrices and
  Vocabulary Scales. London: Lewis.

Richards, Marcus, Rebecca Hardy, Diana Kuh, and Michael E.J. Wadsworth. (2002). “Birth-
   weight, Postnatal Growth and Cognitive Function in a National U.K. Birth Cohort.”
   International Journal of Epidemiology 31: 342-48.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Junsen Zhang. (2012). “Economic Growth, Comparative Ad-
  vantage, and Gender Differences in Schooling Outcomes: Evidence from Birthweight
  Differences of Chinese Twins.” Mimeo, Yale University.

Roy, Andrew D. (1951). “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Eco-
  nomic Papers 3(2): 135-46.

Ruggles, Steve, Matthew Sobek, and Trent Alexander, et al. (2008). Integrated Public Use
  Microdata Series: Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota
  Population Center [producer and distributor]. Online: http://usa.ipums.org/.

Scrimshaw, Nevin S., Carl E. Taylor, and John E. Gordon. (1968). “Interactions of Nutrition
   and Infection.” Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO Monograph Series No. 57.


                                            25
Silventoinen, Karri, Jaakko Kaprio, and Eero Lahelma. (2000). “Genetic and Environmental
   Contributions to the Association Between Body Height and Educational Attainment: A
   Study of Adult Finnish Twins.” Behavior Genetics 30(6): 477-485.

Silventoinen, Karri, Danielle Posthuma, Toos Cem van Beijsterveldt, Meike Bartels, and
   Dorret I. Boomsma. (2006). “Genetic Contributions to the Association Between Height
   and Intelligence: Evidence from Dutch Twin Data from Childhood to Middle Age.”
   Genes, Brain and Behavior 5: 585-595.

Silventoinen, Karri, Patrik K.E. Magnusson, Per Tynelius, Jaakko Kaprio, and Finn Ras-
   mussen. (2008). “Heritability of Body Size and Muscle Strength in Young Adulthood: A
   Study of One Million Swedish Men.” Genetic Epidemiology 32: 341-349.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. (1998). “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Develop-
   ment.” Journal of Economic Literature 36(2): 766-817.

Sundet, Jon Martin, Kristian Tambs, Jennifer R. Harris, Per Magnus, and Tore M. Torjussen.
  (2005). “Resolving the Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between
  Height and Intelligence: A Study of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs.” Twin
  Research and Human Genetics 7:1–5.

Tanner, James M. (1979). “A Concise History of Growth Studies from Buffon to Boas.” In
   Frank Falkner and James M. Tanner, eds., Human Growth, Volume 3: Neurobiology and
   Nutrition. New York: Springer, pp. 515-93.

Thomas, Duncan and John Strauss. (1997). “Health and Wages: Evidence on Men and
  Women in Urban Brazil.” Journal of Econometrics 77(1): 159-185.

Tuvemo, Torsten, Björn Jonsson, and Ingemar Persson. (1999). “Intellectual and Physical
  Performance and Morbidity in Relation to Height in a Cohort of 18-Year-Old Swedish
  Conscripts.” Hormone Research 52: 186-191.




                                           26
                                         Figure 1: The Returns to Height, Various Outcomes




Notes: The panels show local linear regressions with bandwidths of 4 cm; the dashed curves correspond to pointwise 95 percent confidence
intervals, block-bootstrapped at the PSU level. All regressions are weighted using sampling weights. The sample includes all men aged 25-65.
                                    Figure 2: Heterogeneity in the Height-Earnings Relationship




Notes: The panels show local linear regressions with bandwidths of 4 cm; the dashed curves correspond to pointwise 95 percent confidence
intervals, block-bootstrapped at the PSU level. All regressions are weighted using sampling weights. The sample includes all men aged 25-65.
                     Figure 3: Height and Occupational Skill Requirements
                                         A. Intelligence




                                               B. Strength




Notes: Figures plot average occupational skill requirements from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles
against the relative risk ratio on height from a multinomial logit regression of occupation on height, age,
age squared, and an ethnicity dummy. The reference category is “professionals.”
           Figure 4: Heterogeneity in the Relationship between Height and Occupational Intelligence Requirements




Notes: Figures plot average occupational intelligence requirements from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles against the relative risk ratio on
height from a multinomial logit regression of occupation on height, age, age squared, and an ethnicity dummy. The reference category is
“professionals.”
             Figure 5: Heterogeneity in the Relationship between Height and Occupational Strength Requirements




Notes: Figures plot average occupational strength requirements from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles against the relative risk ratio on height
from a multinomial logit regression of occupation on height, age, age squared, and an ethnicity dummy. The reference category is “professionals.”
                        Table 1: Summary Statistics, Men Aged 25-65
                                                                                  Occupational
                                                        Earnings Analysis
                                                                                 Choice Analysis
                                                                 (1)                   (2)
 Height (cm)                                             165.6         [6.9]     165.4     [7.0]
 Raven score                                              0.1          [1.0]      0.1      [1.0]
 Years of education                                       8.4          [4.6]      8.1      [4.8]

 Hourly earnings (2002 Mex$)                              20.0         [18.6]
 Brawn occupation                                                                 0.89

 Age                                                      40.1         [10.3]     41.0     [10.5]
 Indigenous                                               0.12                    0.15
 Rural residence                                          0.20                    0.23

 # of observations                                            5,286                    7,401
 # of individuals                                             3,860                    4,715
Notes: Weighted sample means, with standard deviations in brackets. The sample in column (1) only
includes observations with non-missing wages, and the sample in column (2) only includes observations
with occupations that can be matched to the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.
          Table 2: Childhood Conditions, Cognitive Skill, and the Height Premium
                   OLS Estimates, Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Earnings)
                                                                              Incl. childhood covariates
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)
Height (cm)                                     0.023***        0.020***        0.015***      0.014***
                                                 [0.004]          [0.003]         [0.003]       [0.003]
Raven score                                                     0.144***                      0.091***
                                                                  [0.021]                       [0.018]
Indigenous                      -0.417***       -0.313***       -0.289***       -0.192***     -0.188***
                                  [0.071]         [0.062]         [0.061]         [0.058]       [0.059]
Age                             0.062***        0.058***        0.053***        0.066***      0.062***
                                  [0.013]         [0.012]         [0.012]         [0.012]       [0.012]
Age squared                    -0.0008***      -0.0007***      -0.0006***      -0.0007***    -0.0007***
                                 [0.0001]        [0.0001]        [0.0001]        [0.0001]      [0.0001]

p-value on childhood vars.                                                      < 0.001         < 0.001

Adj. R-squared                    0.039           0.070          0.096           0.146           0.156
Notes: The sample includes 5,286 observations from 3,860 men. Brackets contain standard errors
clustered at the PSU-level. Regressions are weighted using sample weights and control for a survey year
dummy. The Raven score is standardized to have a standard deviation of 1 across the entire Mexican
adult population. The childhood covariates include the father’s first job, the father’s education, the
mother’s education, access to piped water and sanitation at age 12, and urban place of birth. To keep the
sample sizes adequate, the specifications that control for childhood covariates also include indicators for
whether these variables are non-missing. The p-values at the bottom of the table are from joint F tests of
the coefficients on the actual variables, not the non-missing indicators. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
0.01.
  Table 3: Childhood Conditions, Cognitive Skill, and the Height Premium: Heterogeneity
                  OLS Estimates, Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Earnings)
                                                               Incl. childhood covariates
                               (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)
Indigenous (637 observations, 481 individuals)
Height (cm)                 0.037***         0.031***         0.027***           0.023***
                             [0.008]          [0.007]          [0.007]            [0.007]
Raven score                                  0.215***                            0.185***
                                              [0.056]                             [0.053]

Non-indigenous (4,649 observations, 3,379 individuals)
Height (cm)               0.021***          0.018***                      0.014***           0.013***
                           [0.004]           [0.004]                       [0.004]            [0.004]
Raven score                                 0.134***                                         0.079***
                                             [0.021]                                          [0.018]

Non-urban birthplace (3,521 observations, 2,582 individuals)
Height (cm)                 0.023***         0.020***        0.017***                        0.016***
                             [0.005]          [0.005]         [0.005]                         [0.004]
Raven score                                  0.128***                                        0.083***
                                              [0.027]                                         [0.024]

Urban birthplace (1,765 observations, 1,278 individuals)
Height (cm)                 0.015***          0.015***                    0.012**            0.012**
                             [0.005]           [0.005]                    [0.005]             [0.005]
Raven score                                   0.123***                                       0.096***
                                               [0.030]                                        [0.027]
Notes: Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU-level. Regressions are weighted using
sample weights and control for a survey year dummy. The Raven score is standardized to have a
standard deviation of 1 across the entire Mexican adult population. The childhood covariates include the
father’s first job, the father’s education, the mother’s education, access to piped water and sanitation at
age 12, and urban place of birth. To keep the sample sizes adequate, the specifications that control for
childhood covariates also include indicators for whether these variables are non-missing. * p < 0.10, ** p
< 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                  Table 4: Education, Occupational Choice, and the Height Premium
                                         OLS Estimates, Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Earnings)
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)                       (7)           (8)
Height                          0.023***     0.015***     0.013***    0.012***    0.018***      0.014***                  0.013***      0.012***
                                 [0.004]      [0.003]      [0.004]     [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]                   [0.004]       [0.003]
Raven score                                                                       0.145***      0.046***                    0.011       -0.0003
                                                                                    [0.023]      [0.014]                   [0.014]       [0.011]
Years of education                                        0.073***    0.042***                                            0.072***      0.043***
                                                           [0.006]     [0.006]                                             [0.005]       [0.006]

Occupation dummies?                No             Yes            No            Yes             No            Yes             No            Yes
p-value on occ. dummies                         < 0.001                      < 0.001                       < 0.001                       < 0.001

R-squared                         0.070          0.226          0.205         0.252          0.096          0.229          0.204          0.253
Notes: The sample includes 5,286 observations from 3,860 men. Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU-level. Regressions are
weighted using sample weights and control for year, ethnicity, age, and age squared. The Raven score is standardized to have a standard
deviation of 1 across the entire Mexican adult population. The p-values at the bottom of the table are from joint F tests of the coefficients on the
occupation dummies. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                   Table 5: Explaining Occupational Sorting by Height
    Logit Marginal Effects, Dependent Variable: Pr(Brawn Occupation), 1 unit = 1 % point
                                (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)
Height                       -0.627*** -0.299*** -0.054** -0.419*** -0.229*** -0.052**
                              [0.104]   [0.081]     [0.023]  [0.082]     [0.073]     [0.023]
Raven score                                                 -5.80***    -3.71***     -0.198
                                                             [0.735]     [0.567]     [0.193]
Years of education                                 -1.10***                         -1.08***
                                                    [0.105]                          [0.113]

Childhood covariates?               No          Yes           No          No           Yes          No
p-value on childhood vars.                    < 0.001                                < 0.001
Notes: The sample includes 7,401 observations from 4,715 men. Marginal effects from logit estimations,
evaluated at the means of all independent variables. Marginal effects are multiplied by 100, so that 1 unit
equals 1 percentage point. Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU-level. Regressions are
weighted using sample weights and control for year, ethnicity, age, and age squared. The Raven score is
standardized to have a standard deviation of 1 across the entire Mexican adult population. The childhood
covariates include the father’s first job, the father’s education, the mother’s education, access to piped
water and sanitation at age 12, and urban place of birth. To keep the sample sizes adequate, the
specifications that control for childhood covariates also include indicators for whether these variables are
non-missing. The p-values at the bottom of the table are from joint Chi-squared tests of the coefficients on
the actual variables, not the non-missing indicators. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
       Appendix Table 1: Imputed Earnings Regressions
 OLS Estimates, Dependent Variable: Ln(Sectoral Earnings Score)
                                                  Workers with
                             All Workers          Non-Missing
                                                    Earnings
                                  (1)                   (2)
Height (cm)                    0.016***              0.014***
                                [0.002]               [0.002]
Age                            0.033***              0.039***
                                [0.006]               [0.007]
Age Squared                 -0.00047***            -0.0005***
                              [0.00007]             [0.00009]
Indigenous                    -0.210***             -0.179***
                                [0.048]               [0.050]

# of observations                     7,793                  5,103
#of individuals                       4,930                  3,782
Notes: Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU level. The
sectoral earnings score is the average hourly earnings in the worker’s
occupation-industry-education cell in the 2000 Mexican census. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
