                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTERNATIONAL PRICES AND ENDOGENOUS QUALITY

                                          Robert C. Feenstra
                                            John Romalis

                                         Working Paper 18314
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18314


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




The authors thank George Dan, Phil Luck, John Lennox, Anson Soderbery and Greg Wright for excellent
research assistance, as well as Juan Carlos Hallak, Robert Inklaar, Marcel Timmer and seminar participants
at the NBER, National Bank of Belgium, Paris School of Economics, Monash, Oxford, Princeton and
Yale Universities for helpful comments and Raymond Robertson for help compiling the tariff data.
Financial support from the National Science Foundation Grants no. 0648766 and no. 1061880, and
from the Sloan Foundation, is gratefully acknowledged. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation Grants no. 0648766 and no. 1061880, and from the Sloan Foundation, is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert C. Feenstra and John Romalis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Prices and Endogenous Quality
Robert C. Feenstra and John Romalis
NBER Working Paper No. 18314
August 2012
JEL No. F1,F12,F14

                                             ABSTRACT

The unit values of internationally traded goods are heavily influenced by quality. We model this in
an extended monopolistic competition framework where, in addition to choosing price, firms simultaneously
choose quality. We allow countries to have non-homothetic demand for quality. The optimal choice
of quality by firms reflects this non-homothetic demand as well as the costs of production, including
specific transport costs, under the “Washington apples” effect. We estimate the implied gravity equation
using detailed bilateral trade data for about 200 countries over 1984-2008. Our system identifies quality
and quality-adjusted prices, from which we will construct price indexes for imports and exports for
each country that will be incorporated into the next generation of the Penn World Table.


Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu

John Romalis
Australian National University
Research School of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Crisp Building 26, Room 2078
The Australian National University ACT 0200
Australia
and NBER
jromalis@gmail.com
1. Introduction

         It has long been known that the unit values of internationally traded goods are heavily

influenced by their quality (Kravis and Lipsey, 1974). That is the reason why import and export

price indexes for the United States and many other countries no longer use any unit-value

information, but instead rely on price surveys from trading firms. Likewise, when making

international comparisons of real GDP, researchers such as Summers and Heston (1991) rely on

the prices surveys of the International Comparisons Program, which collects prices of identical

products across countries. Those prices are only collected for final goods sold in each country,

however, and are then used to construct real GDP in the Penn World Table (PWT). Recently, it

has been proposed that PWT could be extended to incorporate the prices of exports and imports,

which would allow a distinction to be made between real GDP from the consumers and

producers points of view: these differ by the terms of trade faced by countries (Feenstra et al,

2009). In order to make this distinction we need to have quality-adjusted prices (or unit values)

for a wide range of traded goods over many countries and years. That is the goal of our study.

         To achieve this goal, we extend the model of Melitz (2003) to allow for endogenous

quality choice by firms.1 We are not the first to attempt to disentangle quality from trade unit

values, and other recent authors to do so include Schott (2004, 2008), Hallak (2006), Hallak and

Schott (2011), Khandelwal (2010) and Martin and Méjean (2010).2 These studies rely on the

demand side to identify quality. In the words of Khandelwal (2010, p. 1451): “The procedure



1
  Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) argue that introducing quality in the Melitz model is essential to make it consistent
with empirical observations, but in their framework quality is exogenous. Models with endogenous quality choice by
heterogeneous firms include Gervias (2010), Khandelwal (2010) and Mandel (2009). The latter two paper have
simultaneous choice of price and quality, as we use here. In contrast, Gervias has quality chosen for the lifetime of a
product. This yields a solution where quality is proportional to firm productivity, thereby providing a micro-
foundation for this assumption made in Baldwin and Harrigan (2011).
2
  Another line of literature empirically distinguishes between productivity and quality versions of the Melitz (2003)
model: see Baldwin and Ito (2011), Crozet, Head and Mayer (2012), Johnson (2012) and Mandel (2009).
                                                   2

utilizes both unit value and quantity information to infer quality and has a straightforward

intuition: conditional on price, imports with higher market shares are assigned higher quality.”

Likewise, Hallak and Schott (2011) rely on trade balances to identify quality. To this demand-

side information we will add a supply side, drawing on the well-known “Washington apples”

effect (Alchian and Allen, 1964; Hummels and Skiba, 2004): goods of higher quality are shipped

longer distances. We will find that this positive relationship between exporter f.o.b. prices and

distance is an immediate implication of the first-order condition of firms for optimal quality

choice. This first-order condition gives us powerful additional information from which to

identify quality.

        In section 2 we specify our model, where firms in each country simultaneously choose

price and quality. That is, we are thinking of quality characteristics as being modified easily and

tailored to each market: the specification of a Volkswagen Golf sold in various countries is a

realistic example. Like Hallak (2006) and Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman (2011a,b),

countries have non-homothetic demand for quality. As in Verhoogen (2008), we assume a Cobb-

Douglas production function for quality where firms differ in their productivities. Then solving

the firm’s problem, we find that quality is a simple log-linear function of productivity and wages,

as well as the specific transport costs to the destination market and that country’s valuation of

quality. Specializing to the CES demand system, we solve for the prices charged by firms and

find that an exporter’s f.o.b. prices are directly proportional to specific transport costs,

illustrating the Washington apples effect. It follows that log quality is proportional to the log of

the exporter’s f.o.b. price divided by the productivity-adjusted wages.

        In order to implement this measure of quality, we therefore need accurate information on
                                                 3

wages and other input prices as well as the productivity of exporters to each destination market.

Verhoogen (2008) argues that multiple factors are needed to produce high-quality outputs, and

De Loeker and Warzynski (2011) likewise argue that it is important to model all the inputs used

by a firm in order to measure productivity, especially for exporters. The ability to obtain data on

such input prices for a broad range of industries (i.e. every merchandise export) and countries

(i.e. all countries included in the Penn World Table) is a formidable challenge. To overcome this

challenge, we rely on the equilibrium assumption that the marginal exporting firm to each

destination market earns zero profits, as in Melitz (2003). We further assume that the distribution

of productivities across firms is Pareto. Then we can use the zero-cutoff-profit condition to solve

for the productivity-adjusted wages and firm-level quality.

       Because our goal is to estimate quality for many goods and countries we do not rely on

firm-level data, but in section 3 aggregate to the disaggregate industry level, in which case the

c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices are measured by unit values. We derive the gravity equation and show that

it includes new terms as compared to Chaney (2008), due to endogenous quality. In sections 4

and 5, we estimate the gravity equation using detailed bilateral trade data at the 4-digit SITC

digit level (nearly 800 products per year) for about 200 countries during 1984-2008. Our median

estimate of the elasticity of substitution is higher than that in Broda and Weinstein (2006) due to

our expanded sample over many countries along with the fact that quality is included, and by

using a specification that is more robust to measurement error. Our median estimate of the Pareto

parameter in quite close to Eaton and Kortum (2002), who also consider trade between many

countries.

       Given the parameter estimates, product quality is readily constructed in section 6. Our

results broadly conform to our expectations. Developed countries export and import higher
                                                    4

quality goods than do poorer countries, confirming results of Schott (2004) and Hallak (2006),

but the quality-adjusted prices vary much less than the raw unit values. Countries' quality-

adjusted terms of trade are negatively related to their level of development. We provide indexes

of quality and quality-adjusted prices at the 4-digit SITC and 1-digit Broad Economic Categories

(distinguishing food and beverages, other consumer goods, capital, fuels, intermediate inputs and

transport equipment), that should be useful to researchers interested in the time-series or cross-

country properties of these indexes and that will be incorporated into the next generation of the

PWT (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2012).


2. Optimal Quality Choice

Consumer Problem

        Suppose that consumers in country k have available i=1,…,N varieties of a differentiated

product in a sector. These products can come from different source countries. We should really

think of each variety as indexed by the triple (i,j,t), where i is the country of origin, j is the firm

and t is time. But initially, we will simply use the notation i for product varieties. We denote the

price and quality of good i in country k by pik and zik , respectively. We suppose that the demand

                                                           E ( p1k / z1D ,..., pNk / zDN ,U k ), where
                                                                      k               k
in country k arises from the expenditure function E k

quality zik is raised to the power D k ! 0 , which we denote by ziD { ( zik )D for brevity. Thus,
                                                                       k          k




quality acts as a shift parameter in the expenditure function. Hallak (2006) has introduced similar

exponents on quality, but in the context of the direct utility function. In that case it is not possible

to makes the exponents D k depend on utility or per-capita income; but by working with the

expenditure function we will be able to do just that.

        Differentiating the expenditure function to compute demand qik :
                                                                   5


                                                                 wE        Ei
                                                       qik                           ,
                                                                 wpik      ziD
                                                                                 k




where Ei denotes the derivative of E with respect to its ith argument. Denoting this ith argument

by the quality-adjusted prices Pik { pik / ziD , and defining Qik { ziD qik as the quality-adjusted
                                                             k                                    k




demand, we can re-arrange terms above to obtain Qik                                  Ei ( P1k ,..., PNk ,U k ), so that working with

the quality-adjusted magnitudes still gives quantity as the derivative of the expenditure function

with respect to price.

         We can generalize the expenditure function by allowing the exponents D k                                     h (U k ) to

depend on utility, so that:
                                                                   k                         k
                                         Ek     E[ p1k / z1h (U ) ,..., p Nk / z Nh(U ) ,U k ] ,                            (1)

               k                 k
where zih (U       )
                       { ( zik )h (U ) . Because D k     h(U k ) depends on utility, this expenditure function has

non-homothetic demand for quality, as in Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman (2011a,b).3

This is a valid expenditure function provided that it is increasing in utility and non-decreasing in

price, which can be readily checked for a specific functional form.4 For most of the paper we

shall rely on a “non-homothetic CES” expenditure function, defined over a continuum of

products i as,
                                                                                         1
                                           ª              k       (1V )      º (1V )
                                 Ek    U k « ³ pik / zih(U )               di »        ,                                     (2a)
                                           «¬ i                               »¼

with,                            h(U k ) 1  O ln U k , for U k ! 0.                                                         (2b)


3
  Other recent literature including Bekkers et al (2010), Choi et al (2009) and Simonovska (2011) analyze models
of international trade and quality where non-homothetic demand plays a central role.
4
  The idea of allowing the parameters of the expenditure function to depend on utility is borrowed from Deaton and
Muellbauer (1980, pp. 154-158), who define an expenditure function as a utility-weighted combination of any two
functions that are non-decreasing in price, which is valid provided that the resulting function is increasing in utility.
Deaton and Muellbauer use this approach to obtain a class of expenditure functions where aggregate demand
depends in a simple way on the moments of the income distribution.
                                                            6


Totally differentiating (2a) with respect to utility using Ei               Qik and (2b), we obtain:


                   wE k     Ek             dPik        Ek ª          § Pik Qik   · k º
                                  ³ Qik          di        «1  O ³ ¨¨ E k      ¸¸ ln zi di » ,
                   wU k     Uk      i      dU k        U k ¬«      i©             ¹          ¼»

since dPik / dU k       Pik ln zik h '(U k ) and O U k h '(U k ). The final integral above is interpreted as

the average of log quality across products. In our empirical work we will model D k                       h(U k ) as

depending on per-capita income rather than unobserved utility. We see that the non-homothetic

CES expenditure function will be increasing in utility provided that O is sufficiently small, which

is readily confirmed in our estimates.


Firms’ Problem

         We now add the subscript j for firms, while i denotes their country of origin and k the

destination, so that (i,j,k) denotes a unique variety. Firms make the optimal choice of the quality

zijk to send to country k. We suppose there are both specific and iceberg trade costs between the

countries. The specific trade costs is given by Tik , which can depend on factor prices and the

distance to the destination market k.5 The iceberg trade cost is denoted by W ik , so that W ik units of

the good are exported in order for one unit to arrive. We assume that the iceberg costs, which

includes one plus the ad valorem tariff denoted by tarik , are applied to the value inclusive of the

specific trade costs.6 Then letting pi*k denote the exporters’ f.o.b. price, the tariff-inclusive c.i.f.

price is pik { W ik ( pi*k  Tik ), and the net-of-tariff c.i.f. price is pik / tarik .



5
 That is, we could write Tik wi dik , where dik is in units of the aggregate factor and depends on distance.
6
  Most countries apply tariffs to the transport-inclusive (c.i.f.) price of a product. The exceptions are Afghanistan,
Australia, Botswana, Canada, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho, Namibia, New Zealand, Puerto Rico,
South Africa, Swaziland, and the United States. See the Customs Info Database at http://export.customsinfo.com/
and http://export.gov/logistics/eg_main_018142.asp.
                                                                                             7

        We assume that output is produced with a composite input whose quantity is denoted by

Lkij . The amount of the composite input needed for one unit of production is denoted lijk , and

the total input requirements (or inverse of the production function) takes the form:

                                                                     Lkij          lijk yijk  fijk ,

where yijk is the output sold by firm j to country k, and f ijk are the fixed costs of selling there. We

will not specify these fixed costs until the next section, focusing here on the variable input. In

order to produce one unit of a good with product quality zijk the firm must use the variable input

lijk , according to the Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                                                     zijk         (lijkMij )T ,                                   (3)

where 0 < T < 1 reflects diminishing returns to quality and Mij denotes the productivity of firm j

in country i. We think of lijk as an aggregate of labor inputs, such as high and low-skilled labor

and entrepreneurial ability, as in Verhoogen (2008), and denote its price by the wage wi. The

marginal cost of producing a good of quality zijk is then solved from (3) as,


                                                  cij ( zijk , wi ) = wit xijk                   wi ( zijk )1/T / Mij .           (4)


       Firms simultaneously choose f.o.b. prices pij*k and characteristics zijk for each destination

market. From the iceberg costs, W ik units of the good are exported in order for one unit to arrive,

so total exports are yijk                W ik qijk . When evaluating profits from exporting to country k, we need to

divide by one plus the ad valorem tariff tarik , obtaining:


                                                        W ik qijk                            ª p *k c ( z k , w ) º W k Q k
          max                                                                 max
                         [ pij*k  cij ( zijk , wi )]                                        « ijk  ij ij k i » i ij
         pij* k , zijk                                   tarik               pij* k , zijk   « zijD               » tarik
                                                                                             ¬          zijD      ¼
                                                                                                                                  (5)
                                                                                   ­                   k             k ½      k
                                                                     max           ° k       k [cij ( zij , wi )  Ti ] ° Qij
                                                                    Pijk , zijk    ® Pij  W i                          ¾ k.
                                                                                                          zijD
                                                                                                               k
                                                                                   °¯                                   °¿ tari
                                                               8

The first equality in (5) converts from observed to quality-adjusted consumption, while the

second line converts to quality-adjusted, tariff-inclusive c.i.f. prices Pijk { W ik ( pij*k  Tik ) / zijD ,
                                                                                                            k




while changing the choice variables from pij*k , zijk to Pijk , zijk . This change in variables relies on

the form of the expenditure function in (1) and our assumption that prices and characteristics

are chosen simultaneously, since we are thinking of quality characteristics that can be changed

easily, but does not rely on the CES functional form in (2).

        It is immediate that to maximize profits in (5), the firms must choose zijk to minimize
                          k
                              D
[cij ( zijk , wi )  Tik ] / zik . In the case where D k        1 , this problem is interpreted as minimizing the

average variable cost per unit of quality, inclusive of specific trade costs, which is obtained

where marginal cost equals average cost as found by Rodriguez (1979). More generally, with

D k ! 0 the solution to this problem is:

                                     wcij ( zijk , wi )        [cij ( zijk , wi )  Tik ]
                                                          Dk                                ,              (6)
                                           wzijk                          zijk

so there is a wedge of D k between the marginal and average costs of producing quality. The

second-order condition for this minimization problem is satisfied if and only if w 2cij / w( zijk )2 ! 0,

so there must be increasing marginal costs of improving quality. In that case, either an increase

in the valuation of quality D k or an increase in the specific transport costs to the destination

market Tik will raise quality zijk . This occurs in particular with an increase in Tik due to greater

distance, which is the well-known “Washington apples” effect.

        Making use of the Cobb-Douglas production function for quality in (3), and associated

cost function in (4), the second-order conditions are satisfied when 0 < T < 1 which we have

already assumed. The first-order condition (6) can be solved for quality:
                                                                 9


                           ln zik      T ª¬ln Tik  ln( wi / Mij )  ln(D kT / (1  D kT ))º¼ ,            (7)


where we assume that D kT <1. Conveniently, the Cobb-Douglas production function and

specific trade costs give us a log-linear form for the optimal quality choice. Since we are

allowing D k     h(U k ) to depend on the utility of the destination market, it follows that richer

countries (with higher utility) will import higher quality, as found empirically by Hallak (2006).

In addition, quality in (7) is rising in the productivity of the exporting firm, confirming the

finding of Schott (2004) that richer (more productive) countries export higher quality goods.7

Substituting (7) into the cost function (4), we obtain cij ( zijk , wi ) [D kT / (1  D kT )]Tik . Thus, the

marginal costs of production are proportional to the specific trade costs, as we shall use below.

        Now suppose that the CES expenditure function in (2) applies. Solving (5) for the

optimal choice of the f.o.b. price, we obtain the familiar markup,

                                                                                   § V ·
                                        ( pij*k  Tik ) [cij ( zijk , wi )  Tik ] ¨      ¸.
                                                                                   © V  1¹
This equation shows that firms not only markup over marginal costs cij in the usual manner, they

also markup over specific trade costs. Then using the relation cij ( zijk , wi ) [D kT / (1  D kT )]Tik ,

we readily solve for the f.o.b. and tariff-inclusive c.i.f. prices as:

                                               ª§ 1 · § V · º
                                pij*k      Tik «¨      k ¸¨ V  1¸
                                                                    1» { pi*k ,                           (8a)
                                               ¬© 1  D T ¹ ©    ¹ ¼

                                                  ª§     1   · § V ·º
                                pijk      W ik Tik «¨        ¸¨
                                                                              k
                                                                       ¸ » { pi .                          (8b)
                                                  ¬© 1  D T ¹ © V  1 ¹ ¼
                                                             k


Thus, both the f.o.b. and c.i.f. prices vary across destination markets k in proportion to the



7
  As mentioned in note 5, we could write Tik wi dik , where dik is in units of the aggregate factor and depends on
distance. In that case, wages wi (which also depend on productivity) cancel out from (7).
                                                           10

specific transport costs to each market, but are independent of the productivity of the firm j, as

indicated by the notation pi*k and pik . This result is obtained because more efficient firms

sell higher quality goods, leading to constant prices in each destination market.8

         Both the f.o.b. and c.i.f. prices are increasing in the destination country’s preference for

quality, D k . This provides us with a method to estimate these preferences using data on f.o.b.

unit values ln uvi*k      ln pi*k  ui*k , with measurement error ui*k . We model D k as depending on

real GDP per capita of country k from the Penn World Table. Taking logs of (8a), adding a time

subscript t and a SITC goods subscript g, and assuming that specific transport costs depend on

distance, we estimate:

                                                           ª§      1       ·§ V g · º
                       *k
                  ln uvigt    G igt  E g ln(dist ik )  ln «¨             ¸¨                    *k
                                                                                       ¸  1»  uigt ,         (9a)
                                                             ¨             ¸ ¨         ¸
                                                           «¬© 1  D gtT g ¹ © V g  1 ¹ ¼»
                                                                     k


                               k
with,                        D gt 1  Og ln RGDPLkt / RGDPLUS
                                                           t  ,                                                (9b)

where G igt is a source country-time fixed effect. We measure real GDP per capita, RGDPLkt ,

relative to that in the United States as a normalization. Substituting (9b) into (9a), and using

preliminary estimates of V g and T g that we shall describe later, we can obtain estimates of Og

using nonlinear least squares. This regression is run for each SITC 4-digit industry over 1984-

2008, with the results shown in Figures 1 and 2.

         In Figure 1 we shown the frequency of estimates for E g , the coefficient on log distance.

Its median value over 862 4-digit SITC industries is 0.15. Only 2.5% of the estimates are

significantly negative. The fact that the f.o.b. unit value – which is net of transport costs – is


8
  Our result is a razor-edge case between having the largest firms charge low prices (due to high productivity) or
high prices (due to high quality) in a given destination market. Other authors have distinguished those two cases
using firm-level data: see note 2. While this razor-edge case simplifies our analytical results, such as taking averages
in section 3, it is not essential to our analysis because we ultimately rely on industry rather than firm-level prices.
                                          11


                  Figure 1: Frequency Distribution for Estimates of Eg



      4
      3
Density
2     1
      0




                 -.5                 0                   .5              1
                                           betaDist



                  Figure 2: Frequency Distribution for Estimates of Og
      15
      10
Density
      5
      0




           -.2               -.1              0               .1         .2
                                           lambda
                                                        12

increasing in distance is interpreted by Hummels and Skiba (2004) as evidence of the

“Washington apples” effect, whereby quality grows with distance. In fact, in our model log

quality is only a fraction of the log f.o.b. price, as shown by combining (7) and (8a) to obtain

(without the g and t subscripts):

                                                                              ª D kT (V  1) º
                ln zik   T ªln(N1k pi*k )  ln( wi / Mij )º , with N1k { «                       ».        (10)
                           «¬                            »¼                          k
                                                                              ¬«1  D T (V  1) ¼»

To isolate quality from the f.o.b. price we need to know the key parameter T from the production

function for quality, which we estimate in section 4.

       In Figure 2 we show the frequency distribution for estimates of Og , the coefficient of real
                                k
GDP per capita in determining D gt . Its median value over the 4-digit SITC industries is 0.021,

and about 14% of the estimates are significantly negative. We will replace the negative but

insignificant estimates by zero, but do not alter the negative and significant estimates: there are

plausible cases where lower-income countries prefer higher quality due to the changing

composition of goods within SITC 4-digit categories. The leading example is SITC 3341,

“Gasoline and other Light Fuels,” which includes fuels for aircraft. It has Og = – 0.07, the largest

significant negative value, since many small, low-income economies (especially island countries)

without refining capacity require relatively more of the higher-quality aircraft fuel. The

                     k
implied values for D gt range between 0.42 and 1.31 over all goods.

                                                                                          pik / zijD is:
                                                                                                  k
       For quality in (10), the corresponding quality-adjusted price Pijk

                                                                   D kT
                                  Pijk   pik   ª ( w / M ) N k p*k º      .                                (11)
                                               «¬ i ij      1 i »
                                                                   ¼

Since from (8) the c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices do not differ across firms selling to each destination

market, it follows that the quality-adjusted price is decreasing in the productivity Mij of the
                                                 13

exporter, but at a rate that differs from Chaney (2008). For the CES expenditure function in (2),

sales depend on the quality-adjusted price with elasticity (1  V ) , and from (11), the price

depends on productivity with elasticity –DkT, so that firms’ sales depends on productivity with

elasticity D kT (V  1) . Below we will assume a Pareto distribution for productivities with

parameter J. It follows that firms’ sales in our endogenous-quality model are Pareto distributed

with parameter ] k    J / [D kT (V  1)] in country k. We can see that in order for our model to

mimic the Melitz-Chaney model, we need to have D kT o 1, so that prices would decline at the

rate J / (V  1) as in Chaney (2008). Setting D kT    1 is not permitted because the quality

approaches infinity in (7), but we will occasionally let D kT o 1 to compare our results to the

Melitz-Chaney model.


3. Solving for Productivity-Adjusted Wages

       As discussed in section 1, it would be a formidable challenge to assemble the data on

wages, other input prices and firms’ productivities needed to directly measure quality in (10)

across many goods and countries. In our trade data we will not have firm-level information.

Accordingly, we rely instead on the zero-cutoff-profit condition of Melitz (2003) to solve for the

productivity-adjusted wage of the marginal exporter to each destination market. In addition, we

shall aggregate prices and quality to the industry level to obtain observable magnitudes, which

will turn out to be useful in solving for the marginal exporter.


Zero-Cutoff-Profit Condition

       We let Mˆik denote the cutoff productivity for a firm in country i that can just cover the

fixed costs of exporting to country k. Using this productivity in (11), Pˆik denotes the quality-
                                                         14

adjusted price for the marginal exporter:

                                                                          D kT
                                  Pˆik   pik   ª( w / Mˆ k ) N k p*k º           .                  (11')
                                               ¬« i i         1 i »
                                                                     ¼

We let Qˆ ik denote the quantity of exports for this marginal firm so that Xˆ ik { Pˆik Qˆ ik is tariff-

inclusive export revenue. From the CES markups, profits earned by the firm in (5) are then

( Xˆ ik / tarikV ) , which must cover fixed costs in the zero-cutoff-profit (ZCP) condition:

                                               Xˆ ik   § wi     · k
                                                       ¨¨ k     ¸¸ fi .                             (12)
                                           tarikV       © Mˆi   ¹

        There are two features of this ZCP condition that deserve attention. First, one plus the ad

valorem tariff tarik appears in the denominator on the left because tariffs must be deducted from

revenue before computing profits. Equivalently, we can move the term tarik to the right where it

will multiply fixed costs fik , which is how that term will appear in the ensuing formulas.

        Second, we have written wages on the right of (12) as adjusted for productivity of the

ZCP exporter. That is, we are assuming that an exporting firm’s productivity applies equally well

to variable and fixed costs. We make this assumption because export revenue depends on the

quality-adjusted price Pˆik (in addition to the CES price index, specified below), so the solution

for the quality-adjusted price from (12) is very sensitive to the specification of fixed costs. By

using the productivity-adjusted wages in (12), the solution for the quality-adjusted prices

depends on more than just the fixed cost fik . This assumption is also made by Bilbiie, Ghironi,

and Melitz (2012), though in their case, productivity is equal across firms.

        To make use of (12) we need to aggregate across all firms with higher productivity than

the marginal exporter, obtaining total sectoral exports from country i to k. In addition, following

Melitz (2003) we form the CES averages of the quality-adjusted prices in (11). To perform these
                                                                             15

aggregations, we add the assumption that productivity is Pareto distributed with cumulative

distribution Gi (M ) 1  (M / Mi )J , where the location parameter Mi d M denotes the lower-bound

to the productivities of firms in country i. By varying this lower-bound we can achieve

differences in average productivity across countries, which is realistic, but for analytical

convenience we assume that the dispersion parameter J is identical across countries.9 The density

function is gi (M ) JM  (J 1)MiJ , and the density conditional on exporting to country k is

gi (M ) / [1  Gi (Mˆik )] , for M ! Mˆik .

         In order to aggregate over exporters, we note that the ratio of demand for firm j and the

cutoff firm, both exporting to the same destination market k, is Qijk / Qˆ ik                                     ( Pijk / Pˆik )V , so that

relative firm revenue is X ijk / Xˆ ik             ( Pijk / Pˆik )1V . Denoting the mass of firms in country i by M i ,

total exports in this sector from country i to k are:

                         f                               f
          X ik   { Mi    ³     X ijk gi (M )dM    Mi     ³ Xˆ i ( Pij
                                                                   k     k
                                                                             / Pˆik )1V gi (M )dM
                        Mˆik                            Mˆik
                                                                                                                                       (13)
                        ªf                D kT (1V )             º                                J
                      k « § Mˆi          ·                                           § Mˆik   ·
                                k                                                                       ª                 º
                                                                                                                 J
                 Mi Xi ³ ¨
                    ˆ                    ¸¸             gi (M )dM »            ˆ k
                                                                               Xi Mi ¨        ¸¸        «                 »,
                        « k¨ M                                    »                  ¨ Mi                      k
                        «¬Mˆi ©           ¹                       »¼                 ©         ¹        ¬ J  D T (V  1) ¼


as obtained by evaluating the integral and assuming J ! D kT (V  1). Substituting from (12) for

Xˆ ik , we solve for the wage relative to the cutoff productivity:

                                1J
                   § wi        ·        X ik / N 2k tarik fik                          ª      VJ         º
                   ¨¨ k        ¸¸                              J
                                                                       , with N 2k     «      k          ».                            (14)
                    © Mˆi      ¹          M i (Mi / wi )                               ¬ J  D T (V  1) ¼

         Substituting this solution for productivity-adjusted wages into (11'), we readily obtain an



9
  In this respect we are making the same assumption as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), who allowed for different
location parameters of the Frechét distribution across countries, but with the same dispersion parameter.
                                                          16

expression for the quality-adjusted price for the marginal exporter. Our interest is in the CES

average of the quality-adjusted prices, which for firms in country i exporting to k is:

                                                         1
                                                                                          1
             ªf                                     º 1V      ª                   º1V k
             «                      gi (M )                              J
         Pi { ³ Pij (M )
           k      k      (1V )
                                                 dM »          «                   »   Pˆi ,         (15)
             « k                ª1  Gi (Mˆik ) º »            ¬ J  D k
                                                                         T (V  1) ¼
             ¬Mˆi               ¬               ¼ ¼

as obtained by substituting for Pijk (Mij ) from (11) and computing the integral for J ! D kT (V  1).

This expression shows that the average quality-adjusted price Pik is proportional to the cut-off

price Pˆik , with the factor of proportionality depending only on model parameters.

         Combining (11'), (14) and (15), we therefore obtain,
                                                                                 D kT
                                 § k               D T
                                                    k
                                                         · § X k / N k tar k f
                                                                            k · (1 J )
                          Pik    ¨ pi   N1k pi*k         ¸ ¨¨ i      2    i i
                                                         ¸ M (M / w )J ¸¸
                                                                                          .          (16)
                                 ¨
                                 ©                       ¹©      i i       i   ¹

Notably, an increase in exports to a market, given the mass of firms, raises the relative quality-

adjusted price. That occurs because an increase in relative exports means that less-efficient firms

are exporting to that market, and therefore average quality falls. That relationship sounds

contrary to the demand-side intuition discussed in section 1: given nominal prices, higher sales to

a market should mean higher quality. In fact, that intuition continues to hold in our model, and

we shall use it below in conjunction with (16) to solve for the quality-adjusted prices.


Import Demand

         Returning to the zero-cutoff-profit condition in (12), while the firm-level sales Xˆ ik are

not observed in our data, they equal CES demand from the expenditure function in (2). That is,

Xˆ ik   ( Pˆik ) (V 1) [Y k P k (V 1) ], where P k is the exact price index corresponding to the CES

expenditure function in (2):
                                                               17

                                                      1/(1V )
              ª      f                           º                     ª                                      J º1/(1V )
                                                                              (1V )    § Mˆ k           ·
        P k { «¦ M i ³ Pijk (M )(1V ) gi (M )dM »                     «¦ Pik        Mi ¨ i              ¸¸        »         ,   (17)
              « i                                »                     « i              ¨M                         »
              ¬     Mˆik                         ¼                     ¬                © i              ¹         ¼

using (15). Also using aggregate exports along with (14), demand is re-expressed as:

                                                                (V 1)(1J )                        (1 J )
                         § X ik / N 2ki fik    ·    § Pk   ·                    §      Yk       ·
                         ¨¨                    ¸¸   ¨ i    ¸                    ¨¨ k k k        ¸¸             .                 (18)
                                           J        ¨ k    ¸
                          © M i (Mi / wi )     ¹    ©P     ¹                    © N 2 tari fi   ¹

       Higher exports on the left of this expression imply a lower quality-adjusted price on the

right, ceteris paribus, so this equation has the demand-side intuition. The mass of potential

exporters M i enters this equation because if there are more firms selling from country i to k then

exports will be higher. The presence of this term complicates all demand-side attempts to

measure quality, because either a greater mass of firms (leading to more variety) or higher

quality (leading to lower quality-adjusted prices) will raise exports in (18). This problem is dealt

with in different ways by Hallak and Schott (2011), Hummels and Klenow (2005) and

Khandelwal (2010): the latter author, for example, uses exporting country population to measure

the mass of exporters. We will rely on a similar assumption in our estimation, but first show how

the mass of exporters can be eliminated by combining the demand-side relation (18) with the

supply-side relation (16) to solve for the quality-adjusted price and for exports.


Gravity Equation and Quality-Adjusted Prices

       Combining (16) and (18) we readily solve for exports X ik , which is the gravity equation.

To present this solution in the most compact form, we use the techniques of Chaney (2008) to

solve for the CES price index in (17) (see Appendix A for details). We also assume a specific

functional form for the fixed costs:
                                                                           18

                                                                    E0
                                                       § Yk    ·             § 4          ·
                                           fi   k
                                                       ¨¨ k    ¸¸        exp ¨ ¦ E n Fnik ¸ .                            (19)
                                                                             ¨            ¸
                                                       © uv    ¹             ©n 1         ¹

The first term in (19) follows the hypothesis of Arkolakis (2010) that small markets have lower

fixed costs because it easier to reach all customers: uv k is a deflator for import expenditure in

the industry in question constructed from import unit values, so that (Y k / uv k ) measures

quantity. Arkolakis allows the fixed costs fik to depend on (Y k / uv k ) E 0 , where E 0 is a

parameter indicating the sensitivity to market size. This parameter will prove to be important as

we determine the quality-adjusted import prices in small markets, in particular, since it

potentially takes very efficient firms to overcome the fixed costs of exporting to those markets,

and these firms sell high quality. In addition, fixed costs depend on four measures of language

similarity between any two countries, Fnik , n = 1,..,4. We consider two random people, one from

each country, and construct four probabilities: the probability that they speak a common

language; the probability that they speak a language from a common language genus; the

probability that they speak a language from a common language family; and the probability that

their countries share a common official language. Details are provided in Appendix B.

         With these fixed costs, we derive the solution for the gravity equation for X ik as:

                                                     (V 1)(1J )
                          §                 ·[1D kT (V 1)]                               ª J D kT (V 1) º
                                                                                          «
 §       X ik         ·   ¨     pik         ¸                § k         § 4
                                                                                                            »
                                                                                      · · ¬ 1D kT (V 1) ¼ § Y k     ·
¨¨                   ¸¸   ¨                 ¸                ¨ tari exp ¨¨ ¦ E n Fni ¸¸ ¸
                                                                                   k
                                                                                                              ¨¨ k   ¸¸ , (20)
                 J        ¨ k *k      D T
                                       k
                                            ¸                ¨                          ¸
 © M i (Mi / wi )     ¹                                      ©           ©n 1         ¹¹                       ©M     ¹
                          ¨ N1 pi           ¸
                          ©                 ¹

where M k denotes the “market potential” of country k,10



10
   This term is the inverse of the “remoteness” variable derived by Chaney (2008). Redding and Venables (2004)
refer to (21) as “supplier access” in a monopolistic competition model with homogeneous firms. We are referring to
is as “market potential” from the buyer’s point of view.
                                                              19


                                                    (V 1)(1J )                                     ª J D kT (V 1) º
                    J                                                                                «                »
            §M · §                       D T · [1D T (V 1)] §                                    · 1D kT (V 1) »¼
                                          k            k
                                                                                 §4
                                                                                              k · «¬
M k { ¦ M i ¨ i ¸ ¨ pik       N1k pi*k         ¸                    ¨ tarik exp ¨¨ ¦    E n Fni ¸¸ ¸                     .           (21)
            © wi ¹ ¨©                          ¸                    ¨                              ¸
      i                                        ¹                    ©            ©n 1            ¹¹

The term M k is higher when there are more firms M i potentially selling to country k, and

when transport costs (which affect the c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices (21)) and fixed costs are lower. In

practice we obtain M k as a destination country fixed-effect when estimating the gravity

equation. Notice that the real expenditure (Y k / uv k ) which influences fixed costs does not

appear in (20) or (21), because a destination-specific change in fixed costs cancels out: given

total expenditure on imports Y k         ¦ i X ik , a uniform increase in fixed costs does not affect the
application of expenditure across source countries X ik . But we will find such a uniform change

in fixed costs has an important impact on the quality-adjusted prices.

         The corresponding solution for the quality-adjusted prices is:

                                                                          1
                                                                                               D kT                    E 0D kT
          §                                                 D kT ·1D kT (V 1)                                    
          ¨ pk   § *k k k k           §    4
                                                 k·
                                                      ·             ¸             §Y    k   · (1J ) §  Y k   ·        (1 J )
   Pik
          ¨ i    ¨ pi N1 N 2 tari exp ¨¨ ¦ E n Fni ¸¸ ¸             ¸             ¨¨ k ¸¸             ¨¨ k    ¸¸                 .   (22)
                 ¨                                    ¸
          ¨      ©                     ©n 1        ¹¹               ¸              ©M ¹               © uv    ¹
          ©                                                         ¹

We see that the quality-adjusted price depends on both the c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices as well as the

fixed-cost variables (including the ad valorem tariffs), and then depends on total import

expenditure Y k in two ways. On the one hand, higher expenditure leads to the entry of less-

efficient exporters, who produce lower quality leading to a higher quality-adjusted price. On the

other hand, higher real expenditure (Y k / uv k ) leads to higher fixed costs from (19) so that the

marginal exporter must be more efficient, leading to lower quality-adjusted prices. The strength

of these two opposing forces depends on the parameter E0. This parameter is not estimated from

the gravity equation so we must look to other data to identify it.
                                                               20

           Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) estimated a regression of the number of firms

exporting from France, ln N ik , on the log of real manufacturing imports from France across

various destination countries, obtaining an elasticity of 0.65.11 A similar regression on French

data is reported by Arkolakis (2010). This regression was repeated in Eaton, Kortum and Sotelo

(2012) for Brazil, France, Denmark and Uruguay, yielding an elasticity of 0.71 (or 0.62 with

country fixed effects). In a Melitz model with fixed costs specified as in (19), those elasticities

measure (1 – E0) so we obtain an estimate for E0 of about 0.35 for manufacturing as a whole.

           In our model, the coefficient of 0.65 linking the number of firms to market size implies

an estimate for E0 of less than 0.35, due to our modeling of fixed costs in (12) as depending on

the productivity of the cutoff exporter. To see this, start with (13) where N ik { M i (Mˆik / Mi )J

appearing on the right denotes the number (or mass) of exporters. This number is proportional to

total exports divided by those of the cutoff exporter, N ik v ( X ik / Xˆ ik ) . Then substitute cutoff

exports Xˆ ik from (12) into (13), and simplify to obtain:

                                                                                   E0                   1
                                     (1J ) J     § Xk   ·           § Yk    ·               § 4          ·
                               Nik              v ¨ ik   ¸¸   X ik   ¨¨ k    ¸¸          exp ¨ ¦ E n Fnik ¸ ,
                                                  ¨ f                                        ¨            ¸
                                                  © i     ¹           © uv    ¹              ©n 1         ¹


using (19). If the number of exporters has an elasticity of 0.65 with respect to in Y k , then since
                                                                       1J                                                 1J
exports have elasticity of unity it follows that 0.65                   J
                                                                                    1  E 0 , so that E 0       1  0.65    J
                                                                                                                                 .

Across our industry estimates, J ranges from about 2 to a very large number, so we see that E 0

will range from about zero up to 0.35. We proceed now with describing the estimation of all

other model parameters.




11
     This result is not reported in the published paper, and we thank Jonathan Eaton for informing us of it.
                                                   21

4. Data and Estimation

Data

        The primary dataset used is the United Nations’ Comtrade database. We compute the

bilateral f.o.b. unit values of traded goods using reports from the exporting country. By focusing

on the exporters’ reports we ensure that these unit values are calculated prior to the inclusion of

any costs of shipping the product. The bilateral c.i.f. unit values are calculated similarly using

importers’ trade reports. Since these unit values include the costs of shipping, we need only add

the tariff on the good to produce a tariff-inclusive c.i.f. unit value. To do this we obtain the ad

valorem tariffs associated with Most Favored Nation status or any preferential status from

TRAINS, which we have expanded upon using tariff schedules from the International Customs

Journal and the texts of preferential trade agreements obtained from the World Trade

Organization's website and other online sources. We provide further details in Appendix B.

        The independent variation in the importing country’s c.i.f. unit value and the exporting

country’s f.o.b. unit value is essential to identifying their distinct effects in the gravity equation.

But it must be admitted that there is a large amount of measurement error in these unit values

from the Comtrade database. In fact, it is not unusual for the c.i.f. unit value to be less than the

f.o.b. unit value (as can never occur in theory because the former exceeds the latter by transport

costs). As an initial step towards correcting for such measurement error, we omitted observations

where the ratio of the c.i.f. unit value reported by the importer and the f.o.b. unit value reported

by the exporter, for a given 4-digit SITC product and year, was less than 0.1 or exceeded 10. In

addition, we omitted such bilateral observations where the c.i.f. value of trade was less than

$50,000 in 2005, while adjusting for U.S. inflation so the cutoff was about $25,000 in 1984.
                                                               22

More generally, to reconcile the wide variation in the observed unit values with our model, we
                                                            k         *k
assume that the c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values, denoted by uvigt and uvigt , are related to the true

c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices by:

                          k            k         k       k              *k          *k     *k
                     ln uvigt     ln( pigt / tarigt )  uigt , and ln uvigt     ln pigt  uigt ,                  (23)

       k        *k
where uigt and uigt are the measurement errors that are independent of each other and have

variances V gk and V ig
                     *
                        , respectively. In other words, we are assuming that the measurement error

in the c.i.f. unit value for importer k does not depend on the source country i, while the

measurement error in the f.o.b. unit value for exporter i does not depend on the importer k, and

that these errors are independent of each other. We argue in Appendix C that our estimation

method is robust to this measurement error in the unit values, which ends up being absorbed by

importer and exporter fixed-effects in the estimation. But the errors must be independent for this

claim to hold, which is therefore an identifying assumption.


Estimation

           To estimate the gravity equation we model the mass of potential exporters in (16) as

depending on the estimated labor force Ligt involved in the production of exports of good g in

country i, together with country fixed effects:12

                                ln[ M igt (Migt / wigt )J ] G g 0 ln Ligt  G ig  H igt
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         ,                        (24)

        k
where H igt is a random error. In addition, we make explicit the ad valorem tariffs and unit values

using in our estimation by re-writing the net-of-tariff c.i.f. price as the import unit value
  k           k         k                                                      *k             *k
uvigt      ( pigt / tarigt ) , and the f.o.b. price as the export unit value uvigt           pigt . Using these in (20),



12                                                                             g             g
     Denoting sectors by g, we estimate the labor force in each sector by Lit { POPit ( X it / GDPit ) , or country
population times exports in sector g divided by country GDP.
                                                                      23

we readily obtain exports expressed as the difference between countries i and j selling to

destination k:


      k
ln X igt  ln X kjgt       Agk ª ln uvigt
                                       k
                                            ln uv kjgt  D gkT g ln uvigt
                                                                       *k           k º
                                                                            ln uv*jgt    G (ln Lgit  ln Lgjt )
                                «¬                                                     »¼ 0 g
                             4                                                                                          (25)
           G ig  G jg  ¦       Bgk E ng ( Fnik    Fnjk )  Cgk          k
                                                                     ln tarigt            k
                                                                                  ln tarigt       k
                                                                                                H igt    H kjgt ,
                            n 1

where:

               (V g  1)(1  J g )              J g  D gkT g (V g  1)                ª V g (1  J g ) º
      Agk {                           , Bgk {                             , C k
                                                                              g { E 5g «                       »  1.   (26)
              1  D gkT g (V g  1)                 1  D gkT g (V g  1)              «¬1  D gkT g (V g  1) »¼


           Three features of this estimating equation deserve attention. First, notice that the c.i.f.

unit values appear with the negative coefficient  Agk in this gravity equation, whereas the f.o.b.

unit values appear with a positive coefficient of AgkD gkT g , because they represent product quality

and higher quality leads to great demand. 13 The key to successful estimation will be to obtain

this sign pattern on the c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values, which we achieve by adapting the GMM

estimator from Feenstra (1994). As described in Appendix C, we add a simple supply

specification whereby the specific and iceberg trade costs depend on distance, ad valorem tariffs

and the quantity traded. Feenstra (1994) assumed that the supply shocks and demand shocks are

uncorrelated. That assumption seems unlikely to hold with unobserved quality, since a change in

quality could shift both supply and demand. But here, the demand errors and the supply errors

are the residuals after taking into account quality. So the assumption that they are uncorrelated

seems much more acceptable, and is the basis for the GMM estimation.

           Second, we have isolated one plus the ad valorem tariffs tarigk in (25)-(26) because this


13
     For the purpose of estimating (19), we simplify the analysis slightly by taking the time-average of the ratios of
real GDP in (9b), so that D gk depends on the SITC good g but not on time.
                                                              24


variable plays a special role in the estimation. In theory, the term E5 g appearing within Ckg is

unity, so that Ckg       Agk  Bgk , meaning that ad valorem tariffs have an impact through their effect

on the consumer price and on fixed costs. But in the estimation we allow for E5 g z 1 so that

tariffs can have a distinct impact on export flows. We hypothesize that tariff evasion can lead to

E5 g  1 , so that tariffs have a smaller impact in the data than indicated by the theory.

           The final challenge is that not all the parameter estimates are identified without additional

information. In particular, we estimate Bgk E ng in (25) but not these coefficients alone. If we do

not identify Bgk , then we cannot solve for V g and J g . We resolve this issue as in Chaney

(2008), by using estimates of ] gUS            J g / [D US
                                                        g T g (V g  1)] from regressions of firm rank


on size for each SITC sector in the U.S., where we further normalize D US
                                                                       g { 1.
                                                                              14
                                                                                 Then for other

countries, ] gk      J g / [D gk T g (V g  1)]  ] gk D gk   J g / [T g (V g  1)] ] gUS D US
                                                                                            g    ] gUS . It follows that

J g is obtained as ] gUST g (V g  1) . Substituting this into (25)-(26), we obtain an estimating

equation that is nonlinear in the parameters V g , T g and Og .

           In addition, it is difficult to identify Og from the gravity equation (25) alone. For this

reason, we rely instead on the estimates of Og that come from the f.o.b. price regressions

reported in section 2. In those regressions, we use preliminary estimates of V g and T g that come

from estimating (25) and (9b).15 Using these preliminary estimates, we estimate (9a) and (9b) to

obtain improved values for Og , as reported in section 2. These improved values are substituted

into (25) to obtain new estimates for V g and T g .


14
     We thank Thomas Chaney for providing these estimates for 3-digit SITC Rev. 3 sectors for the United States,
which we concorded to 3-digit SITC Rev. 2 sectors. The normalization D US                          k
                                                                       g { 1 is harmless because D g always

appears multiplied by T, so D US
                              g { 1 fixes the value for T in our estimates.
15
     In those preliminary estimates we constrain Og to be non-negative by estimating it as Og     P g2 , and find that the
median estimate is 0.005 with about one-third of the estimates across the SITC industries estimated at zero.
                                                          25


5. Parameter Estimates

         Estimation is performed for each 4-digit SITC Revision 2 good (which we also refer to as

an industry) using bilateral trade between all available country pairs during 1984-2008. There are

2.4 million observations with data on both the c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values, and excluding those

goods with fewer than 50 observations, we perform the GMM estimation on 783 industries as

shown in the first row of Table 1.16 The median estimate of V g is 6.39, not counting seven

industries with an inadmissible value less than unity; the median estimate of J g is 8.85, not

counting the same seven industries with an inadmissible negative value; and the median estimate

of T g is 0.64, not counting one case with an inadmissible value greater than unity. For

inadmissible values or for SITC industries with fewer than 50 observations, we replace the

parameter estimates with the median estimate from the same 3-digit or 2-digit SITC industry,

after which we find the median estimates shown in the last row of Table 1 for 925 industries.

         The frequency distribution of parameter estimates are illustrated in Figures 3-5. Our

median estimate for the elasticity of substitution V g is higher than found by Broda and Weinstein

(2006) for the United States. We have found that our higher value comes from using worldwide

trade data and correcting for quality, and from using an empirical specification that is more

robust to measurement error since we do not take differences over time and instead include

source-country fixed effects in our estimation of (25).17 Our median estimate for the Pareto

parameter J is quite close to that reported by Eaton and Kortum (2002), who also considered

bilateral trade between many countries. 18



16
   In each industry we use only the most common unit of measurement, which is nearly always kilograms.
17
    Destination country fixed effects are implicitly included, too, because (19) is specified as the difference between
countries i and j exporting to country k.
18
   This median estimate is higher, however, than the recent results of Simonovska and Waugh (2011, 2012).
                                                  26




                                Table 1: Median Parameter Estimates

                                               Number of
GMM Estimation Method with:                      SITC             V           J       T
                                               industries
Dropping SITC4 with < 50 observations             783            6.39        7.95   0.63

No. of inadmissible parameters                     8              7           7       1

Filling in SITC4 with < 50 observations           925            6.43        8.85   0.64
   or inadmissible parameters




                          Figure 3: Frequency Distribution for Estimates of Vg
                     (Note: Estimates are right-censored for presentation purposes only)
              .2
              .15
           Density
            .1.05
              0




                     0           5           10             15          20           25
                                                   sigma
                                            27


               Figure 4: Frequency Distribution for Estimates of Jg
          (Note: Estimates are right-censored for presentation purposes only)



     .2
     .15
 Density
 .1  .05
     0




            0              5           10                15     20              25
                                            gamma



                  Figure 5: Frequency Distribution for Estimates of Tg
   5
   4  3
Density
   2
   1
   0




             .2                .4                   .6          .8                   1
                                                 theta
                                                                  28


       Turning to T g , Crozet, Head and Meyer (2012) are the only other authors to estimate the

elasticity of quality with respect to inputs. They use ratings of wines to obtain an estimate of 0.29

for Champagne, which is at the lower end of our estimates shown in Figure 3. However, our

estimates for T g depend on the normalization we have adopted for D gk , namely, that D US
                                                                                        g { 1. If


we had instead normalized D gk { 1 for a lower-income country so that D US
                                                                        g ! 1, then all of our


estimates of T g would be correspondingly lower.


6. Indexes of Quality-Adjusted Prices and Quality

       Quality-adjusted prices are shown by (22). When comparing two exporters i and j selling

to the same destination k, we write that expression while adding the good and time subscripts as,

                                                   1                                                     D gkT g
               § k          D gkT g   ·   [1D gkT g (V g 1)]   § tar k exp                       ·[1D gkT g (V g 1)]
                                                                                 ¦ n 1 Engt Fnik
                                                                                    4
          k              *k
        Pigt   ¨ pigt / pigt          ¸                          ¨ igt                             ¸
               ¨              k       ¸                          ¨ k                               ¸                     . (27)
                                                                                 ¦ n 1 Engt Fnjk
                                                                                    4
         k
        Pjgt   ¨ p k / p*k D gT g     ¸                          ¨ tar jgt exp                     ¸
               © jgt      jgt         ¹                          ©                                 ¹

                                        k
Notice that the market potential term M gt appearing in (22) cancels out when computing the

ratio, which means that this term will not enter our calculation of relative quality-adjusted export

prices. Likewise, the market size term (Ygtk / uv gt
                                                  k
                                                     ) which influences fixed costs from (19) does

not appear and the terms N1kg and N 2k g do not appear, since both exporters are selling to the same

destination market.

       The calculation of quality-adjusted prices on the import side is slightly more complicated.

If we compare a given exporter i selling to two destinations k and l, then the ratio of (22) would

involve two different taste parameters D gk and D gl , and two market potential terms M gt
                                                                                        k
                                                                                           and
                                                             29

  l
M gt . The latter are estimated as destination-country fixed effects in the gravity equation (see

Appendix C), and are particularly prone to absorbing measurement error in any of the unit-values

included there. We can avoid this problem by instead using (16) to evaluate the quality-adjusted

prices, where the term M igt (Migt / wigt )J appearing there cancels out in the ratio. The problem of


having two different taste parameters D gk and D gl is resolved by using an average value D g for

all countries importing the good g.19 Then we measure the ratio of (16) for a given exporter i

selling to two destinations k and l as:

                                                                                                  D gT g
                                              §                         E0 g                  · (1J g )
                                                               § k ·
                                            ·¨ X k / N k tar k ¨ Ygt ¸ exp § E F k · ¸
                                                                                   4
              § k
                                                                               ¨¨ ¦ ngt ni ¸¸ ¸
                                   D gT g
       k
     Pigt     ¨ pigt         *k
                     / N1kg pigt            ¸ ¨ igt    2 g igt
                                                               ¨ uv gt
                                                                    k ¸
              ¨                             ¸¨                 ©       ¹        ©n 1       ¹¸
                                                                         E                                 (28)
       l
     Pigt     ¨ l                  D gT g   ¸¨                 § l ·       0 g                ¸
                                            ¸ ¨ X l N l tar l ¨ Ygt ¸ exp §¨ E F l ·¸ ¸
                                                                                   4

              ©
                             *l
              ¨ pigt / N1lg pigt
                                            ¹ ¨ igt /  2 g igt
                                                               ¨ uv gt
                                                                    l ¸         ¨ ¦ ngt ni ¸ ¸
                                              ©                ©       ¹        © n 1       ¹¹


            To implement (27) and (28), we use the import c.i.f. unit value inclusive of one plus the
                     k       k                k                                 *k              *k
ad valorem tariff, uvigt tarigt , to replace pigt , and the f.o.b. unit value uvigt to replace pigt . Also,

                                                   k
we collect terms involving the tariff variable tarigt , which appears within the tariff-inclusive

        k
prices pigt and multiplying the fixed costs. Just as in our estimation of the gravity equation (25)-

(26), we allow the coefficient on the tariff to differ from its theoretical value using the estimated

coefficient E5 g . For consistency with the import side we also used the average D g for the export

side in (27), though this has a minimal impact on the export results.


19
  According to Fisher and Shell (1972), with changing preferences (in this case changing between countries), a
suitable approach is to compute a geometric mean of price indexes that first uses one country’s preferences and then
uses the other’s. We have not (yet) implemented the Fisher-Shell approach for our indexes, but instead we evaluate
quality-adjusted prices in (27)-(28) using an average preference for quality D g .
                                                          30

                                 k                                                      k
        The c.i.f. unit values uvigt and the quality-adjusted unit-values denoted by UVigt ,

obtained from (27)-(28), are then aggregated from the 4-digit SITC to the Broad Economic

Categories (BEC) to obtain overall indexes of quality and quality-adjusted prices of exports and

imports for each country and year in our dataset. The formula we shall use for aggregation is the

so-called GEKS method, 20 which is a many-country generalization of Fisher Ideal indexes, as

we shall describe. What we add to this method is a two-stage aggregation procedure that arises

naturally from our trade data.


Indexes for Export Prices and Quality

        In the first stage, for each 4-digit SITC product g we aggregate over all partner countries

in trade, i.e. over all destination countries for an exporter and all source countries for an

importer. Consider first the problem from the exporters’ point of view. The unit-value ratio

    k        k
(uv git / uv gjt ) compares countries i and j selling to k, from we shall construct an index of relative

export prices. That is, we compare the unit values of countries i and j only when they are selling

to the same country k: essentially, we are treating products sold to different countries as entirely

different goods and avoid comparing their prices in that case.

        Suppose that exporting countries i and j both sell the 4-digit SITC product g to k=1,…,Cij

destination markets. The Laspeyres and Paasche price indexes of these export unit values are:

                           ¦ uvgit                              ¦ uvgit
                               Cij k k                              Cijk k
                    L
                                       qgjt              A
                                                                           qgit
                  Pgijt   { Ck 1            ,   and,   Pgijt   { Ck 1           .                          (29)
                           ¦ k 1 uvgjt qgjt
                                ij k k
                                                                ¦ k 1uvgjt qgit
                                                                     ijk k




20
  Named after Gini, Eltetö and Köves, and Szulc. We refer the reader to Balk (2008) and Deaton and Heston (2010)
for a modern treatment and details of these historical references. While the Fisher Ideal index is not “exact” for a
CES utility function, it belongs to the class of superlative indexes, and Diewert (1978) argues that these indexes
approximate each other quite closely. We employ it here because it is commonly used by statistical agencies,
including the ICP and PWT, which also use the GEKS generalization.
                                                            31

                       k        k
In these expressions, qgit and qgjt are the quantity exported by countries i and j to country k.
                                                                       k
Alternatively, we could instead use the quality-adjusted unit values UVgit in these formulas,
                                          k           k k                       k k
in which case the quantities are instead Qgit with uv git qgit                UVgit Qgit and likewise for country j,

so the export values are not affected by the quality adjustment. Regardless of whether the unit

values or quality-adjusted unit values are used, the Laspeyres and Paasche index can always

                                                               k
be re-written as a weighted average of their ratios. Letting s gjt                      k k
                                                                                     uv gjt qgjt / ¦ k uv gjt
                                                                                                          k k
                                                                                                              qgjt denote

                                                                      L
the export shares for country j, the Laspeyres index in (29) equals Pgijt                      ¦ k sgjt
                                                                                                    k       k
                                                                                                        (uv git      k
                                                                                                                / uv gjt ).

Likewise, the Paasche index is a weighted average of the unit-value ratios using the export shares

  k
s git of country i. In either case, we can alternatively use the ratio of quality-adjusted unit values,

   k       k
(UVgit / UVgjt ) . In this way, we obtain the Laspeyres and Paasche indexes for both unit values

and quality-adjusted unit values.

           The Fisher Ideal price index is the geometric mean of the Laspeyres and Paasche indexes,

  F           L     A 0.5
Pgijt     ( Pgijt Pgijt ) . Then the GEKS price index of country i relative to k is computed by taking

the mean over all Fisher indexes for exports of country i relative to exports of j times the Fisher

index for exports of j relative to exports of k:

                                                            C                     1/ C
                                                GEKS
                                               Pgikt {               F
                                                                    Pgijt   F
                                                                          Pgjkt          ,                           (30)
                                                            j 1

       F
with Pgiit { 1 for i =1,…,C. In most applications, the resulting GEKS indexes are transitive.21 That

property does not necessarily hold in our case, however, because two countries may not export the

4-digit SITC product to the same set of partners, so that the mean in (30) is actually taken over only


21                                            GEKS         GEKS                                    GEKS    GEKS      GEKS
     This is shown from (29) by noting that Pjkt     1 / Pkjt     , so that we readily compute Pikt       Pkmt     Pimt     .
                                                          32

the set of exporters j that share some common destination markets with both countries i and k.

Despite the fact that transitivity may not hold, the GEKS transformation of the Fisher Ideal

indexes in (30) is useful because it compares the export prices of countries i and k (selling to the

same destination markets) via all possible indirect comparisons with other exporters. 22

         This GEKS aggregation is done for each 4-digit SITC product. We trim one percent of

the estimated quality-adjusted price indexes (i.e. the upper and lower 0.5 percent) and then

proceed with the second stage aggregation over the SITC products g. We again use Fisher Ideal

indexes – now computed by summing over products rather than over partner countries as in (29)

– together with the GEKS transformation. In this second step we choose the United States as the

comparison country k, so we end up with indexes of unit values, or quality-adjusted unit-values,

for each exporting country and year relative to the United States. These indexes are computed for

all exports and for the one-digit Broad Economic Categories (BEC). The BEC distinguishes food

and beverages, other consumer goods, capital, fuels, intermediate inputs, and transport

equipment, so this breakdown of sectors should be useful for many researchers interested in

international prices.

         We refer to the GEKS index of unit values as the “price index” and the GEKS index of

quality-adjusted unit values as the “quality-adjusted price index”. Our final step is to divide the

former by the latter – for each country, year and BEC– to obtain the index of export quality.23


Indexes for Import Prices and Quality


22
   To maximize the number of indirect comparisons, for each 4-digit SITC product and year we chose the base
country k as the exporter having the largest number of destination markets times its total exports to all of them.
23
   Since our indexes of prices and quality-adjusted prices are both measured as ratios relative to the United States,
the same is true of quality. For expositional convenience in our table and graphs, we re-normalize these series so
they are measured as ratios relative to their (geometric) means, so the world average price, quality-adjusted price,
and quality are all unity. When the quality-adjusted prices are incorporated into the next generation of PWT, then
time-series variation is introduced by re-normalizing them again so the U.S. series follows the national accounts
prices for U.S. import and exports at the BEC 1-digit level (see Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2012)."
                                                        33

        Our treatment of imports is similar to our treatment of exports, so we only highlight

the differences. In the first stage, the Laspeyres and Paasche indexes are computed by summing

over source countries i that importers k and l both purchase from. So we compare the import

prices of countries k and l only if they come from the same exporter i. As we found earlier, the

Laspeyres and Paasche indexes can be expressed as share-weighted averages of the unit-value

ratio, or quality-adjusted unit-value ratio, for countries k relative to l. That is, the Laspeyres

                                k       l
and Paasche indexes depend on uvigt / uvigt , or alternatively on the quality-adjusted unit value

   k       l
UVigt / UVigt . We then compute the Fisher Ideal indexes and perform the GEKS transformation,

resulting in an index of the import prices for country k relative to a base country m for each SITC

product.24 In the second stage, we aggregate over products g to obtain indexes of import prices,

and quality-adjusted prices, relative to the United States for each BEC category. Dividing the

former by the latter, we obtain the import index of quality.


Empirical Results

        Figures 6 to 8 summarize our results for 2007. We aggregate raw export prices for each

4-digit SITC product into an aggregate price index for exports, with the average export price

index across countries normalized to 1. We then similarly aggregate our quality estimates, and

plot these indexes for 2007 for about 200 countries in Figure 6. The results broadly conform with

our priors. Developed countries tend to export more expensive goods (top panel), and we

estimate these goods to be of higher than average quality (second panel). The quality adjusted-

price (price divided by quality), about which we have less strong priors, tends to be only slightly

higher for developed countries (bottom panel).

24
  Analogous to the export side, for each 4-digit SITC product and year we chose the base country l as the importer
having the largest number of source countries times its total imports from all of them.
                                                                                    34


Figure 6: Exports - Raw Prices, Quality, and Quality Adjusted Prices in 2007

                                                                      Relative Export Prices, Unadjusted




                                                 1.8
            Raw Export Prices, World Average = 1
            .6   .8     1     1.2   1.4   1.6




                                                                6               8                   10         12
                                                                             Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)



                                                                            Relative Export Quality
                                                     1.8
            Relative Export Quality, World Average = 1
             .6      .8     1    1.2    1.4   1.6




                                                                6               8                   10         12
                                                                             Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)



                                                                    Relative Export Prices, Quality Adjusted
            Quality Adjusted Export Prices, World Average = 1
              .8         .9         1        1.1       1.2




                                                                6               8                   10         12
                                                                             Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)
                                                                                        35


Figure 7: Relative Import Unit Values, Quality, and Quality Adjusted Prices in 2007
                                                                          Relative Import Prices, Unadjusted




                                                    1.4
                Raw Import Prices, World Average = 1
                      .8         1      .61.2




                                                                    6               8                   10         12
                                                                                 Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)



                                                                                Relative Import Quality
                                                         1.4
                 Relative Import Quality, World Average = 1
                .6         .8        1         1.2




                                                                    6               8                   10         12
                                                                                 Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)



                                                                        Relative Import Prices, Quality Adjusted
                Quality Adjusted Import Prices, World Average = 1
                .6          .8          1         1.2        1.4




                                                                    6               8                   10         12
                                                                                 Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)
                                                  36

        We illustrate a similar exercise for import prices in Figure 7. Developed countries import

more expensive items (top panel) that are of higher quality (second panel). Quality-adjusted

import prices (third panel) increase noticeably with the importing country's GDP per capita. This

pattern is due to an interaction of preferences for quality and the rising marginal cost of

producing quality. Rich countries tend to prefer higher quality goods – this is reflected in our

estimates of Og in equation (9a) – which enter the import quality-adjusted price in (28) via N1kg

and N 2kg . But our estimates of Tg between zero and unity means, from (4), that there is an

amplified effect of quality on increasing the marginal cost, so that higher quality induced by a

preference for quality leads to a higher quality-adjusted price.

        It is evident the variation in quality-adjusted import prices in Figure 7 is much greater

than for export prices in Figure 6. Numerically, this occurs because the preference for quality
                                                               k
affects import prices in (28), along with bilateral imports X igt and total import expenditure Ygtk ,

none of which enter the export-side formula in (27). The economic intuition for this result comes

because relative import prices are obtained by comparing a given exporter i selling to two

destinations k and l. In our model, any difference in the f.o.b. price from a given exporting firm

must be due to quality. As we noted earlier in (10), log quality is only a fraction of the log f.o.b.

price, with the remaining difference in f.o.b. prices in (11) attributed to the quality-adjusted

price. This pattern is illustrated on the import side in Figure 7.

        For exports, we instead compare two countries i and j selling to a given destination

market k, and the intuition is different. Now the differences in the exporter firms f.o.b. prices can

be due to costs or quality. But because they are selling to the same market, and our estimated

elasticities of substitution V are quite high, there is little scope for average quality-adjusted prices

to differ by exporter, at least when there are meaningful amounts of exports. Hence, most of the

difference in price is attributed to quality, as shown in Figure 6.
                                                                                            37


             Figure 8: Terms of Trade 2007 - Unadjusted and Quality Adjusted
                                                                                 Terms of Trade, Unadjusted




                     Terms of Trade, Unadjusted, World Average = 1
                         .6       .8       1      1.2      1.4




                                                                           6            8                   10    12
                                                                                     Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)



                                                                               Terms of Trade, Quality Adjusted
                     Terms of Trade, Quality Adjusted, World Average = 1
                           .8       .9        1        1.1     1.2




                                                                           6            8                   10    12
                                                                                     Log GDP Per Capita (PPP)




       Figure 8 shows terms of trade estimates for 2007. Terms of trade estimates constructed

using raw export and import prices fluctuate substantially across countries, and lie between 0.52

and 1.49. Terms of trade estimates constructed from quality-adjusted prices move in a much

narrower band, between 0.80 and 1.24. Despite the narrowness of this band, these quality-

adjusted terms of trade measures are sufficiently different from unity to produce meaningful

differences between output-based and expenditure-based real GDP estimates for many countries

in the PWT (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2012). Notably, the terms of trade decline in real
                                                 38

GDP per capita, as wealthier countries are trading higher-quality goods at higher quality-adjusted

prices, but this effect is much stronger for imports than for exports.

       We report estimates for aggregate export quality for 1987, 1997 and 2007 in Table 2 for

the 52 largest traders measured by their average value of exports from 1984 to 2008. Swiss

exports have the highest quality, on average 68% higher than the world average in 2007,

followed by Finland and Israel with quality 39 and 37 percent higher, respectively, than the

average. Japan, the U.S. and other wealthy European countries usually have 15 to 30 percent

higher export quality than the average. Of note are the recent quality increases for several

Eastern European countries that have joined the EU, especially those proximate to Germany:

Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. Asian countries that rapidly industrialized in the

1970's – Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan – exhibit improving export quality but

with the exception of Singapore still lag average export quality. Poorer large Asian countries

have notably lower quality, with Indian and Chinese export quality respectively 13 percent and

34 percent lower than average levels. Vietnam and Indonesia do little better, with quality lagging

average levels in 2007 by 13 and 21 percent respectively.

       It is interesting that China's relative export quality appears to have declined despite

substantial economic progress. This does not imply that its absolute export quality has declined,

since other countries may have raised quality. China’s substantial exports of relatively low-

quality products may have in fact caused most other countries to focus on higher quality goods;

see Amiti and Khandelwal (2009) for a discussion. We can find plenty of examples in the

detailed data of rising relative quality for China, such as “Computers” rising from 0.27 in 1987 to

0.35 in 1997 and 0.67 in 2007, or “Coarse Ceramic Housewares” (dinnerware), rising from 0.36

in 1987 and 1997 to 0.51 in 2007, or “Footwear”, rising from 0.22 in 1987 to 0.49 in 1997 and
                               Table2:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                                         QualityRankings,AllGoods
                                     Rank                             NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                1987       1997       2007 Change               1987       1997        2007 Change
Switzerland                1          1          1           0          1.53       1.58        1.68       0.15
Finland                    3          5          2           1          1.24      1.32         1.39       0.15
Israel                    16          4          3          13          1.15       1.37        1.37       0.21
Austria                    2          9          4          Ͳ2          1.28       1.24        1.32       0.04
UnitedKingdom            15          7          5          10          1.16       1.31        1.31       0.15
Ireland                    9          6          6           3          1.19       1.32        1.31       0.12
Sweden                     7          2          7           0          1.21       1.38        1.27       0.06
France                     5        13           8          Ͳ3          1.23       1.20        1.26       0.04
Germany*                   4        10           9          Ͳ5          1.23       1.22        1.25       0.01
Denmark                    8          8         10          Ͳ2          1.20       1.27        1.24       0.04
Japan                     12          3         11           1          1.16       1.37        1.24       0.07
USA                        6        15          12          Ͳ6          1.22       1.19        1.22       0.00
Australia                 19        12          13           6          1.09       1.20        1.21       0.11
NewZealand               18        14          14           4          1.15       1.20        1.19       0.04
Norway                    11        18          15          Ͳ4          1.16       1.16        1.19       0.03
Canada                    25        16          16           9          1.01       1.16        1.18       0.17
Italy                     13        11          17          Ͳ4          1.16       1.22        1.18       0.02
Belgium                   17        19          18          Ͳ1          1.15       1.13        1.15       0.01
Netherlands               21        20          19           2          1.08       1.11        1.14       0.07
Portugal                  22        25          20           2          1.07       1.06        1.14       0.07
Nigeria                   33        26          21          12          0.94       1.05        1.12       0.18
Chile                     29        22          22           7          0.96       1.11        1.11       0.15
Spain                     30        17          23           7          0.96       1.16        1.11       0.15
Algeria                   23        31          24          Ͳ1          1.04       1.00        1.10       0.06
Singapore                 27        21          25           2          0.98       1.11        1.06       0.08
Hungary                   46        35          26          20          0.81       0.95        1.05       0.25
SouthAfrica              36        30          27           9          0.91       1.01        1.03       0.13
SaudiArabia              20        32          28          Ͳ8          1.09       1.00        1.01      Ͳ0.07
Slovakia*                 50        48          29          21          0.70       0.82        1.01       0.31
Mexico                    38        43          30           8          0.89       0.87        1.01       0.12
CzechRep.*               51        42          31          20          0.70       0.88        1.00       0.30
Colombia                  24        24          32          Ͳ8          1.02       1.07        0.97      Ͳ0.04
Russia*                   43        40          33          10          0.84       0.88        0.97       0.14
UAE                       10        23          34         Ͳ24          1.17       1.07        0.97      Ͳ0.21
Turkey                    31        33          35          Ͳ4          0.96       0.99        0.95      Ͳ0.01
Argentina                 40        27          36           4          0.88       1.04        0.95       0.07
Rep.ofKorea             37        29          37           0          0.90       1.01        0.94       0.05
Philippines               42        37          38           4          0.86      0.92         0.94       0.08
Romania                   48        50          39           9          0.79       0.78        0.94       0.14
Iran                      14        34          40         Ͳ26          1.16       0.97        0.94      Ͳ0.22
Brazil                    28        28          41         Ͳ13          0.97       1.02        0.93      Ͳ0.04
Poland                    52        46          42          10          0.68       0.85        0.92       0.24
Thailand                  45        41          43           2          0.83      0.88         0.90       0.07
Malaysia                  35        45          44          Ͳ9          0.91       0.86        0.89      Ͳ0.02
HongKong                 41        49          45          Ͳ4          0.87       0.81        0.88       0.01
VietNam                  39        36          46          Ͳ7          0.88       0.94        0.87      Ͳ0.01
India                     34        39          47         Ͳ13          0.92       0.91        0.87      Ͳ0.05
Venezuela                 32        44          48         Ͳ16          0.96       0.86        0.86      Ͳ0.09
Taiwan                    47        47          49          Ͳ2          0.79       0.84        0.86       0.07
Ukraine*                  44        51          50          Ͳ6          0.84       0.74        0.80      Ͳ0.03
Indonesia                 26        38          51         Ͳ25          0.99       0.92        0.79      Ͳ0.20
China                     49        52          52          Ͳ3          0.76       0.69        0.66      Ͳ0.10
Mean:                                                                   1.01       1.06        1.07
StandardDeviation:                                                     0.18       0.19        0.19
(*1987dataarefromWestGermany,Czechoslovakia,Czechoslovakia,USSRandUSSRrespectively)
                                                 39

0.84 in 2007. But there are an almost equal number of examples of falling relative quality. At the

SITC 4-digit level the median quality estimate for China has risen modestly from 0.55 in 1987 to

0.57 in 1997 and 0.61 in 2007. What is working against China in aggregate are the weights

applied to items due to compositional shifts in China’s exports. In 1987, 62 percent of China’s

exports were in BEC categories 1 through 3: Food, Industrial Supplies, and Fuels. China’s

measured quality was much closer to average levels for these products, varying from 0.85 for

Food to 0.99 for Fuels. By 1997 these exports had declined to 35 percent of China’s exports, and

to just 27 percent by 2007. China’s exports at first were mostly re-oriented towards consumer

goods (BEC 6), with that share rising from 30 percent in 1987 to 44 percent in 1997, but these

declined back to 27 percent in 2007. The more prolonged re-orientation was towards capital

goods and parts (BEC 4), rising from 3 percent of China’s exports in 1987 to 17 percent in 1997

and 39 percent in 2007. It is in capital goods and parts where China’s relative export quality has

always been lowest, between 36 and 52 percent of average levels. China’s re-allocation from

sectors of relatively high quality towards sectors with relatively low quality is also helping to

mask the quality improvements that we often observe as consumers.

       Tables 3 through 8 report export quality results for the top-20 exporters in each 1-digit

Broad Economic Category (BEC). With a few notable exceptions, the pattern for aggregate

quality holds in each of the BEC categories: rich countries tend to have high quality in all BEC

categories, while poor countries tend to have notably lower quality. The main exceptions are in

Table 5 for BEC 3: Fuels and Lubricants, where there is a less clear relationship between export

quality and the exporter's level of development. The recent improvement in Eastern European

quality is very apparent in their transport equipment exports. China’s declining aggregate relative

quality also appears in BEC 1: Food and Beverages and BEC 2: Industrial Supplies. China's
                               Table3:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                                QualityRankings,BEC1:FoodandBeverages
                                      Rank                            NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987      1997       2007 Change               1987      1997        2007 Change
France                       3         1         1            2          1.20      1.26        1.41       0.21
UnitedKingdom               4         2         2            2          1.18      1.25        1.36       0.18
Australia                   10         4         3            7          1.09      1.20        1.36       0.27
Ireland                      2         5         4           Ͳ2          1.20      1.20        1.34       0.14
Italy                        8         7         5            3          1.14      1.13        1.23       0.09
Denmark                      1         3         6           Ͳ5          1.24      1.21        1.21      Ͳ0.03
Germany*                     5       11          7           Ͳ2          1.17      1.10        1.19       0.01
Netherlands                 11       15          8            3          1.07      1.06        1.18       0.11
Belgium                      7         8         9           Ͳ2          1.14      1.11        1.17       0.03
USA                          9         6        10           Ͳ1          1.12      1.14        1.16       0.04
NewZealand                  6       10         11           Ͳ5          1.16      1.10        1.15      Ͳ0.01
Spain                       15       12         12            3          0.94      1.08        1.12       0.18
Canada                      14         9        13            1          1.01      1.10        1.11       0.10
Malaysia                    16       13         14            2          0.91      1.07        1.01       0.10
Mexico                      17       19         15            2          0.89      0.88        1.01       0.11
Brazil                      13       17         16           Ͳ3          1.02      1.03        0.92      Ͳ0.10
Thailand                    20       16         17            3          0.77     1.04         0.90       0.13
Indonesia                   12       14         18           Ͳ6          1.02      1.07        0.85      Ͳ0.17
Argentina                   19       20         19            0          0.80      0.87        0.85       0.06
China                       18       18         20           Ͳ2          0.85      0.95        0.82      Ͳ0.03
Mean:                                                                    1.05      1.09        1.12
StandardDeviation:                                                      0.14      0.11        0.18
(*1987dataarefromWestGermany)

                               Table4:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                                 QualityRankings,BEC2:IndustrialSupplies
                                      Rank                             NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987      1997       2007 Change               1987       1997        2007 Change
Switzerland                  1         2         1            0          1.61       1.53        1.52      Ͳ0.09
Japan                        2         1         2            0          1.61       1.71        1.51      Ͳ0.09
UnitedKingdom               5         3         3            2          1.28       1.37        1.37       0.09
France                       7         8         4            3          1.25       1.21        1.28       0.02
Sweden                       3         4         5           Ͳ2          1.32       1.30        1.27      Ͳ0.05
USA                          9         7         6            3          1.21       1.22        1.27       0.06
Austria                      4       10          7           Ͳ3          1.31       1.20        1.27      Ͳ0.04
Germany*                     8       11          8            0          1.25       1.18        1.26       0.02
Italy                        6         5         9           Ͳ3          1.26       1.25        1.22      Ͳ0.03
HongKong                   13         6        10            3          1.11       1.25        1.22       0.11
Netherlands                 10       15         11           Ͳ1          1.14       1.08        1.18       0.04
Spain                       16       16         12            4          1.02       1.07        1.16       0.14
Canada                      17       12         13            4          1.00       1.14        1.14       0.14
Australia                   11       14         14           Ͳ3          1.13       1.09        1.14       0.01
Rep.ofKorea               12         9        15           Ͳ3          1.12       1.20        1.14       0.02
Belgium                     15       17         16           Ͳ1          1.07       1.02        1.09       0.02
Taiwan                      14       13         17           Ͳ3          1.10       1.12        1.04      Ͳ0.06
Brazil                      18       18         18            0          0.99       1.02        0.98      Ͳ0.01
Russia*                     20       19         19            1          0.77       0.87        0.97       0.20
China                       19       20         20           Ͳ1          0.86       0.84        0.78      Ͳ0.07
Mean:                                                                    1.17       1.18        1.19
StandardDeviation:                                                      0.21      0.20         0.17
(*1987dataarefromWestGermanyandUSSRrespectively)
                                 Table5:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                                  QualityRankings,BEC3:FuelsandLubricants
                                        Rank                            NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987        1997       2007 Change               1987      1997        2007 Change
USA                          2           1          1           1          1.16     1.21         1.25       0.10
UnitedKingdom               8           5          2           6          1.05     1.11         1.16       0.11
SaudiArabia                 4           7          3           1          1.10     1.04         1.14       0.03
Netherlands                 11         10           4           7          1.03     1.02         1.08       0.05
Australia                    9           2          5           4          1.05     1.13         1.08       0.03
Oman                         1           9          6          Ͳ5          1.35     1.02         1.06      Ͳ0.30
UAE                          5           4          7          Ͳ2          1.08     1.12         1.04      Ͳ0.04
Algeria                      3           8          8          Ͳ5          1.12     1.03         1.03      Ͳ0.09
Nigeria                     20           6          9          11          0.84      1.08        1.01       0.17
Malaysia                    10           3        10            0          1.04     1.13         1.00      Ͳ0.05
Iraq                         7         16         11           Ͳ4          1.05     0.91         0.98      Ͳ0.07
Russia*                     17         18         12            5          0.95     0.91         0.94      Ͳ0.01
Mexico                      16         17         13            3          0.95     0.91         0.92      Ͳ0.03
Canada                      18         12         14            4          0.93     0.99         0.92      Ͳ0.01
Venezuela                   19         20         15            4          0.90      0.85        0.91       0.01
Norway                      12         11         16           Ͳ4          1.02     1.01         0.90      Ͳ0.12
Iran                        13         19         17           Ͳ4          1.01     0.88         0.90      Ͳ0.11
Qatar                       15         14         18           Ͳ3          1.00     0.96         0.89      Ͳ0.10
Kuwait                       6         15         19          Ͳ13          1.06     0.94         0.87      Ͳ0.19
Indonesia                   14         13         20           Ͳ6          1.01     0.98         0.86      Ͳ0.15
Mean:                                                                      1.04     1.01         1.00
StandardDeviation:                                                        0.11     0.10         0.11
(*1987dataarefromUSSR)

                               Table6:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                               QualityRankings,BEC4:CapitalGoodsandParts
                                       Rank                           NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987      1997       2007 Change               1987      1997        2007 Change
Switzerland                 1           1         1           0          1.89     1.87         1.70      Ͳ0.19
Canada                      2           4         2           0          1.40     1.38         1.41       0.01
Ireland                     4           3         3           1          1.26     1.47         1.34       0.08
Sweden                      7           2         4           3          1.22     1.49         1.32       0.11
Germany*                    6           7         5           1          1.25     1.23         1.24       0.00
USA                         5           6         6          Ͳ1          1.25     1.26         1.23      Ͳ0.02
UnitedKingdom              8           5         7           1          1.12     1.30         1.22       0.11
Netherlands                 9         11          8           1          1.11     1.16         1.14       0.03
Belgium                    10           8         9           1          1.06     1.23         1.14       0.07
France                      3         10         10          Ͳ7          1.30     1.19         1.12      Ͳ0.19
Japan                      11           9        11           0          0.95     1.21         1.06       0.11
Italy                      12         13         12           0          0.94     1.00         1.02       0.08
Singapore                  15         12         13           2          0.87     1.01         0.98       0.11
Mexico                     13         15         14          Ͳ1          0.91     0.75         0.97       0.06
Malaysia                   16         16         15           1          0.84     0.72         0.90       0.05
Rep.ofKorea              18         14         16           2          0.55      0.80        0.88       0.33
Thailand                   14         17         17          Ͳ3          0.90     0.72         0.81      Ͳ0.09
Taiwan                     20         18         18           2          0.45     0.54         0.74       0.29
HongKong                  17         19         19          Ͳ2          0.59     0.50         0.72       0.13
China                      19         20         20          Ͳ1          0.49     0.36         0.52       0.03
Mean:                                                                    1.02     1.06         1.07
StandardDeviation:                                                      0.35     0.38         0.27
(*1987dataarefromWestGermany)
                               Table7:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                            QualityRankings,BEC5:TransportEquipmentandParts
                                       Rank                           NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987       1997       2007 Change              1987       1997       2007 Change
Austria                      7          2          1          6          1.22      1.41        1.34       0.11
Sweden                       1          1          2         Ͳ1          1.46      1.55        1.33      Ͳ0.12
UnitedKingdom               5          3          3          2          1.27      1.39        1.31       0.04
Spain                      12         12           4          8          0.93      1.06        1.27       0.34
Canada                       3         4           5         Ͳ2          1.28      1.30        1.26      Ͳ0.02
Hungary                    19         15           6        13           0.64       0.92       1.25       0.60
Belgium                      9        10           7          2          1.13      1.09        1.23       0.10
Germany*                     2          7          8         Ͳ6          1.43      1.21        1.21      Ͳ0.22
USA                          4          6          9         Ͳ5          1.27      1.23        1.20      Ͳ0.07
France                       8          5        10          Ͳ2          1.22      1.24        1.19      Ͳ0.03
Italy                        6          8        11          Ͳ5          1.23      1.19        1.18      Ͳ0.05
Netherlands                10         13         12          Ͳ2          1.08      1.02        1.12       0.03
Mexico                     16         16         13           3          0.82      0.84        1.08       0.26
Japan                      11           9        14          Ͳ3          0.97      1.12        1.07       0.11
CzechRep.*                17         17         15           2          0.75      0.82        1.05       0.30
Brazil                     13         11         16          Ͳ3          0.89      1.08        0.97       0.08
Poland                     20         19         17           3          0.48      0.74        0.90       0.42
Rep.ofKorea              14         14         18          Ͳ4          0.89      0.93        0.84      Ͳ0.05
Taiwan                     15         18         19          Ͳ4          0.84      0.80        0.82      Ͳ0.01
China                      18         20         20          Ͳ2          0.66      0.68        0.77       0.10
Mean:                                                                    1.02      1.08        1.12
StandardDeviation:                                                      0.28      0.24        0.18
(*1987dataarefromWestGermanyandCzechoslovakiarespectively)

                               Table8:ExportQualityin1987,1997and2007.
                                 QualityRankings,BEC6:ConsumerGoods
                                      Rank                            NormalizedQuality,WorldAverage=1
country                  1987      1997       2007 Change               1987      1997        2007 Change
Switzerland                 1          1         1            0          2.07     2.48         2.72       0.65
Japan                       6          2         2            4          1.48     1.88         1.99       0.51
UnitedKingdom              7          7         3            4          1.40     1.53         1.57       0.16
France                      2          3         4           Ͳ2          1.80     1.74         1.56      Ͳ0.24
Italy                       3          4         5           Ͳ2          1.58     1.68         1.51      Ͳ0.06
USA                         8        10          6            2          1.35     1.34         1.41       0.07
Belgium                     9          8         7            2          1.29     1.44         1.41       0.12
Ireland                     5          5         8           Ͳ3          1.49     1.56         1.39      Ͳ0.10
Canada                     12        12          9            3          1.15     1.25         1.35       0.20
Germany*                    4          6        10           Ͳ6          1.54     1.54         1.35      Ͳ0.20
Netherlands                10          9        11           Ͳ1          1.25     1.38         1.30       0.05
Singapore                  13        13         12            1          1.02     1.09         1.30       0.27
Spain                      11        11         13           Ͳ2          1.24     1.31         1.19      Ͳ0.05
HongKong                  17        18         14            3          0.87     0.84         1.09       0.22
Rep.ofKorea              15        14         15            0          0.88      0.96        1.03       0.14
Mexico                     19        16         16            3          0.76     0.90         1.02       0.26
Turkey                     14        15         17           Ͳ3          0.94     0.94         0.89      Ͳ0.05
Taiwan                     18        17         18            0          0.79     0.84         0.80       0.00
India                      16        19         19           Ͳ3          0.88     0.79         0.75      Ͳ0.13
China                      20        20         20            0          0.60     0.64         0.62       0.03
Mean:                                                                    1.22     1.31         1.31
StandardDeviation:                                                      0.38     0.45         0.46
(*1987dataarefromWestGermany)
                                                           40

relative quality has risen modestly in all other 1-digit BEC categories.

         Some curious results in BEC 3: Fuels and Lubricants lead us to peer into the detailed

calculations. Indonesia's recent low quality estimate is driven by the low relative quality of its

coal and gas exports. Oman's high relative quality for 1987 comes from high quality estimates

for its relatively modest exports of SITC codes 3341 (“Motor Spirit and Other Light Oils”) and

3345 (“Lubricating Petroleum Oils and Other Heavy Oils”). The weight applied to Oman's

quality estimates for these products depends not only on their importance in Oman's exports, but

also on their importance in other countries' exports because we use Fisher Ideal price indexes. By

2007 Oman ceased to export SITC 3341 and its relative quality estimate in SITC 3345 had

declined. Another interesting change in BEC 3 is the relative rise in U.S. export quality. Peering

into the underlying data shows that this is driven by a rise in the relative U.S. export quality of

SITC 3330 (“Petroleum Oils and Crude Oils”), which is generated by many countries reporting

small volumes of imports from the U.S. with high unit values.

         Our estimates call out for a comparison with the quality estimates of Hallak and Schott

(2011) and Khandelwal (2010). We do this in Figure 9 using data from Table IV of Hallak and

Schott and in Figure 10 using the median of HS 10-digit quality results for manufactured

products generously provided by Amit Khandelwal. We take logs of our Table 2 results to make

them more comparable with Hallak-Schott and demean all series.25 Figure 9 compares our

normalized quality estimates with Hallak–Schott in 1997 for the forty countries common to all

three papers.26 The correlation is extremely high, at 0.70, but there is a considerable difference in




25
   Khandelwal’s quality estimates are not as directly comparable, since if translated to a CES framework they
confound quality and the sensitivity of demand to price: see equation 15 of Khandelwal (2010).
26
   Hallak and Schott's quality estimates for each country are linear trends, so it is a simple matter to back out the
implied 1997 results.
                                                                                            41


                                                               Figure 9: Comparison With Hallak and Schott (2011)



               .4
                                                                                                                     CHE



                                                                                                ISR      JPN       SWE
Quality 1997, Feenstra - Romalis

                                                                                                      GBR          FIN                    IRL
                            .2

                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                       AUS                      DEU
                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                NZL                         FRA
                                                                                      CANNOR
                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                 NLD          BLX
                                                             CHL                                              SGP
                 0




                                                                     COL                PRT
                                                                               ARG
                                                                         ZAF BRA                  KOR
                                                                         TUR
                                                                                         HUN
                                                                          PHL
                                                                     IND IDN
    -.2




                                                                     THA
                                                                   PAK MEX            MYS
                                                                    POL                     TWN
                                                                                      HKG
               -.4




                                                                     CHN

                                           -1                      -.5                0              .5                         1               1.5
                                                                                Quality 1997, Hallak - Schott



                                                              Figure 10: Comparison With Khandelwal (2010)
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                CHE



                                                                                                                      JPN                 SWE      ISR
                     Quality 1997, Feenstra - Romalis




                                                                                                                            GBR           FIN    IRL
                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                        DEUITA
                                                                                                                            AUS NZL
                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                         ESP      CANNOR
                                                                                                                                         BLX
                                                                                                                             CHLNLD                    SGP
                                      0




                                                                                                                       COL           PRT
                                                                                                             BRA         ARG
                                                                                                                      ZAF KOR
                                                                                                                   TUR
                                                                                                                                 HUN
                                                               IND                                     IDN           PHL
                         -.2




                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                                               PAK                    MEX
                                                                                                                       POL          MYS
                                                                                                                                                TWN
                                                                                                                                                      HKG
                                    -.4




                                                                                 CHN

                                                        -3                 -2                     -1                        0                     1
                                                                                       Quality 1997, Khandelwal
                                                          42

the dispersion of the two sets of estimates. The standard deviation of the Hallak-Schott quality

estimates is 0.45, compared with 0.18 for our matching estimates. The lower dispersion of our

estimates likely reflects our use of world-wide trade data in all products rather than just U.S.

manufacturing imports, but may also be partly due to different estimation and aggregation

procedures.

         Figure 10 provides the equivalent comparison with Khandelwal (2010). The correlation

between the two sets of estimates is high, at 0.49, but the higher dispersion of Khandelwal’s

estimates (the standard deviation is 0.77) cannot be directly compared with the other estimates.27

There is one interesting feature of this comparison though relating to population. A close look at

Figure 10 suggests that while the quality estimates of our paper are closely related to income per

capita, Khandelwal’s are closely related to population – the countries to the right of the figure

have fairly small populations while those to the left have large populations. This association is

driven by the use of population as a proxy for variety.28 Less obviously, the Hallak-Schott

estimates are closely related to the manufacturing trade balance, which is a key component of

their measure of demand. These associations are made crystal-clear in Table 9, which reports

regressions of the three sets of export quality estimates plus our import-quality and terms of trade

estimates on three country-level variables: log per capita income from the PWT; log population;

and the manufacturing trade balance from the UN’s Comtrade database divided by

manufacturing value added from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.29




27
   See note 25.
28
   Following Khandelwal (2010), we have used the estimated labor force in each SITC industry and country as a
proxy for export variety, as explained in note 12. While this proxy enters into the gravity equation (19), and thereby
affect the estimated parameters from this equation, it does not otherwise enter into the formulas for quality or
quality-adjusted prices.
29
   Since Hallak and Schott report trend values of quality, we take an average of the manufacturing trade balance to
value added ratio over their 1989 to 2003 sample period.
                                                          43


                          Table 9: Comparison of Quality Estimates for 1997

                                Hallak and          Khandelwal           Feenstra and Romalis (this paper)
                               Schott (2011)          (2010)
     Dependent variable:          Export              Export             Export          Import         Terms of
                                  quality             quality            quality         quality         trade
Independent variables:
Log GDP Per Capita                   0.32               0.31                0.14          0.01            -0.07
                                    (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.03)        (0.02)           (0.02)

Log Population                      -0.08              -0.37               -0.01         -0.01            -0.03
                                    (0.03)             (0.04)              (0.02)        (0.01)           (0.01)

Manufacturing Trade                  0.84               0.17                0.09          0.03            -0.04
Balance / Value Added               (0.08)             (0.11)              (0.06)        (0.04)           (0.03)
Observations                          38                 38                  38            38               38
R-squared                            0.88               0.92                0.54          0.15             0.43
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The ratio of the manufacturing trade balance to manufacturing
value added variable has been averaged over Hallak and Schott’s (2011) 1989 to 2003 sample period. We lose two
countries, Israel and Taiwan, due to missing manufacturing value added data in the World Development Indicators.




         All three export quality estimates are strongly positively correlated with per capita

income. Khandelwal’s estimates exhibit a very strong relationship to country population, while

Hallak and Schott’s estimates are moderately correlated with population and our estimates are

uncorrelated with population. The Hallak-Schott quality estimates are very strongly correlated

with the manufacturing trade balance, while Khandelwal’s and our export quality estimates are

only slightly correlated with that balance. Our import quality estimates are not significantly

correlated with any of the three variables.30 Finally, our quality-adjusted terms of trade estimates

for these countries are negatively correlated with per capita income and population, but are not

associated with the manufacturing trade balance.



30
   The relationship between import quality and log GDP per capita evident in the middle panel of Figure 7 is not
present in 1997, but a regression over the full sample of about 200 countries in 2007 generates a significant positive
coefficient on log GDP per capita of 0.017 (s.e. 0.004). Interestingly, the full sample of countries in 1987 yields a
marginally significant negative coefficient on log GDP per capita: -0.010 (0.006).
                                                 44


8. Conclusions

       Our goal has been to adjust observed trade unit values for quality so as to estimate

quality-adjusted prices in trade. We achieve this goal by explicitly modeling the quality choice

by exporting firms in an environment where consumers have non-homothetic tastes for quality.

We find a greater preference for quality in richer countries, consistent with Hallak (2006). Our

key parameter estimate of the elasticity of quality with respect to the quantity of inputs almost

always lies between zero and unity, as required by our model. This implies that only a fraction of

observed import unit-value differences are due to quality, with the remainder reflecting

differences in quality-adjusted import prices.

       Our estimates of the elasticity of substitution between different varieties of the same

SITC 4-digit products are substantially higher than in Broda and Weinstein (2006). As a result,

the observed differences in export unit-values are attributed predominantly to quality, with very

small remaining difference in quality-adjusted export prices. The quality-adjusted terms of trade

therefore declines with country income, at least in 2007, reflecting rich countries’ preferences for

higher quality and therefore higher quality-adjusted prices. In that year variation in the quality-

adjusted terms of trade is only one-half as large as that in the unadjusted ratio of export to import

unit-value indexes.

       In contrast to existing literature, which has tended to focus on exports and often for one

destination market (e.g. the United States), we construct quality and quality-adjusted prices for

imports and exports (at the BEC 1-digit level) for all countries included in the Penn World Table

(PWT). These estimates will be used to construct an output-based measure of real GDP,

reflecting countries terms of trade, in the “next generation” of the PWT.
                                                                         45


                                           Appendix A: Gravity Equation

       Combining (16) and (18), we readily solve for:

                                                          1                                         D kT
                         §                      D T ·1D T (V 1)
                                                  k                k
                                                                              § Y k P k (V 1) ·1D kT (V 1)
                  Pik    ¨ pik     N1k pi*k           ¸                       ¨¨ k k k ¸¸                        .          (A1)
                         ¨                            ¸
                         ©                            ¹                        © N 2 tari fi ¹

We obtain the gravity equation by solving for the CES price index in (17). To this end, we first

replace the quality-adjusted prices appearing in (17) by using their solution in (A1). Second, that

solution from (A1) is substituted into (18) to obtain exports,

                                                                   (V 1)(1 J )
                                                              
                                  §                       ·       [1D k T (V 1)]                          (1 J )
        § X ik / N 2k fik    ·    ¨                       ¸                          § Y k P k (V 1) · [1D kT (V 1)]
                                  ¨     pik               ¸
        ¨¨               J   ¸¸                                                      ¨¨ k k k ¸¸                        .   (A2)
         © M i (Mi / wi )    ¹    ¨ k *k         D kT     ¸                            N   tar
                                                                                     © 2 i i ¹    f
                                  ¨ N1 pi                 ¸
                                  ©                       ¹

Third, we solve for the export probabilities (Mˆik / Mi )J appearing in (17) using (14),

                                                                        J
                                      J                                                           J
                             § Mˆik ·          ªXk        k     k k º (1 J )
                                                      / N 2 tari fi                     § wi ·
                             ¨¨    ¸¸          « i                  »                   ¨ ¸             .                   (A3)
                              © Mi ¹           «¬ M i (Mi / wi )J »¼                    © Mi ¹

       We now follow the same steps as in Chaney (2008), which means that we substitute (A2)

into (A3) to obtain an expression for the export probabilities that depends on the c.i.f. prices,

f.o.b. prices, trade costs, income and the price index P k itself. That solution is substituted back

into (17) to solve for the CES price index in terms of those other variables. That solution is:

                                                                           [1D kT (V 1)]
                                                        § Yk              · (1J )
                              Y k P k (V 1)      N 2k ¨       ¸                               ,                            (A4)
                                                        ¨Nk M
                                                            jk ¸
                                                        © 2    ¹

                                   j k is defined by,
where N 2k is defined by (14), and M
                                                                  46

                                                                  (V 1)(1 J )
                                 J                                                             ª J D kT (V 1) º
                        §                                D kT · [1D kT (V 1)]
         j k { M § Mi · ¨ p k
                                                                                              «                »
         M    ¦ i¨w ¸ ¨ i                    N1k pi*k         ¸
                                                              ¸
                                                                                   tarik fik ¬« 1D kT (V 1) ¼» . (A5)
              i  © i¹ ©                                       ¹

The gravity equation is obtained by substituting (A5) back into (A2):

                                                         (V 1)(1J )
                                 §                   · [1D kT (V 1)]
        §       X ik        ·    ¨     pik           ¸                             ª J D kT (V 1) º
                                                                                                      § Yk    ·
                                 ¨                   ¸                       k k  « 1D k T (V 1) »
        ¨¨                  ¸¸                                           tari fi ¬                  ¼¨        ¸.          (A6)
                        J        ¨ k *k       D kT   ¸                                                ¨ jk    ¸
        © M i (Mi / wi )    ¹                                                                          ©M     ¹
                                 ¨ N1 pi             ¸
                                 ©                   ¹

        Then using the specification for fixed costs in (19), we obtain (20)–(21), where the term

(Y k / uv k ) E 0 from (19) cancels out. The exponents in the gravity equation appear complex, but in

fact, are not too different from those in Chaney (2008) as can be seen by allowing D kT o 1 . In

this limit we have N1k o (V  1) / V , which can be ignored as a constant. Then the price term in


(A6) approaches the ratio ( pitk / pit*k ) , which from (8) equals the iceberg trade costs W ik . The

exponent of that term approaches (V  1)(1  J ) / V . In contrast, Chaney (2008) finds that the

exponent of iceberg trade costs is simply the Pareto parameter J . This difference between our

gravity equation and Chaney’s is explained by the fact that we have allowed the fixed costs of

exporting to depend on the productivity of the firm. The second term on the right of (A6) is the

fixed costs of exporting, inclusive of one plus the ad valorem tariff, raised to a power that is

again similar to that in Chaney (2008) when D kT o 1 . So difference between Chaney’s gravity

equation and what we find when D kT o 1 is due to our modeling of fixed costs as depending on

productivity and the adjustment to this term due to ad valorem tariffs.
                                                         47


                                               Appendix B: Data

(i) Trade Data: We obtain all bilateral international trade values and quantities for the SITC

Revision 2 classification from the United Nation's COMTRADE database. Where possible,

quantities for a given SITC code are converted into common units. Where this is not possible,

each combination of SITC code and unit of quantity is treated as a separate product.

(ii) Distance Data: The distance between countries is measured as the great-circle distance

between the capital cities of those two countries.

(iii) Tariff Data: We obtain tariff schedules from five primary sources: (i) raw tariff schedules

from the TRAINS database accessed via the World Bank's WITS website date back as far as

1988 for some countries; (ii) manually entered tariff schedules published by the International

Customs Tariffs Bureau (BITD) dating back as far as the 1950's;31 (iii) U.S. tariff schedules from

the U.S. International Trade Commission from 1989 onwards;32 (iv) derived from detailed U.S.

tariff revenue and trade data from 1974 to 1988 maintained by the Center for International Data

at UC Davis; and (v) the texts of preferential trade agreements primarily sourced from the

WTO's website, the World Bank's Global Preferential Trade Agreements Database, or the Tuck

Center for International Business Trade Agreements Database. For the U.S., specific tariffs have

been converted into ad-valorem tariffs by dividing by the average unit value of matching

imported products. Due to the difficulties of extracting specific tariff information for other

countries and matching it to appropriate unit values, only the ad-valorem component of their

tariffs are used. The overwhelming majority of tariffs are ad-valorem. Switzerland is a key

exception here, with tariffs being specific. We proxy Swiss tariffs with tariffs of another EFTA



31
  Most tariff schedules can be fairly readily matched to the SITC classification.
32
  See Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott (2002) for a description of U.S. tariff data for 1989
onwards.
                                                         48

member (Norway). We aggregate MFN and each non-MFN tariff program33 to the 4-digit SITC

Revision 2 level by taking the simple average of tariff lines within each SITC code.

         Tariff schedules are often not available in each year, especially for smaller countries.

Updated schedules are more likely to be available after significant tariff changes. Rather than

replacing “missing” MFN tariffs by linearly interpolating observations, missing observations are

set equal to the nearest preceding observation. If there is no preceding observation, missing MFN

tariffs are set equal to the nearest observation.

         Missing non-MFN tariff data (other than punitive tariffs applied in a handful of bilateral

relationships) are more difficult to construct for two reasons: (i) it is often not published in a

given tariff schedule; (ii) preferential trade agreements have often been phased in. To address

this we researched the text of over 100 regional trade agreements and Generalized System of

Preferences (GSP) programs to ascertain the start date of each agreement or program and how

the typical tariff preference was phased in. To simplify our construction of missing preferential

tariffs we express observed preferential tariffs as a fraction of the applicable MFN tariff. We fill

in missing values of this fraction based on information on how the tariff preferences were phased

in. Preferential tariffs are then constructed as the product of this fraction and the MFN tariff. We

then keep the most favorable potentially applicable preferential tariff. Punitive non-MFN tariff

levels tend not to change over time (though the countries they apply to do change). We replace

missing observations in the same way we replace missing MFN tariff observations.

         The evolution of a simple average of these MFN and most favorable preferential tariffs

from 1984 to 2008 is summarized in Appendix Figure 1. Since MFN tariffs apply to most




33
 Multiple preferential tariffs may be applicable for trade in a particular product between two countries. Since the
most favorable one may change over time, we keep track of each potentially applicable tariff program.
                                                          49

bilateral relationships, the average “Preferential” tariff is only slightly lower than the average

MFN tariff.

(iv) Quality-Adjusted Unit Values: The quality estimates shown by (27) and (28) depend on the

c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values, but two-thirds of the bilateral, 4-digit SITC trade flows in our

                     Appendix Figure 1: Typical MFN and Preference-adjusted Tariff*




*Notes: Simple average across all potential bilateral trade relationships and products. If no tariff preference applies
the MFN tariff is used.



Comtrade data that have quantity information are missing one unit-value or the other. So while in

our estimation we use only the observations where both the c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values are

available, to construct the quality-adjusted prices we want to fill in for the missing c.i.f. data. To

achieve this we use the structure of our model, where from (8) the ratio of c.i.f. to f.o.b. prices is

proportional to the iceberg trade costs. Replacing the c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices by their unit values as

in (23), we use estimates from the preliminary regression:

                                 k       *k
                            ln(uvigt / uvigt )   E 0 g  E1g ln distik  uigt
                                                                          k      *k
                                                                               uigt ,


to form an estimate of the predicted iceberg trade costs, exp( Eˆ0 g  Eˆ1g ln distik ) . Then when an

f.o.b. unit value uvit*k is available but not the c.i.f. unit value, we can impute the c.i.f. unit value
                                                         50


by uvit*k u exp( Eˆ0 g  Eˆ1g ln distik ) , and when only the c.i.f. unit value is available then we impute

the f.o.b. unit value by uvitk / exp( Eˆ0 g  Eˆ1g ln distik ) .


(v) Language Data: Data on 6,909 spoken languages in almost all countries is published in M.

Paul Lewis (2009) and available online at www.ethnologue.com (Ethnologue). We collected data

on the number of speakers in each country of languages that are spoken by 0.5 percent or more

of the local population, and on immigrant languages that are either spoken by more than 0.1

percent of the local population or are an official language. Official language data is primarily

collected from the Central Intelligence Agency’s “The World Factbook” (2012), supplemented

by data from Lewis (2009) when The World Factbook does not list official languages. Spoken

and official languages are then classified by Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath (2011)

The World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) into languages, and progressively broader

groupings: language genus, language sub-family, and language family. For most languages

language sub-family is not defined, so we collect data on language, language genus and language

family. For example, Swedish belongs to the Germanic language genus and the Indo-European

language family. In this way we capture the fact that Swedish is closer to German than it is to

French, which belongs to the Romance genus, and closer to French than to Swahili which

belongs to the Niger-Congo language family. This process is rendered difficult for three reasons.

Firstly, Ethnologue is more liberal at classifying a dialect as a separate language than is WALS,

so we have to look to Ethnologue’s more detailed but less systematic classification scheme to

infer what WALS language Ethnologue is referring to. Secondly, Ethnologue and WALS

sometimes use different names for the same languages, which have to be reconciled by searching

their lists of alternative names. Finally, WALS is incomplete, so we infer a WALS classification

using Lewis’s classification.
                                                                51


                                               Appendix C: Estimation

        For convenience, we omit the goods subscript g in what follows, though all parameters

and equations differ by SITC good.

        To utilize the GMM methodology introduced by Feenstra (1994), we need to develop the

supply side in more detail. The c.i.f. and f.o.b. prices shown in (8) depend on the iceberg and the

specific transport costs. The former depends on one plus the ad valorem tariffs, denoted by taritk ,

and we model both costs as also depending on the distance from country i to k and the aggregate

physical export quantity ( X itk / uvitk ) , in a log-linear fashion:

                             lnW itk   Kt  K0 ln taritk  K1 ln distik  K2 ln( X itk / uvitk )  [1kit ,                       (C1)

                             ln Titk    Ft  F1distik  F 2 ln( X itk / uvitk )  [2kit .                                        (C2)

We are including the quantity exported ( X itk / uvitk ) to reflect possible congestion (or scale

economies) in shipping, and also so that our model nests that used in Feenstra (1994). We treat

the random errors [1kit and [2kit as independent of H itk .

                                                                                              1 ·§ V · º ª§ 1 ·§ V · º
        Notice from (8a) and (8b) that pitk pit*k                  N 3kW itk , N 3k { ª«§¨     k ¸¨       ¸      ¨        ¸¨      ¸ 1 .
                                                                                       ¬ © 1D  T ¹© V 1 ¹ »¼ «¬© 1D kT ¹© V 1 ¹ »¼

Combining this with pitk           W itk ( pit*k  Titk ) , (C1), (C2) and (23), we write an inverse supply curve

using a similar linear combination of c.i.f. and f.o.b. unit values that appear in the demand

equation (25):

         ª ln uvitk  ln uv kjt  T ln uvit*k  ln uv*jtk º          (K0  1)(ln taritk  ln tarjtk )
         ¬                                                ¼
                                                                                                                                 (C3)
            Z1 ( distik  dist kj )  Z2 ªln( X itk / uvitk )  ln( X kjt / uv kjt ) º  ([itk  [jtk ),
                                          ¬                                           ¼

where Zi { (Ki  TF i ) , i=1,2, and [itk { ([1kit  uitk )  T ([2kit  uit*k ) incorporates the measurement

error in (23). We rewrite (C3) slightly by shifting the export unit values and values to the left:
                                                                          52


          ª(1  Z ) ln uv k  ln uv k  T ln uv*k  ln uv*k º  Z (ln X k  ln X k )
          ¬      2       it         jt            it         jt ¼      2       it         it
                                                                                                                                    (C4)
                    (K  1)(ln tar k  ln tar k )  Z ( dist k  dist k )  ([k  [k ).
                            0               it                 jt     1        i            j        it        jt


We combine this supply curve with the gravity equation (25), rewritten slightly as:

ln X itk  ln X kjt  Ak ª ln uvitk  ln uv kjt  D kT ln uvit*k  ln uv*jtk º G 0 (ln Lit  ln L jt )
                         ¬                                                   ¼
                                       N                                                                                            (C5)
                     G i  G j  ¦ B       k
                                                 E n ( Fnik    Fnjk )  C k   ln taritk    ln tarjtk     Hitk    Hkjt ,
                                      n 1

where Hitk { (H itk  Ak uitk  AkD kT uit*k ) includes the measurement error in (23), and Ak , B k , C k

                                       § T 1 RGDPLkt ·
are given by (27) using D k { 1  O ln ¨ ¦
                                       ¨ T RGDPLUS ¸¸
                                                       as the time-average of (9b).
                                       ©t 1       t ¹

         Taking the product of (C4) and (C5) and dividing by Ak (1  Z2 ) , we obtain:
                            2
     ln uvitk  ln uv kjt

    ª k         T º             k          k         *k          *k     D kT 2                                                  2
    « D T            »   ln uvit  ln uv  jt  ln uv it   ln uv jt              ln uvit*k  ln uv*jtk
    ¬       (1  Z2 ) ¼                                                (1  Z2 )
                                                                                                                                    (C6)
        Z                            2 § Z                1 ·
    k 2         ln X itk  ln X kjt  ¨         2       k ¸ ln X itk  ln X kjt ln uvitk  ln uv kjt
                                          ¨                   ¸
    A (1  Z2 )                           © (1  Z2 ) A ¹
    §     T         D k Z 2T ·
   ¨ k                          ln X itk  ln X kjt ln uvit*k  ln uv*jtk  Controlsitk  Pitk ,
    ¨ A (1  Z ) (1  Z ) ¸¸
    ©         2              2 ¹


with the control terms,

                                    1       ª(K0  1)(ln taritk  ln tarjtk )  Z1( distik  dist kj ) º u
          Controlsitk {
                                A (1  Z2 ) ¬
                                 k                                                                     ¼
                                                                                                                                    (C7)
             ª                                      N                                                    º
              G
             « 0 (ln Lit  ln L jt )  G i  G j  ¦ B k E n ( Fnik  Fnjk )  C k ln taritk  ln tarjtk »
             ¬                                     n 1                                                   ¼

and the error term,

                  ([itk  [jtk ) ª                                     N
                                                                                                             k º
          Pitk                     «G i  G j  G (ln Lit  ln L jt )  ¦   B k
                                                                                E n ( F k
                                                                                       ni  F k
                                                                                             nj )  H
                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                      it  H
                                                                                                            jt »
                  Ak (1  Z2 ) ¬                                        n 1                                     ¼
                         (Hitk  Hkjt )
                                    ª(K0  1)(ln taritk  ln tarjtk )  Z1 ( distik  dist kj ) º .
                         A (1  Z2 ) ¬
                            k                                                                    ¼
                                                     53

We treat the country fixed effects, sectoral labor force, distance, tariffs and language variables

for the fixed costs of exporting as exogenous, so they are uncorrelated with the demand and

supply shocks. We further assume that the supply and gravity shocks are uncorrelated in (C4)

and (C5), so that E Pitk    0 for each source country i and destination k. This is the moment

condition that we use to estimate (C6). This equation is simplified using ] k          J / [D kT (V  1)]

and so ] kD k    J / [T (V  1)] ] USD US     ] US , since D US { 1 by normalization. It follows that

J   ] UST (V  1), and then from (C5) we obtain Ak          (V  1)[1  ] UST (V  1)] / [1  D kT (V  1)]

and B k    [] UST (V  1)  D kT (V  1)] / [1  D kT (V  1)] . Substituting these relations into (C6), we
obtain an equation that is nonlinear in the parameters T and V.

          For estimation, we average the variables in (C6) over time, which eliminates the time

subscript and gives a cross-country regression that can be estimated with nonlinear least squares

(NLS). A final challenge is to incorporate the source country fixed effects (G i  G j ) interacted

with distance and tariffs as appear in (C7). The list of countries varies by product, so it is

difficult to incorporate these interactions directly into the NLS estimation. Instead, we first

regress all other variables in (C6) on the source country fixed effects and their interaction terms,

and then estimate (C6) using the residuals obtained from these preliminary regressions. The

source country fixed effects are needed to control for the measurement errors in the c.i.f. and

f.o.b. unit values, shown in (23), which we assume are independent of each other and of the

export values. Then the variance of the measurement errors appears in the error term after

averaging over time, and the source country fixed effects absorb these variances.

          Because the GMM estimation is performed after eliminating the source country fixed

effects and their interactions, we do not obtain the coefficients of those terms. Likewise, we do

not recover the estimates of the other control terms in (C7). So a second-stage estimation is
                                                                    54


performed to obtain these coefficients. In particular we substitute the estimates Vˆ, Tˆ, Jˆ and Oˆ

into (26) to obtain the coefficients Aˆ k , Bˆ k . Then writing ln[ M it ( wit / Iit )J ] G i  G 0 ln Lit  H itk

more generally as ln[ M it ( wit / Iit )J ] G it  H itk , and also allowing the coefficients E 0t and E nt

to vary over time, the gravity equation (25) is run again over time for each SITC good:

         ln( X itk / Ytk )  Aˆ k ª ln uvitk  ln uv kjt  Dˆ kTˆ ln uv*gitk  ln uv*gjtk º
                                  «¬                                                      »¼
                                         4                   ­° ª Vˆ (1  Jˆ ) º ½°                              (C8)
                     G it  G tk    ˆk
                                   B    ¦     E nt Fnik    ® E 5t «    k ˆ
                                                                                                    k     k
                                                                                      »  1¾ ln tarit  H it ,
                                         n 1                  ¯° «¬1  Dˆ T (Vˆ  1) »¼ ¿°

where the error term Hˆitk includes Hitk plus the sampling error in the coefficients Vˆ, Tˆ, Jˆ and Oˆ ,

and G tk {  ln M tk . Running (C8) as a fixed-effects regression for each SITC good and each year,
                                                           ˆk
we obtain Gˆit and Gˆtk , so that Mˆ tk             eG t is the estimate of market potential. In addition, we

estimate the coefficients E nt , n 1,...,5, from which we construct the fixed costs of exporting

      ¦ n 1 Eˆnt Fnik
         4
exp                      that is used when obtaining the quality-adjusted prices. It turns out that

multicollinearity in the language variables leads to some SITC industries where the estimates of

E nt , n 1,...,5, are quite large positive or negative values, leading to extreme values of the

estimated fixed costs. Accordingly, we omitted 5% of the bilateral fixed cost estimates (i.e. the

top and bottom 2.5 percentiles) and replaced these with average values.
                                              55


References

Alchian, Armen A., and William R. Allen, 1964, University Economics. Belmont, Calif.:
       Wadsworth.
Amiti, Mary and Amit K. Khandelwal, 2009, “Import Competition and Quality Upgrading”,
       NBER working paper no. 15503.
Arkolakis, Costas, 2010, Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
       International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118 (6), 1151-1199.
Baldwin, Richard E. and James Harrigan, 2011, “Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory and
       Trade Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3, May, 60–88.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Tadashi Ito, 2011, “Quality Competition versus Price Competition
       Goods: An Empirical Classification,” Journal of Economic Integration, 26, March.
Balk, Bert M., 2008, Price and Quantity Index Numbers: Models for Measuring Aggregate
       Change and Difference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bekkers, Eddy, Joseph Francois, and Miriam Manchin, 2010, “Import Prices, Income, and
       Income Inequality,” University of Linz and University College London.
Bilbiie, Florin, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, 2012, “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety,
       and Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 304-345.
Broda, Christian, and David W. Weinstein, 2006, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 121(2), 541-585.
Central Intelligence Agency, 2012, The World Factbook, available online at
       https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/.
Chaney, Thomas, 2008, “Distorted Gravity: the Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
       Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(4), September, 1707-1721.
Choi, Yo Chul, David Hummels and Chong Xiang, 2009, “Explaining Import Quality: The role
       of Income Distribution,” Journal of International Economics, 77(2), 265-275.
Crozet, Matthieu, Keith Head and Thierry Mayer, 2012, “Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level
       Evidence for French Wine,” Review of Economic Studies , 79(2), April, 609-644.
Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer, 1980, Economics and Consumer Behaviour. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
Deaton, Angus and Alan Heston, 2010, “Understanding PPPs and PPP-based National
       Accounts,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 1-35.
                                               56

De Loecker, Jan and Frederic Warzynski, 2011, “Markups and Firm Level Export Status,”
       American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Diewert, W Erwin, 1978, “Superlative Index Numbers and Consistency in Aggregation,”
       Econometrica, 46(4), 883-900.
Dryer, Matthew S. & Haspelmath, Martin, eds., 2011, The World Atlas of Language Structures
       Online, Munich: Max Planck Digital Library, available online at http://wals.info/,
       accessed in April and May 2012.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
       70, 1741-1779.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz, 2011, “An Anatomy of International
       Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica, 79, 1453-1498.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Sebastian Sotelo, 2012, “International Trade: Linking
       Micro and Macro,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 17864.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman, 2011a, “Income Distribution,
       Product Quality, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(4), 721 –
       765.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman, 2011b, “A Linder Hypothesis
       for Foreign Direct Investment,” NBER Working Papers 17550.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1994, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
       Prices,” American Economic Review, 84(1), March, 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert C., Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer, and Haiyan Deng, 2009, “Estimating Real
       Production and Expenditures Across Countries: A Proposal for Improving the Penn
       World Tables,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 201-212.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer, 2012, “The Next Generation of the
       Penn World Table,” University of California, Davis and University of Groningen.
Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott, 2002, “U.S. Imports, Exports, and Tariff
       Data, 1989-2001,” NBER Working Papers no. 9387.
Fisher, Franklin M. and Karl Shell, 1972, “Taste and Quality Change in the Pure Theory of the
       True Cost-of-Living Index,” Essay I in: Economic Theory of Price Indices: Two Essays
       on the Effects of Taste, Quality and Technological Change, New York: Academic Press,
       1972, 1-48.
                                               57

Gervias, Antoine, 2010, “Product Quality, Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade,
       University of Notre Dame.
Hallak, Juan Carlos, 2006, “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of
       International Economics, 68, 238-265.
Hallak, Juan Carlos and Peter K. Schott, 2011, “Estimating Cross-Country Differences in
       Product Quality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (1), 417-474
Hummels, David L., 1999, “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs”, GTAP Working Papers no.
       17.
Hummels, David L. and Peter J. Klenow, 2005, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s
   Exports,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 704-723
Hummels, David L. and Alexandre Skiba, 2004, “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical
       Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(6),
       December, 1384-1402.
Johnson, Robert C., 2012, “Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms,” Journal of
       International Economics, 86(1), January, 43-56.
Khandelwal, Amit, 2010, “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economics
       Studies, 77(4), 1450-1476.
Kravis, Irving and Lipsey, Robert, 1974, “International Trade Prices and Price Proxies,” in N.
       Ruggles, ed., The Role of the Computer in Economic and Social Research in Latin
       America, New York: Columbia University Press, 253-266.
Lewis, M. Paul, ed., 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.:
       SIL International. Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com/ accessed in April and
       May 2012.
Mandel, Benjamin R., 2009, “Heterogeneous Firms and Import Quality: Evidence From
       Transaction-Level Prices,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Martin, Julien and Isabelle Méjean, 2010, “Reallocation Across Firms and Aggregate Quality
       Upgrading,” CREST and Ecole Polytechnique.
Melitz, Marc J., 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
       Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725, November.
Redding, Stephen and Venables, Anthony J., 2004, “Economic Geography and International
       Inequality,” Journal of International Economics, 62, 53– 82.
                                              58

Rodriguez, Carlos Alfredo, 1979, “The Quality of Imports and the Differential Welfare Effects
       of Tariffs, Quotas, and Quality Controls as Protective Devices,” Canadian Journal of
       Economics, 12 (3), 439-49.
Romalis, John, 2007, “NAFTA's and CUSFTA's Impact on International Trade”, Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 416-35.
Sato, Ryuzo, 1977, “Homothetic and Non-Homothetic CES Production Functions,” American
       Economic Review, 67(4), 559-569.
Schott, Peter K., 2004, “Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in International
       Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 646-677.
Schott, Peter K., 2008, “The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports,” Economic Policy, 23,
       5-49.
Simonovska, Ina, 2011, “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables,” University of California,
       Davis.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael Waugh, 2011, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 16796.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael Waugh, 2012, “Different Trade Models, Different Trade
       Elasticities?” UC Davis and NYU Stern School of Business. Available at:
       http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/sina/sw2.pdf
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
       International Comparisons, 1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 327-368.
Verhoogen, Eric, 2008, “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
       Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489-530.
