                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INTERTEMPORAL LABOR SUPPLY
                AND LONG TERM EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS




                          John M. Abowd


                            David Card




                     Working Paper No. 1831




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 1986




This paper was originally circulated under the title "Intertemporal
Labor Supply in the Presence of Long Term Contracts." Our research
was partially supported by the University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business. We acknowledge the helpful comments of Gary
Chamberlain, Henry Farber, Zvi Griliches, John Kennan, and John
Taylor on earlier drafts of this paper. We are also grateful to the
Department of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology for their hospitality while this paper was being
completed. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                NBER 'brkina Paper #1831
                                                February 1986




                     Intertemora1 Labor Supply
                 and Long Term flTp1oynEnt Contracts




                              ABSTRACT




     In this paper we compare the implications of a symmetric infor-
mation contracting model and a dynamic labor supply model for changes
in individual earnings and hours over time. The critical distinction
between these models is whether earnings represent optimal consumption
or payment for current labor services. We develop a simple test between
labor supply and contracting models based on the relative variability of
earnings and hours with respect to changes in productivity. If earnings
represent consumption then changes in productivity generate smaller
changes in earnings than hours. The opposite is true in the labor
supply model. We apply our test to longitudinal data on male household
heads fran the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National
Longitudinal Survey of Older Men, focusing on individuals who do not
change employers during the survey period. Neither model fits the data
well. In both surveys, however, the contrihition of changes in produc-
tivity to changes in earnings is greater than the contribution to
changes in hours. The data are more consistent with a labor supply
interpretation, although the estimated labor supply elasticities suggest
that changes in hours occur at fixed wage rates.




John M. Abowd                               David Card
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
MIT                                         Princeton University
Cambridge MA 02139                          Princeton, NJ 08544
(617) 253—1526                              (609) 452—4045
     Despite rapid progress over the last decade in modeling employment

contractsi' and recent evidence on the importance of long—term jobs in

the economy, microeconomic studies of labor supply continue to

interpret individual hours and earnings data in terms of an auction

model of the labor market.-' Traditional labor supply analysis assumes

that earnings represent the product of desired hours and market wage

rates. Contracting models, on the other hand, interpret earnings

as optimal consumption for the payment period, including savings and

insurance payments from firms to workers.-" If savings and insurance

are important components of earnings, then average hourly earnings pro-

vide noisy information on underlying productivity.-" Contract models,

therefore, offer a Simple explanation for the weak link between wage

rates and hours that has confounded empirical studies of intertemporal

labor supply.--"

     In this paper we compare the implications of life cycle labor

supply models and intertemporal contracting models for changes in indi-

vidual earnings and hours over time.ui We consider a standard dynamic

labor supply model in which individuals have access to complete capital

markets.   We compare this model to a symmetric information labor

contracting model in which employees receive complete insurance from

their employers. The critical distinction between the labor supply and

contracting models is whether earnings represent optimal consumption or

the product of wage rates and hours of work. We develop a simple test

between labor supply and contracting models based on the variability of

earnings with respect to changes in productivity. If earnings represent

the product of wages and hours, then changes in productivity generate
                                  —2—



bigger changes in earnings than hours. If earnings represent consump-

tion, on the other hand, then changes in productivity generate smaller

changes in earnings than hours, provided that leisure is a normal good.

     This simple test is complicated by changes in wealth that may occur

with changes in productivity. For employees who are covered by implicit

contracts, however, wealth changes are ruled out by the form of the

optimal contract, which provides complete insurance against produc-

tivity risks. We therefore propose the following test of the implicit

contract model: compare the relative contribution of productivity

shocks to changes in earnings and changes in hours for workers who are

observed on the same job over time. If, as the intertemporal

contracting model suggests, these workers are fully insured, then the

contribution of productivity shocks to changes in earnings should be

smaller than the contribution of productivity shocks to changes in

hours. If the labor supply model is correct, then the contribution of

these shocks to changes in earnings should be greater than the contribu-

tion to changes in hours.

     Our empirical analysis is conducted with data from the Panel Study

of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Older

Men (NLS). To focus attention on workers who are potentially covered by

long term contracts, we compare individuals who have the same employer

during the sample period and individuals who change employers at least

once. We find that earnings and hours changes are substantially less

variable for individuals with the same employer. For both groups of

workers, however, the contribution of productivity shocks to earnings is
                                   —3--




 greater than the contribution to hours. We conclude that earnings and

hours changes of long term employees are consistent with complete

interteinporal contracting only if one is prepared to accept that leisure

is a nonnormal good. The same data are consistent with an intertemporal

labor supply model, however, only if one is prepared to accept large

intertemporal substitution elasticities and significant differences

between those who change employers and those who do not.--' Neither a

symmetric information contracting model nor a dynamic labor supply model

with complete capital markets is likely to provide a complete descrip-

tion of individual labor market outcomes.

     The first section of the paper presents a simple theoretical

analysis of intertemporal contracting and intertemporal labor supply.

For both models we derive the theoretical implications of aggregate

shocks, changes in tastes, productivity variation, and survey measure-

ment error for the variances and covariances of earnings and hours

changes. These theoretical models provide the basis for our empirical

analysis.

     In the second section of the paper we show how to estimate the

theoretical models using the "ariances, autocovariances, arid cross—

covariances of earnings and hours changes from individual longitudinal

data. A two—factor variance components model provides a convenient

framework for distinguishing productivity changes from other sources of

earnings and hours variation, including changes in tastes and measure-

ment error.

     In the third section of the paper we summarize the data from both
                                     —4--




surveys and present estimates of the structural parameter that

distinguishes the contracting and labor supply models. The covariance

structure of earnings and hours changes is remarkably similar in the two

surveys.   Our main   finding is that productivity variation affects

earnings   at least as much as hours. This is true for individuals who
have the same employer-in all years and for those who change employers.
The data therefore provide some evidence against a contracting interpre-

tation, although they suggest that productivity—related changes in

earnings and hours occur at more or less fixed wage rates.


I. Earnings and Hours Under Long Term Contracting Models and Life Cycle
    Labor Supply Models

     In this section we present a simple dynamic model of earnings and

hours determination under long term employment contracts. We also pre-

sent a model of earnings and hours determination under a standard life

cycle labor supply framework. We make identical environmental and pre-

ference assumptions in both models. For the contracting model we assume

that employers have access to complete capital and insurance markets.

For the labor supply model we assume that individuals have direct access

to these markets. The resulting empirical models encompass existing

symmetric information contracting models and dynamic labor supply

models. Our empirical models, therefore, contrast a widely—used version

of the intertemporal labor supply model with a class of testable

contracting models.

     Individual productivity is modeled as a random variable drawn from

a sequence of distributions that are common knowledge for both workers
                                    —5—


and firms. Productivity is the only source of uncertainty in the model.

Apart from firm—specific training and recruiting costs, individuals are

equally productive at all firms. Long term attachments between workers

and firms arise from two sources: the desire to avoid recurrent

training costs, which occurs in either the contracting or labor supply

model; and the desire to smooth consumption vis—a—vis productivity,

which is associated with long term attachments in the contracting model.

     Preferences for consumption and leisure within periods are modeled

as a general function of consumption, hours of work, and age.

Preferences are assumed to be additively separable over time and across

states of productivity. The worker's intertemporal objective is to

maximize the expected discounted value of life—time utility. In the

contracting model the expectation is taken over the distribution of

individual productivities. In the labor supply model the expectation is

taken over the distribution of market wages, which is assumed to be

identical to the distribution of individual productivities.

     Let      represent the productivity of a given individual in period

t.' Assume that 0
                    t   is distributed on the interval (0
                                                            £
                                                                ,   0
                                                                        u
                                                                            )


according to a known distribution function F(0      eo), given produc-

tivity in a planning period t=O .    Let u(c(O) ,
                                                    h(O),           t) repre-

sent a concave von Neumann—Morgenstern utility function over consumption

(c) and hours of work (h) in period t. Let the utility discount rate be

p. The worker's objective is to maximize expected utility denoted by:
                                          —6—




          (l)t         u(c(O)   ,   h(8)        ,    t) dF(8         0)
                  :;

where T represents a fixed planning horizon.

      Consider the long term contracting model first. Firms offer

contracts consisting of contingent labor demand functions h(G) and

contingent earnings functions            (8          for t=l, . ..,      T.        Since workers

have no access to capital markets,            g(O) = ct(0t)              for   all     t.   If

productivity is         in period    t, the          firms s revenues are 0 h (0 )
                                                                                      tt    t

and its costs are g(O). We assume                   that         is observable and,

therefore, contracts are fully enforceable.                   We also assume that firms

are risk neutral and can borrow and lend at the constant real interest
          10/
rate r— Competition among firms for the services of a worker with

the sequence of productivity distributions                    {F(o   I   0)}        implies that

contracts offered to that worker have expected present value equal to

the training costs,     R, for that worker:



(2)
           (l)t ::       [eh(e) - g(0)]                    dF(0 0) =           R



Pointwise optimization of the Lagrangian expression for the maximization

of (1), subject to (2), leads to the first order conditions:


(3a) (lsr)t u(c(O) ,       h(0)      ,   t)   —     X   = 0



(3b) (.±!)t uh(ct(Ot) ,    h(0)      ,   t)   — AG         = 0


where u     and Uh represent the partial derivatives of u(.,.,.) with
                                               —7—


respect to c and h, and X represents the multiplier associated with

the constraint (2). Equations (3a) and (3b) have the familiar implica-

tions that the marginal utility of consumption follows a deterministic

trend, while the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and

leisure equals            for each realization of productivity.

        Differentiation of the first order conditions (3a) and (3b) yields:


        3 logh 3 logh           3 logcc
(4)             —   ______ ___ ____
        3   log e 3 log v e 3 log


where          X((l+p)/(l+r))t .            To understand the implications of

equation (4), consider the log—linear approximation to the solution of

equations (3a) and (3b)


(5a) log c =        log      —   cx   log      + a
(5b) log ht = n log          + 6 log V + b


where a and b          are terms in the log—linear approximation that do

not depend on         or v. The parameter $ represents the substitu-

tion elasticity between consumption and leisure holding constant the

marginal utility of wealth: the sign of               cF   depends on the sign of

uh. If the permanent income hypothesis is correct, for example, then

•=O and consumption is independent of productivity. The parameter                   ii




represents the elasticity of substitution of labor supply over time and

across states of e; therefore, n > 0. The parameter —a represents

the elasticity of consumption demand and respect to the marginal utility
                                    —8—


of wealth; if consumption is a normal good, then a >           Finally,

the parameter 6     represents the elasticity of labor supply with respect

to   the marginal utility of wealth; if leisure is a normal good, then
6   > 0.  Since E{c] E[Oh] by constraint (2),---' the restriction
(4)   implies (to a first order approximation):


(6) p      -? 1 -


The parameter p represents the relative sensitivity of consumption and

hours choices to changes in productivity. Even in the absence of direct

information on productivity, p is identifiable from information on the

relative variability of earnings and hours. If p ) 1, then 6        0;

that is, if consumption is more variable than hours with respect to

changes in productivity, then leisure is an inferior good. If 6 > 0 is

treated as a maintained hypothesis, then the intertemporal contracting

model presents one testable implication: namely, that changes in pro-

ductivity influence hours at least as ntich as earnings, on average.

      Now consider the intertemporal labor supply irodel. We assume that

workers have access to risk—neutral insurance and capital markets so

that the life cycle budget constraint can be replaced by its

expect ion :—
            13/




( (l)t            ju   [8h)     -
                                    c(9)]   dF(0    0o) = 0



The first order conditions for the maximization of (1) subject to the

constraint (7) are identical to (3a) and (3b). Labor earnings, however,
                                                  —9—


                                            =
are now described by
                                                Oh(e).         The log—linear form of the

solution for            and h           becomes:



(8a) log         =   (l+n)   log        +       log      + b

(8b) log h 11 log              +   '5    log       ÷ b


Under the labor supply interpretation of earnings and hours the para-

meter p      is given by:

        - 1+ri
(9)



Since earnings represent the product of wages and hours in the labor

supply model, earnings must respond more than hours to changes in pro-

ductivity.

      Our analysis of the contracting model shows that the elasticity of

earnings with respect to productivity is less than the elasticity of

hours with respect to productivity if leisure is a normal good. Our

analysis of the intertemporal labor supply model shows that the relation

between these elasticities is reversed under identical assumptions.-'

In the next section we develop a statistical model for estimating the

critical parameter p , the ratio of the two elasticities.


II. Econometric Models for the Covariance Structure of Earnings
     and Hours Changes

      Our empirical strategy is to use equations (5) and (8) as the basis

for a description of the sources of variation in earnings and hours over

time. Individual productivity enters as an unobserved component of

variance in both earnings and hours. Other components include variation
                                  —10—



in preferences for consumption and leisure, and survey measurement

error. We derive the implications of this variance components model for

the covariance structure of earnings and hours changes in longitudinal

survey data. Since the sample covariances are easily computed, it is

straightforward to summarize the empirical success or failure of the

model in terms of its actual fit to the data.

     The first step is to express equations (5a) and (5b) in first dif-

ference form taking account of individual—specific components. Since

earnings are identical to consumption in the contracting model, we

substitute log       for log c. Let A log         and A log hit

represent the changes in the logarithms of real annual earnings and

annual hours for individual i between periods t—l and t, respec-

tively. Append a survey measurement error ut to the expression for

for log g and a survey measurement error          to the expression for

for log hit. Then, equations (5) imply:


(lOa) A log gfr =     A log B — a (p—r) + A      + A u


(lOb) A log hi =    n A log    + 6 (p—r) + A b1 + A v.


Since employers can perfectly insure individual productivity variation,

changes in the discounted marginal utility of wealth only contribute the

constant (p—r) to equations (ba) and (lob). In the labor supply

model the equation for the change in hours is identical to (lob). The

equation for the change in earnings in the labor supply model, however, is


(11) A log g = (l+n) A log        + 6 (p—r) + A b.t + A
                                               —11—


Equations (lOa) and (11) are very similar. The statistically iden-

tifiable difference between the models arises from the different coef-

ficients on the change in individual productivity. To clarify this

point, we complete the model by specifying the covariance structure of

log       '
              a   ,
                      bj   ,        ,    and

       We adopt a linear specification for individual productivity con-

sisting of a permanent individual effect (er) , an aggregate time

effect (dr) , a quadratic labor force experience effect, and a purely

stochastic component (zj):


         log e1 =          + dt + O x1 + 1/2                  ÷
                      O

where x1 represents the labor force experience of individual i at

the beginning of year t.                Since labor force experience increases by one

each year, the change in the logarithm of individual productivity is:


          log 0it =            +
(12)                               e X0 + Z1

where x0 represents the labor force experience of individual i at
the beginning o the survey and                        is a time effect that incorporates

the change in the aggregate productivity shock as well as the change in

average labor force experience.---"

       In a similar fashion, we assume that the preference variations

(air and bj) contain permanent individual effects, aggregate time

effects, quadratic experience effects, and stationary, serially uncorre—

lated random components:


        ait =ai +at + axit                ÷1/2ca X2
                                                  it         alt
                                              —12—


       bit = b1            + b + b it + 1/2 b         + 6bit


These specifications permit individual preferences for consumption and

leisure to exhibit homogeneous curvature over the lifecycle. The vector

of deviations from the life cycle profile of preferences (c. ebit)

is assumed to be independent and identically distributed for all i and

t with an unrestricted contemporaneous covariance matrix. The first

differences of the preference variations can be written as:


(l3a) Aa.it            Kat + axiO            ait
(l3b) A b. = Kb + b x0 + A


where Kat and Kb                  are composite time effects that incorporate

changes in a and b as well as changes in average labor force
             16/
experience.—

     Finally, we assume that the vector of survey measurement errors

(ut, vt) contains permanent and purely transitory errors:


        it
             =   u + C uit
                   i

        it
             =v+C
               i  vit


The permanent errors, represented by u and v , model systematic

deviations of the survey instrument from the theoretically appropriate

concepts. We assume that the vector of transitory errors, (ei

€vit) is independent and identically distributed with an unrestricted

contemporaneous covariance matrix. The first differences of the

measurement errors can be written as:


(14a) A it
        u =            A   c
                            uit
                                                      —13—


(14b) A v =      A
                         c1
Equations (14a) and (14b) indicate that only the transitory measurement

errors contritxite to the covariance structure of earnings and hours

changes. Permanent response biases are eliminated by first—

differencing.

     Apart from time effects, preference variation and survey measure-

ment errors are statistically indistinguishable, since the first

differences of both components represent first differences of uncorre—

lated vectors. For simplicity, we combine the preference variation com-

ponents, A Cait and A                            ,
                                                     with   the survey measurement error

components, A c               and A c                  to form a single vector of variance
                     ult                        vit
components (A u1, ,        A    v.). In the labor contract model, the pre-

ference variation and measurement error components of variance in

earnings and hours changes is given by:
                = A
(l5a) A             Cait 1 A Cuit

(15b) A v1 A                   +   A       c.
In the labor supply model, on the other hand, the preference variation

and measurement error component of variances in earnings and hours is

given by:

(15a') A u. =        A   Cbi +         A


(l5b') A v1 =        A   bit +         A
                                           vit
In either case, the vector (A u. , A v) is independently and iden-

tically distributed across individuals with an arbitrary contemporaneous

covariance matrix and a known autocovariance structure. Specifically,
                                                —14—


the vector (A uft , A vj) is a bivariate first order moving average

process with first order autocorrelations equal to                                     This simple

autocorrelation structure reflects the following observation: if
                                                            2
is serially uncorrelated with variance                              ,   then the variance of
          is 22 , the covariance of A                       with A y is _2 ,                   and

changes in y more than one period apart are uncorrelated.

         Combining equations (12)—(15), the equations for the changes in log

earnings and log hours in the labor contracting models can be simplified

to:



(16a) A log               =K + gx10 +Az
                                gt
                                            +Au.it     it

(16b) A log hit           =Kht + hx.
                                   ii)
                                       +Az it+Av.it
where K           and     K          combine the aggregate time effects of equations
            gt                ht
(12) and (13);                  and         combine the linear labor force experience

effects of equations (12) and (13); A u. and A v combine the pre—

ference variation and survey measurement errors as in equation (15); and

A          represents the individual productivity variation from equation

(12). For the labor supply model, the hours equations is the same as

(16b). The equation for earnings, on the other hand, becomes


(17) A log gft =                     +   x10 + (1+T) A                  + A U1
                              K't

where Ktt combines the aggregate time effects of equations (12) and

(13), and '             combines the linear labor force experience effects of

changes in productivity and preferences. In general, the year effects

K        and K'       and the experience slopes                         and       are different in
    gt           gt                                             g             g
(16a) and (17).
                                   —15—


     Neither the labor supply model nor the labor contracting model,

however, imposes any restrictions on the year effects or experience

slopes of equations (16) and (17). Under our assumptions, individual

productivity changes and preference variations contribute three

unrestricted time effects (icet K, and Kbt) to the changes in log

earnings and log hours in the labor contract model, or two unrestricted

time effects (icet cbt) in the labor supply model. The cross—

sectional means of A log gft and A log h.t in period t (controlling

for experience) are sufficient to estimate only two linear combinations

of these effects (Kgt and Kht). Similarly, there are three

unrestricted labor force experience effects
                                                   a'   and      in the

labor contract model, or two unrestricted experience effects

in the labor supply model. Again, however, we can only identify two

experience slopes (g and             Therefore, the coefficients of the

multivariate regression of individual i's changes in log earnings and

log hours on time effects and initial labor force experience are

unrestricted by either model)-2'

     Equations (16) and (17) do, however, provide a simple two—factor

model for the residuals from the regression of changes in individual

earnings and hours on time effects and labor force experience.

According to these equations, unpredicted changes in earnings and hours

contain a time—stationary preference and measurement error component,

with a known autocorrelation structure, and a productivity component,

with an arbitrary autocorrelation structure.

     The relative contribution of productivity changes to earnings and
                                   —16—


hours changes depends on the parameters    4)   and   ii.   In   the absence of

direct information on the variance of individual productivity shocks

these parameters are not separately identifiable from the covariance

structure of earnings and hours changes. The critical parameter p,

which measures the relative contribution of productivity changes to

earnings as compared to hours is over—identified, hever. First, p

is identifiable if changes in earnings and hours exhibit second—order or

higher autocorrelation, since the preference variation and measurement

error component only contributes first order autocorrelation.

Second, p   is identifiable if the first order autocorrelations of

earnings and hours changes are not identically equal to _1/2, since the

preference variation and measurement error component has all first order

autocorrelations equal to —1/2. Third, p        is identifiable if the autoco—

variances and cross—covariances of earnings and hours changes are not

time—stationary, since the preference variation and measurement error

component is assumed to be stationary.

     While p is identifiable from the covariance structure of earnings

and hours changes, the variance contributions of changes in produc-

tivity, preference shifts and measurement errors are not separately

identifiable. All components contribute to the variances and first—

order autocovariances of changes in earnings and hours. It is

impossible to determine their separate contributions without further

assumptions on either the serial correlation properties of the produc-

tivity shocks, or the correlations of the measurement errors and pre-

ference variations.
                                     —17—


     Table 1 displays the theoretical formulas for the autocovariances

and cross—covariances of earnings and hours changes implied by equations

(16) and (17). The variables A log             and A log   are defined as

the deviations of A log         and A log hits respectively, from their

conditional means given t and x10. We refer to these variables as

experience—adjusted changes in log earnings and log hours. The formulas

are written in terms of the parameter p so that they apply to either
                                         20/
the contracting or labor supply model.— Table 1 shows how the

covariance structure of earnings and hours changes depends on the

covariance structure of individual productivity changes (A z.), the

covariance structure of the preference variation and measurement error

process (A u and A         )   and   p. The formulas in Table 1 form the

basis for our empirical test of the contracting model versus the labor

supply model.


III. A Test of the Contracting Model Versus the Labor Supply Model
      Using Longitudinal Data on Adult Males

    The longitudinal earnings and hours data used in this paper are

drawn from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National

Longitudinal Survey of Older 'len. From the PSID we selected 1448 male

household heads whose records indicate nonzero earnings and hours in

each year from 1969 to 1979 (the third through thirteenth waves of the

survey). We included only those male household heads who were between

the ages of 21 and 64 in all eleven sample years. The "one—employer"

subsample was defined on the basis of answers to the questions about

present employment status and reason for changing employment status. If
                                  —18—


an individual was currently employed or temporarily laid off and

reported having the same job at least one year (including promotions),

then the individual was considered to have the same employer as in the

previous year. An individual with the same employer as in the previous

year for all years from 1970 to 1979 was included in the one—employer

subsample. There were 618 individuals who satisfied this condition.

The remaining 830 individuals were included in the "multiple—employers"

subsample. Every member of the multiple—employers subsample experienced

at least one change of employer during the period from 1969 to 1979.

Table 2 presents means and standard deviations of the changes in log

real annual earnings, and log annual hours, as well as basic demographic

variables for the PSID sample and subsamples.

     From the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men we selected 1309

men whose records indicate nonzero earnings and hours for each of the

years 1966, 1967, 1969, 1971, 1973, and 1975.---" We included only those

males who were between the ages of 45 and 64 in all six sample years.

The one—employer subsample was defined on the basis of the number of

years the individual had worked for his current employer in 1971 and

whether or not the individual worked for a different employer in 1973 or

1975. An individual who had worked for his current employer at least

5 years in 1971 and who did not change employers in either 1973 or

1975 was included in the one—employer subsample. All   others   were

Included in the multiple—employers subsample. Means and standard

deviations for the NLS sample are also presented in Table 2. For the

interpretation of the NLS data, It is important to note that later waves
                                  —19—


of the survey were administered biennially. The changes in earnings

and hours from 1969 to 1975 refer to changes in annual totals dif—

ferenced over two—year intervals. These changes are not reported at

annual rates in Table 2.

     Table 2 shows that average age and potential labor force experience

(age minus years of education minus five) differ substantially between

the PSID and NLS samples because of design differences in the underlying

surveys. The NLS workers are an average of 13.3 years older and 15.5

years more experienced than the PSID workers. We experience—adjust all

subsequent calculations in this paper to correct for systematic dif-

ferences between the PSID and NLS samples arising from this difference

in labor force experience. Both surveys also over—sampled nonwhites.

The percentage of nonwhites is similar in our two samples, however, and

we make no further adjustments to account for the small difference in
                                22/
racial composition between them.— There are no important differences

in age, labor force experience or percentage nonwhite between the one—

employer and multiple—employers subsamples of either survey.

     Table 2 reveals three striking features of the individual earnings

and hours data    from our two samples. First, the overall pattern of

changes in earnings and hours is similar in the two surveys. This

conclusion applies when comparing all individuals, individuals with one

employer, and individuals with multiple employers. The older sample

(NLS) experienced slightly larger changes (in absolute value) during the

1973 to 1975 period than the younger sample (PSID). Individuals in the

multiple—employer subsample of each survey experienced substantially
                                      —20—


larger changes during this period than those in the one—employer

subsamples. Second, there is significant nonstationarity in the stan-

dard deviations of changes in earnings and hours. In the PSID sample

earnings and hours changes are most variable in the 1975—1976 period and

least variable in the 1972—1973 period. In the NLS sample these changes

are most variable in the 1973—1975 period and least variable in the

1969—1971 period. This pattern of nonstationarity is apparent in the

one—employer and multiple—employers subsamples of both surveys. Third,

the standard deviations of earnings and hours changes for the one—

employer subsample are much smaller than the standard deviations for the

multiple—employers subsample of both surveys. Individuals who do not

change employers experience less variability in earnings and hours corn—
                                              23/
pared to individuals who change employers.—

     Our   theoretical   analysis of the contracting and labor supply models

focuses on their implications for the autocovariances and cross—

covariances of earnings and hours changes. Table 3 presents the average

cross—covariances of the PSID and NLS samples.--" The similarity bet-

ween the two samples extends to their covariance structure. Both

samples and all the subsamples exhibit strong positive correlations bet-

ween contemporaneous changes in earnings and hours, and strong negative

autocorrelation in earnings and hours changes. This similarity is even

more remarkable since the PSID data represent year—to—year changes,

while the NLS data represent changes in annual data over two—year

intervals.

     In contrast to the first—order autocovariances of earnings and
                                  —21—


hours changes, the second—order autocovariances are relatively small,

although nonzero in the PSID at least. The higher—order autocovariances

(not reported in Table 3) are generally small and mixed in sign. Row 12

of Table 3 contains the test statistics for a test that the third— and

higher—order autocovariances of earnings and hours changes are jointly

equal to zero. This hypothesis is not rejected for any of the NLS

samples or the complete PSID sample. These samples are therefore con-

sistent with a (nonstationary) bivariate second—order moving average

(MA(2)) model of earnings and hours changes.--' There is some evidence

of third— and higher—order serial covariation in the one—employer and

multiple-employers subsamples of the PSID. These covariances are of

trivial magnitude, however, and we choose to assume that they are zero

in the interest of parauteric simpiicity.--"

     For both complete samples and for all the subsamples except the

one—employer subsample of the NLS there is strong evidence of nonsta—

tionarity in the covariances of earnings and hours changes. The good-

ness—of—fit of a stationary model of the cross—covariances of earnings

and hours (up to second order) is recorded in the last row of Table 3.

Judging by these test statistics, at least one of the variance com-

ponents generating the changes in earnings and hours in the PSID and NLS

surveys is nonstationary.

     Table 3 also shs that the first—order autocorrelations of

earnings and hours changes are negative but smaller than 1/2 in absolute
                                               27/
value for both samples and all the subsaniples.—     Similarly, the ratios

of the first—order cross—covariances of earnings and hours changes to
                                      —22--



their corresponding zero—order covariances are all negative and smaller

than 1/2 in absolute value.----' In the framework of our two factor model,

the fact that these autocorrelations are smaller than 1/2 in absolute

value is evidence of a productivity component in earnings and hours. A

pure measurement error model of the data implies that these autocorrela—

tions are all exactly equal to —1/2.

       To summarize the evidence in Table 3, the covariance structure of

changes in earnings and hours is consistent with a second—order

bivariate moving average model. Third— and higher—order autocovarlances

and   cross—covariances   are approximately zero in both the PSID and NLS

surveys. In addition, both samples and all the subsamples (i) exhibit

second—order serial correlation, (if) exhibit covariance nonsta—

tionarity, and (iii) have first—order autocorrelatfons less than 1/2 in

absolute value. Since any one of these three conditions is sufficient

to identify the relative contribution of productivity shocks to earnings

as compared to hours, the parameter p is empirically identified.

      Table 1 describes the expected values of the variances, autoco—

variances, and cross—covariances of experience—adjusted earnings and.

hours changes in terms of the autocovariance structure of individual

productivity and the covariance structure of preference variation and

measurement error. Estimation of p and tests of the goodness—of—fit

of the statistical model described in Table 1 require that we

paraneterize the autocovariance structure of individual productivity

changes. We use two different parameterizations. In the first case we

assume that     z. is a stationary second—order moving average.2" in
                                   —23—


the second case we asstmie that A z1 is a nonstationary second—order

moving average.--1 If individual productivity is stationary, the

bivariate process for earnings and hours changes described in Table 1 is

stationary. While we have strong evidence against a stationary

covariance structure, the advantage of a stationary model is that the

sufficient statistics for estimation of the structural parameters are

just the average variances and covariances reported in Table 3. If

individual productivity is a nonstationary second-order moving average,

on the other hand, the sufficient statistics for estimation of the

structural parameters are all the elements of the complete covariance

matrix of earnings and hours changes up to second order. In both

cases, we use the method of uments estimator based on minimizing the

distance between the sample covariance matrix and the theoretical

covariance matrix implied by Table 1 to estimate 1 and the goodness—

of—f it of the structural models.--"

     Table 4 reports the goodness—of—fit and the estimates of p from

both samples and all subsamples.-' The upper panel of the Table con-

tains the estimates for a stationary parameterization of individual pro-

ductivity changes. The goodness—of—fit statistics are large, even in

comparison to the goodness—of—fit statistics for an unrestricted sta-

tionary covariance model (reported in the last row of Table 3). The

estimates of p are all in excess of one, and are actually larger for

the one—employer subsamples than for the multiple—employer subsamples or

the overall samples. The estimates of p for the one—employer samples

are relatively imprecise, however, and one is within two standard errors
                                  —24—


of both estimates.

     The lower panel of Table 4 contains the estimates of i   and the

goodness—of—fit statistics for a non—stationary parameterization of

individual productivity changes. This model fits the data better in all

cases, although the estimates of p are not such affected. The non—

stationary model actually provides an acceptable fit to the one—employer

subsample of the NLS. For the other subsamples and the two complete

samples the two factor model of the covariance structure of earnings and

hours changes is rejected.

     The point estimates of p from the one—employer subsamples provide

evidence against the intertemporal contracting model of earnings and

hours changes, and in favor of the intemporal labor supply model. The

associated estimates of the intemporal substitution elasticity (n)      are

recorded in rows 2 and 5 of Table 4.--' In the PSID one—employer

sample, the estimates of r from the stationary and nonstationary

models are 1.84 and .68, respectIvely. These estimates are larger than

the instrumental variables estimates reported by Altonji (1986) and

MaCurdy (1981) for PSID males, although they are based on a very dif-

ferent methodology.----" In the NLS one—employer sample, the estimates of

i are .29 for the stationary model and .32 for the nonstationary model.

These estimates are comparable to other estimates based on individual

longitudinal data.

     While the results from the one—employer subsamples are relatively

favorable to the labor supply interpretation of earnings and hours

changes, the results from the multiple—employer samples and the complete
                                    —25--



samples   reveal a difficulty with the labor supply interpretation. In

the contracting model, changes in employer represent changes between

contracts. The contract model therefore offers a simple explanation for

the greater variability of earnings and hours for those who change

employers than those who do not. The labor supply model, on the other

hand, applies the samemodel to changes in earnings and hours within and

across jobs. The labor supply model by itself does not explain the

higher variation in earnings and hours changes for those who change

jobs. The labor supply model also predicts the same relative effect of

productivity   shocks on earnings and hours for job changers and stayers.
The point estimates of p for the multiple—employer subsamples,
however, are very different from the estimates based on the one—employer
subsamples.    In both the PSID and NLS multiple—employer subsamples, p
is   precisely estimated and close to, but greater than, one. The implied

estimates of the intertemporal substitution elasticity are large and

imprecise.

      The estimates of p for individuals who change employers suggest

that productivity changes affect earnings and hours proportionately. In

other words, for these individuals, hours vary at fixed wage rates. One

simple explanation for this finding in the framework of a labor supply

model is that individuals cannot fully insure productivity risks. In

this case, our estimation strategy confounds changes in productivity and

changes in the marginal utility of wealth. Since changes in the mar-

ginal utility of wealth influence earnings and hours proportionately in

the labor supply model, p is biased towards one if we incorrectly
                                     —26—


impose the assption of complete insurance. In other work, however, we

have found that estimates of p are unaffected by controlling for

changes in the marginal utility of wealth (Abowd and Card (1985)). The

evidence that changes in earnings and hours occur at constantwage rates

is inconsistent with either labor supply models or the contracting

models considered in this paper. Fixed wage contract models have been

considered by Abd and Orley Ashenfelter (1981), and applied in the

macroeconomics literature by Stanley Fischer (1977) and John Taylor

(1980), among others. Our results for the job changers suggest that

these models may be useful in the empirical analysis of Individual data

as well.

     Finally, Table 4 also reports parameter estimates for the complete

PSID and NLS samples. It is clear from these estimates that the charac-

teristics of the multiple—employer subsainpies carry over to the complete

samples. In the complete samples changes in productivity have slightly

larger effects on earnings than hours, although we cannot easily reject

the hypothesis that productivity—induced changes in hours occur at fixed

wage rates (i.e., p1).


IV. Conclusion

     Our   goal   in this paper was to develop an empirical strategy for

testing between intertemporal contracting models and labor supply

models. Such a test must rely on the fundamental distinction between

contracting and labor supply models: in contracting models earnings

represent optimal consumption whereas In labor supply models earnings
                                        —27—


represent the product of wage rates and hours of work. We derive a

testable contrast between the two models based on the relative variabi-

lity of changes in earnings and changes In hours. If the contracting

models Is correct, earnings are less variable than hours with respect

to changes in productivity. If the labor supply model is correct, the

reverse is true.

     In order to apply the test, we specify a complete model of earnings

and hours variation, including productivity components and components

due to changes in tastes and measurement errors. The statistical model

implied by either theory            Is itself testable. This test provides a

check on the ability of either theory to explain the covariance proper-

ties of earnings   and   hours changes in longitudinal data.

     We apply the model to longitudinal data from the PSID and NLS sur—

veys. Generally speaking, the data are inconsistent with the             simple
covariance structure implied by either          the   labor supply or contracting

model. Contrary to the implications of the contracting model, the

contrilxition of productivity shocks to earnings as at least as large as

the contrilution to hours. This Is true for individuals with the

same employer   over   the   entire period of    the PSID and NLS surveys,      and also
more generally. Fran the point of view of             the labor supply model,

hever, the implied intertemporal substitution elasticities are large

and imprecise. A simpler interpretation of the data is that

productivity—related changes In hours       occur at fixed      wage rates. We

conclude   that the specification and testing of fixed wage contracting

models for individual earnings and hours data should be a high priority

for future research.
                                  —28—


                               FOOTNOTE S



     -'The recent surveys by Oliver Hart and Sherwin Rosen (1985)

contain detailed summaries of the theoretical foundations of implicit

contract theory.


     'See especially Robert Hall (1982) and Katherine Abraham and Henry

Farber (1985) for estimates of the distribution of completed job dura-

tions in the U.S. economy.


     FRecent surveys by Mark Killingsworth (1983) and John Pencavel

(1985), for example, focus exclusively on auction—market models of labor

supply.


     'All of the symmetric information models reviewed by Hart (1983)

and Rosen(1985) take this form. Hall (1980) presents a model in which

contractual earnings represent average lifetime productivity.


     -'This point is stressed by Rosen (1985). James N. Brown (1982)

analyses the implications of implicit savings and insurance components

in earnings. Brn applies his viodel to aggregate labor market data.


    -'See Killlngsworth (1983, pp. 296—301) in particular.


    -'Studies of life cycle labor supply and consumption originate in

Franco Modigliani and Richard Brumberg's (1954) analysis of the

divergence between planned consumption and earnings over the life

cycle and in Milton Friedman's (1957) study of the consumption function.
                                    —29—


Robert E. Lucas, Jr. and Leonard Rapping (1969) use a two period model

in their influential study of intertemporal substitution and labor

supply. Multiperiod labor supply is considered by James Heckman (1974,

1976), Gilbert Ghez and Gary Becker (1975), and many subsequent authors

(see in particular Thomas MaCurdy (1981) ). The modern analysis of

implicit contract models begins with Walter Oi (1962) and Sherwin Rosen

(1968). The macroeconomic implications of employment contracts are

emphasized by Martin N. Baily (1974), Donald Gordon (1974) and Costas

Azariadis (1975).


            our paper "On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours

Changes" (1985) we find that this conclusion is not altered by

controlling for wealth effects arising from uninsured productivity

changes.


     1"For notational simplicity, we suppress the dependence of      on

the individual. Randomness of       is over ex ante identical individuals,

conditional on G.


    1-2tlmplicitly we are assuming that productivity risks are fully

diversifiable. See Rosen (1985, pp. 1153—4) for a discussion of aggre-

gate versus idiosyncratic productivity risks and the implications of

nondiversifiability.


           concave utility function implies that A is a decreasing function

of wealth, and therefore that the sign of the derivative of the demand

for consumption goods with respect to A is the same as the sign of the

derivative of demand for consumption goods with respect to income.
                                           —30—


    — This
    12/
             approximation holds for small training costs, R.


    ---"Robert Topel and Finis Welch (1983) refer to this model as a

contracting model with self insurance.


           the worker does not have access to complete insurance markets,

the testable implications of intertemporal labor supply models are

unchanged, provided that the marginal utility of wealth is held

constant. Since changes in productivity may be correlated with changes

in the marginal utility of wealth, estiaation of p requires additional

structure. (See Abowd and Card, 1985.)


                                                   + 0t , since       x. —              = 1
             effect K9 =       lx dt + —1/2
                                                                             x11              and

x —          = 2x10 + 2t —      1   ,   where    x10 =   labor   force experience at the

beginning of the first survey period.

             term Kat =   lx   a + a + at _1/2 a and sinilarly for Kbt


    i7"Th1s model also implies that the ratio of either first—order

cross—covariance (Cov(lx log gft ,          lx   log h.+i) or Cov(lx log

lx log h11)) to the zero—order covariance (Cov(A log                         ,
                                                                                 lx   log

is _1/2.



           MaCurdy (1981) and Joseph Altonji (1986),curvature in

preferences for hours is ignored and the labor market is assumed to

function as a spot   market.        Under those assumptions, the ratio of the

labor force experience coefficient of earnings to the labor force

experience coefficient of hours, g'h equals (l+n)/n. This is pre—
                                     —31—


cisely the instrumental variable estimator for ii            using   labor supply

equation (16b), assuming that productivity equals average hourly

earnings, and using labor force experience as the instrument for average

hourly earnings. For the two samples considered in this paper, the PSID

yields an estimate of n equal to 1.52 (with a standard error of .44)

and the NLS yields an estimate of     ri    equal to —1.62 (with a standard

error of .61) when these assumptions are used.


   22!The experience slopes of earnings and hours changes are actually

restricted to be constant over time. Both the contracting model and the

labor supply model imply this restriction, given our model for indivi-

dual productivity and preference variations. The experience slopes from

the PSID are consistent with this restriction (x2 = 25.80 with 18

degrees of freedom, probability value =       .104).   The experience slopes

from the NLS are not consistent with this restriction (x2 = 40.96 with

8 degrees of freedom, probability value         0 ).



   -1Express1ng the covariances as functions of p requires the defi-
nition of            fl



    21/
          These six survey years were the only waves in which comparable
                                                         .




earnings and hours data were collected.


             PSID sample includes the Survey of Economic Opportunity sub—

sample, which over—sampled low income households. The requirement of

eleven years of continuous earnings and hours data, however, eliminates

proportionately more low income households from the sample.
                                    —32—


             might ask if variability of earnings and hours changes for

the multiple—employers subsamples is similar to the one—employer sub—

samples if we consider only those years that do not involve employer

changes. The answer is yes. In the PSID sample, in which we have

annual data sampled at an annual rate, individuals experience substan-

tial variability in earnings and hours changes during the three year

period surrounding the change in employer. For the NLS sample, in which

we cannot perform such a detailed year—to—year analysis because we have

annual data sampled at a biennial rate, it is still true that most of

difference in variation between the multiple—employer and one—employer

subsamples occurs because of the variability contributed by the period

in which the employer change actually occurred. Put differently, most

of the added variability in earnings and hours changes for the many—

employers sample occurs around the time of employer changes. There is

no substantial difference between the one-employer and multiple—employer

subsamples when data fran employer changes are excluded. See Altonji

and Paxson (1985) for a detailed comparison of hours variability between

job changers and stayers in the PSID.


    24/
          The complete covariance matrix of earnings and hours changes for

the PSID contains 210 unique elements; the complete covariance matrix

for the NLS contains 55 unique elements. Estimates of these matrices

(with standard errors) for the complete samples are contained in Abowd

and Card (1985). The covariances reported in Table 3 represent simple

averages of the covariances for each year of the PSID or NLS survey.
                                                    —33—


    ?.JBy a nonstatlonary second order moving average representation we

mean that Cov( log g11 *              t   log              = 0   ,   Cov(    log h.t

1 log hit. = 0)          ,   Cov(t. log         ,t     log hj+j) = 0             and

Cov( log         ,
                     t       log h..) =     0   ,    for   all j     )   3 ; and all other

variances and covariances are unrestricted.


              explanation for the lower—order serial correlation of the NLS

data as compared to the PSID data is the fact that the NLS data are

sampled biennially. If an MA(2) model is appropriate for year—to—year

changes, for example, then biennial changes follow an MA(l) model.


   — In
    27/
           the PSID sample the first—order autocorrelations of earnings

changes are —.35 (overall), —.42 (one—employer), and —.33 (multiple—

employers). In the NLS sample the first—order autocorrelations of

earnings changes are —.27 (overall), —.39 (one—employer), and —.27

(multiple—employers). Similarly, the PSID first—order autocorrelations

of hours changes are —.30 (overall), —.40 (one—employer), and —.29

(multiple—employers). The LS first order autocorrelations of hours

changes are —.35 (overall), —.46 (one employer), and —.35 (multiple—

employers).


           the PSID sample the ratios Cov( log                               ,     log

Cov(A log gft *      t       log h1) and Cov(. log g ,                     log h11)/
Cov( log gft ,               log h.) are —.32 and —.27 (overall), —.46 and —.27

(one—employer), and —.31 and —.28 (multiple—employers), respectively.

In the NLS sample these ratios are —.24                    and   —.16     (overall),     —.25   and
                                         —34—


—.25 (one—employer), and —.26 and —.18 (multiple—employers), respec—

t ively.



             the PSID this results in the addition of three parameters for

the productivity process. In the NLS, because of the irregular timing of

the survey, this results in the addition of six parameters.


              the PSID this results in 27 parameters for the productivity

process. In the NLS this results in twelve parameters for the produc-

tivity process.


               Chamberlain (1984) for a discussion of the statistical theory

of these estimators, and the comparison between these estimators and the

maximum likelihood estimators. Our goodness—of—fit measures are derived

in Newey (1985).


     -"Estimation of            requires one arbitrary normalization of the

variance parameters in Table 1. We Set the correlation of A u. and

A          to 0. All statistics reported in Table 4, including the esti-

mate of i , are invariant to the choice of normalization.


              estimates of n       are obtained from the formula n   =


If   i-i   Is near one,   ri   will be imprecisely estimated and the point

estimate of r will fluctuate substantially with relatively small

changes in the point estimate of p.


     -'MaCurdy's and Altonhi's estimates of the intertemporal substitu-

tion elasticity are based on the relative covariances of changes in
                                   —35—




earnings   and changes in hours with instrumental variables like age and
education.
                                   —36—


                                REFERENCES




Abowd, John N. and Orley Ashenfelter. "Anticipated Unemployment,

     Temporary Layoffs and Compensating Wage Differentials," in Studies

     in Labor Markets. ed. Sherwin Rosen, Chicago: University of

     Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1981,

     pp. 141—70.


              and David Card. "On the Covariance Structure of Earnings

     and Hours Changes." Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University,

     December 1985.


Abraham, Katherine and Henry Farber. "Job Duration, Seniority, and

     Earnings." Unpublished manuscript, MIT, December 1985.


Altonji, Joseph A. "Interteinporal Substitution in Labor Supply:

     Evidence from Micro Data." The Journal of Political Economy 94

     (June 1986) forthcoming.


_____—______ and Christina H. Paxson. "Job Characteristics and Hours
     of Work." Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University, June 1985.


Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria."

     Journal of Political Economy 83 (December 1975): 1183—1202.


Baily, Martin N.   "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand." Review

     of Economic Studies 41 (January 1974): 37—50.
                                      —37—


Brown, James N. "How    Close   to an Auction is the Labor Market." Research

     in   Labor Economics 5 (1982): 182—235.


Chamberlain, Gary. "Panel Data." Chapter 22 in The Handbook of

     Econometrics, Vol. 2, ed. by Zvi Griliches and Michael

     Intrilligator. New York: North Holland, 1984.


Fischer, Stanley. "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

     Optimal Money Supply Rule.'      Journal of Policy Economy 85

     (February 1977): 191—205.


Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consuniption     Function.   Princeton, NJ:

     Princeton    University Press (for the National Bureau of Economic

     Research), 1957.


Ghez, Gilbert and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over

     the Life Cycle. New York: Columbia University Press (for the

     National Bureau of Economic Research). 1975.


Gordon, Donald. "A Neo—Classical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment.

     Econanic   Inquiry 12   (December 1974): 431—459.


Hall, Robert E.     'Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity."

     Brookings Papers   on Economic Activity (Spring     1980): 91—124.


                  "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy.'

     American Economic Review 72 (September 1982): 716—724.
                                     —38--



Hart, Oliver D. "Optimal Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric Information:

     An Introduction." Review of Economic Studies 50 (January 1983):

     3—35.


Heckman, James J.      "Life—Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An

     Explanation of the Relationship Between Income and Consumption over

     the Life Cycle." American Economic Review 64 (March 1974): 188—94.


                   "A Life—Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and

     Consumption." Journal of Political Econoy 84 (August 1976):

     S11—S44.


Killlngsworth,     Mark. Labor Suppj. New    York:   Cambridge University
     Press,    1983.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and    Leonard A. Rapping. "Real Wages, Employment

     and    Inflation." Journal of Political Economy (September/October
     1969): 721—754.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle

     Setting." Journal of Political Economy 89 (December 1981):

     1059—108 5.


Modigliani,   Franco   and Richard Brumberg. "Utility   Analysis and the

     Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data."

     Post   Keynesian Economics. New Brunswick: Rutgers University
    Press, 1954, pp. 388—436.
                                   —39—


Newey, Whitney K. "Generalized Method of Moments Specification

     Testing." Journal of Econometrics 29 (September 1985) :   229—256.


Of, Walter. "Labor as a Quasi—Fixed Factor." Journal of Political

     Economy 70 (December 1962): 538—555.


Pencavel, John. "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey." The Handbook of

     Labor Economics ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.

    Forthcoming, 1985.


Rosen, Sherwin. "Short Run Employment Variation on Class—I Railroads

     in the U.S., 1947—1963." Econometrica 36 (July/October 1968):

    511—529.


                "Implicit Contracts: A Survey." Journal of Economic

    Literature 23 (September 1985): 1144—1176.


Taylor, John. "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts.' Journalof

    Political   Economy 88 (February 1980) :   1—23.


Topel, Robert and Finis Welch. "Self Insurance and Efficient Employment

    Contracts." Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 1983.
</ref_section>
                                            Table 1

       Implied Covariances of Experience—Adjusted Changes in Log Earnings
               and Log Hours: Contracting and Labor Supply Models



                                                              2
1. var (A log                                                ji var it + 2aU


2. var (A log hit)                                          var (A 'it ) +            2a2
                                                                                              V



3. coy (A log         A log h )
                                    It
                                                            ii var (A                 + 2p a a
                                                                                                  Uv U V



4. coy (A log         A log It—l                            j.t coy                   A                   ) — a2
                                                                                               it—l               u



5. coy (A log hj      A       log h
                                   it—i
                                        )                   coy (A '             ,A                   ) — a2
                                                                            it            It—i                V



6. coy (A log g11, A log h11),                              ii coy                    A
                                                                                               it-i
                                                                                                          ) — puvuv
                                                                                                                 a a

     coy (A log hj,       A   log



                                                                 2
7. coy (A log         A log 1_2)                                     coy                  A
                                                                                                  it—2 )
                                                            .'




8.   coy (A log hit, A log h. — )
                               2    it                      coy (A '
                                                                            it
                                                                                 ,A       it—2
                                                                                                      )




9.   coy (A log g1, A log hj2),                             p coy (A                  A
                                                                                              it—2 )
     coy (A log       A log


Notation:   A log              A log g it —   K         —              x
                    It                            gt                 g 10
            Aiog1 it
                     Alogh
                         it
                            —K —h ii)             lit
                                                                       x
            A it flAzit uy Correlation (                                     A
                                                                                  u1 ,            A
                                                                                                          v
            a2Var         2_
                 (A u) , aV = Var(A y1)
             U
                                                                         Table 2

                 Sarnple   and Subsam2le       Characteristics for             e   ieX     PA'                     Pxic! IIP1

                                      Means (and Standard       Deviations)        for   the    Indicated    Years




                                              P510            Multiple               Year                   All            One             Multiple
      Year                   All              One
                                                              Employers                                                                    Employers
                                            Employer                                                                     Employer


                                      hi
Change in Log Real Earnings—

      1969—70              2.5 (40.)         1.8    (24.)      3.0 (49.)            1966-67            4.4    (31.)      2.6   (20.)         6.7   (41.)
      1970—71          3.0       (40.)       2.5    (24.)      3.4 (48.)            1967—69            4.6    (3!.)      4.0   (23.)         5.3   (39.)
      1971—72          6.9       (41.)       5.8    (30.)      7.7 (48.)            1969—71            2.5    (3!.)      3.2   (23.)         1.6   (38.)
      1972—73          4.7       (37.)       3.5    (29.)      5.6 (41.)            1971—73           —1.2    (38.)      1.2   (29.)        —4.4   (47.)
      1973—74         —5.5       (36.)      —3.8    (26.)     —6.8 (42.)            1973—75          —16.4    (54.)     —6.9   (32.)       —28.7   (72.)
      1974—75         —4.2        (43.)     —2.8    (28.)     —5.3 (51.)
      1975—76          4.1 (47.)             2.7    (30.)      5.2 (57.)
      1976—77              2.5    (44.)      2.8    (25.)      2.3 (54.)
      1977—78          0.2 (44.)             0.0    (27.)      0.4 (53.)
      1978—79         —5.5 (42.)            —4.4 (28.)        —6.4   (5!.)

Change in
 Annual Hours—

      1969—70         —0.8        (35.)     1.8     (21.)     —0.1 (42.)            1966—67           —0.1 (29.)        —0.8 (19.)           0.8 (37.)
      1970—71          0.3        (34.)     0.6     (18.)     —0.0 (42.)            1967—69           —0.3 (27.)        —0.5 (21.)          —0.2 (33.)
      1971—72          2.0        (34.)     0.1     (19.)      3.6 (42.)            1969—71           —0.9    (26.)     —0.3   (19.)        —1.6 (33.)
      1972—73          1.9        (28.)     2.1     (19.)      1.7 (34.)            1971—73           —1.2 (29.)        0.9 (18.)           —3.9 (38.)
      1973—74         —4.1 (27.)            2.5 (18.)         —5.3 (32.)            1973—75          —10.9    (46.)     —3.0   (22.)       —21.1 (64.)
      1974—75         —2.4 (33.)             1.1(20.)         —3.4 (41.)
      1975—76          0.6 (38.)            0.2 (22.)          1.2   (47.)
      1976—77          0.3 (38.)            0.6 (20.)          0.1 (47.)
      1977—78          (1.5 (37.)           0.9     (2!.)      1.6   (45.)
      1978—79         —4.2        (37.)     1.3     (24.)      6.4 (44.)

Age    (1969)          35.8       (   9.)   38.2    (   8.)   34.1   (   9.)             1966         49.1 ( 4.)        48.9   ( 4.)       49.5    (    )
Potent tal
                       18.9       (II.)     21.4 (10.)        17.1   (1!.)               1966         34.4    (   6.)   33.8   (     5.)   35.2    (    5.)
 Experience (1969)


Percent Nonwhite                 27.3          27.7              27.0                                       29.6           30.8                28.2

Sample Size                      j4421             618               830                                                       735                574


.Wgtstistics from the NLS are not at annual rates.

WMeana and standard deviations times 100.

£'Eight outliers with average hourly earnings greater than $100/hour (1967 dollars) have heen deleted.

—'Nine outliers with ahsolute changes in log earnings or log hours in excess of 3.5 have been deleted.
                                                                               Table 3

                                             Staçros-CovarianceStructureforPSIDsndNLSSamples
                                                   14am lea (ftandard Errors in Parentheses)

Sample    Cross—Covariance                       All                One                                      All                 Oae
                                                                  Employer                                                     Employer


Earning.    Autocovartance.
 1. Var   [A log                                 .172 (.011)         .074 (.006)         .245 (.017)          .158 (.011)         .074 (.010)      .259 (.020)
2. Coy [A      log g, A        log              —.060 (.006)        —.031 (.004)        —.081 (.009)         —.043 (.006)        —.028 (.006)     —.069 (.011)

3. Coy [A log             A                      .007    (.003)     —.002 (.002)        -.010 (.004)         —.001 (.003)         .002 (.002)      .004
                               log _2l                                                                                                                    (.008)

Hours    Autocovariance.

4. Var [A log                                    .117 (.007)         .040 (.003)         .174 (.012)          .108
                     h]                                                                                               (.010)      .039 (.005)      .191 (.020)

5. Coy [A log             A log                 —.035 (.003)        —.016 (.002)        -.050 (.006)         —.038 (.006)        —.018 (.003)     -.066 (.014)
                     '                _i
6. Coy [A log             A log                 —.011 (.002)        —.000 (.001)        —.019 (.003)          .008 (.005)         .001 (.003)      .017 (.011)
                                      "t—2

Earnings/flours Cro..—covariances
7.    Coy [A   log        A    log               .006 (.002)        —.001 (.001)        —.010 (.004)          .001 (.004)         .000 (.001)      .002 (.009)
                                      ht2]
8. Coy [A log        g,   A log                 —.023 (.004)        —.005 (.001)        —.037 (.007)         —.015 (.004)        —.002 (.001)     —.033 (.0W)

9.    Coy [A log          A log                  .073 (.007)         .011 (.001)         .119    (.012)       .063 (.007)         .008 (.002)      .126 (.014)
                                      h)
10.    Coy [A log          A    log            —.020 (.004)         —.003 (.001)       —.033 (.007)          —.010 (.004)        —.002 (.001)
                     g,               hi)                                                                                                         —.022 (.009)

11. Coy [A log             A log               —.002 (.003)          .001    (.001)    —.004 (.005)           .007    (.005)      .000 (.002)      .015 (.010)
                                      h2J
12. Goodness—of—fit for
    nonstationary t(2)-                      137.19 (.053)       168.09     (.000)   153.54     (.006)     15.15     (.233)    11.84   (.459)   16.09   (.187)
13. Goodness—of—fit
    stationary MA(2)—                        143.69     (.000)   201.96     (.000) 148.63       (.000)    79.11      (.000)    33.21   (.043) 742.27    (.000)
—-
       Covariance matrix and standard errors based                   on equally weighted minimum          distance estimates      of   croas-covariances.
               estimates      based on the four changes with gaps of two years:                  67—69, 69—71, 71—73, 73—75.

     CWald x2 statistic for nonstationary bivariate PIA(2) versus arbitrary process for the bivariate cross—covarfance
function. The statistic has 112 degrees of freedom for the PSID sample and 12 degrees of freedom for the NLS
                                                                                                             sample.
Probability values in parentheses.

     dWald x2 statistic for stationary bivariate MA(2) verus nonstationary bivariate MA(2)
                                                                                            process for cross—covarlance
function. The statistic has 87 degrees of freedom for the PSID sample and 21 degrees of freedom for the NLS
                                                                                                            sample.
Probability values in parentheses.
                                                                       Table 4

                    Estimated Relative Contribution of Productivity Variance to Earnings and Hours Change Variance

                       For PSID and MLS SamLies and Subsamples Using Stationary anflonstationary              Specifications

                                         Parameter Estimates (and Standard Errors in Parentheses)



                                                              P510                                                  NLS'
                                                                             Multiple                                              Multiple
Denflotion of Parameter                     All               one                                   All              One
                                                                             Employers                                             Employers
                                                            Employer                                               Employer



     intl
1.   Relative Colittibution     of        1.05 t.078)        1.54 (.439)         1e02 (.079)       1.56 (.174)     4.39 (2.]9)      1.39 (.154)
     Ptaductivit to Variance 0E
     Chafte   in Log Earnings    (Iii


2.   Elasticdty of lnterteth$iofal       19.96 (30.9)        1.84 (1.50)     51.86 (213.)          1.11   (.563)     .29 (.190)     2.53 (.980)
     Labor tltih1y (n)

3.   Goodness—af—Pit                    335.90    (.000)   229.64 (.000)    304.32 (.000)        145.54   (.000)   50.23 (.036)   144.47 (.000)
                     ftI'
     Structural Mode1-




4.   RelatIve Contribution of
                                          1.14    (.091)     2.46 (.781)         l.io              1.23 (.100)     4.10 (2.15)       1.14   (.080)
     produttivity to Variance dt                                                        (.089)
     Change in Log Earnings (U)

5.   Elasticity of lntertempntal
     Labor Supply (ii)                    7.27 (4.81)         .68 (.365)         6.40 (3.63)        4.34 (1.89)      .32 (.220)     7.14 (4.08)

6.   Coodness—of—Fit
     Structursl Model—                  261.15 (.000)      142.13 (.000)    223.01 (.000)         127.02 (.000)    33.84 (.206)    97.80 (.000)


              statistic for stationary structural model versus nonstationary bivariate MA(2) model.
The statistic has 92 degrees     of freedom for the PSID sample and 34 degrees of freedom for the NLS sample.              Probability values in
parentheses.

     bx2 statistic for nonstationary model versus nonstationary bivsriate MA(2) model. The statistic has 68 degrees of freedom
for the P511) sample and 28 degrees of freedom for the MLS sample. Probability values in parentheses.
