                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE VALUE OF BOSSES

                                       Edward P. Lazear
                                       Kathryn L. Shaw
                                     Christopher T. Stanton

                                       Working Paper 18317
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18317


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2012




We greatly appreciate the comments of seminar participants at the University of Chicago, Columbia,
Yale, Stanford, Harvard, MIT, USC, Northwestern, the AEA meetings, the Society of Labor Economics,
the IZA Economics of Leadership Conference, the Utah Winter Business Economics Conference,
NBER Personnel Economics and NBER Organizational Economics meetings. We thank our discussants
John Abowd, Mitch Hoffman, Casey Ichniowski, and Robert Miller for their thoughtful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Edward P. Lazear, Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Bosses
Edward P. Lazear, Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 18317
August 2012, Revised June 2013
JEL No. J01,J24,J3

                                           ABSTRACT

How and by how much do supervisors enhance worker productivity? Using a company-based data
set on the productivity of technology-based services workers, supervisor effects are estimated and
found to be large. Replacing a boss who is in the lower 10% of boss quality with one who is in the
upper 10% of boss quality increases a team’s total output by more than would adding one worker
to a nine member team. Workers assigned to better bosses are less likely to leave the firm. A separate
normalization implies that the average boss is about 1.75 times as productive as the average worker.


Edward P. Lazear                                  Christopher T. Stanton
Graduate School of Business                       Department of Finance
Stanford University                               David Eccles School of Business
Stanford, CA 94305                                University of Utah
and Hoover Institution                            Salt Lake City, UT 84112
and also NBER                                     christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com
lazear@stanford.edu

Kathryn L. Shaw
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
        Do bosses have a positive effect on worker output and if so, how large and how variable
is it? Bosses generally earn more than the workers whom they supervise. Is the productivity that
they generate worth the additional pay? It is clear from other studies of productivity that workers
vary in their output even within the same job category and pay grade. Does boss productivity
also vary; if so, how significant is the variation both in absolute terms and relative to the workers
whom they supervise? Even if bosses vary in their effects on worker output, do these variations
persist or do they die out with time? Finally, are some bosses more likely to retain their workers
than other bosses?
        These questions merit examination. A significant fraction of resources is devoted to
supervision. Among manufacturing workers, front-line supervisors comprised 10 percent of the
non-managerial workforce in 2010. Among retail trade workers, front-line supervisor comprised
12 percent of the non-managerial workforce.1                 Despite the potentially important role that
supervisors play, the economics literature has been largely silent on the effects that bosses
actually have on affecting worker productivity.2
        Even more to the point, the literature has not been able to speak to the importance of the
various mechanisms through which boss effects might operate. Most of this is a data issue, but
some of it reflects the fact that the literature has modeled the relationship between boss and
worker at an abstract level and has not pushed beyond to examine what is likely to be the most

1
   The data is from Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Employment Statistics for 2010. First-line supervisors
are an occupational class. For manufacturing, the non-managerial workforce is all those who are not supervisors or
managers. For retail, the non-managerial workforce is retail clerks and cashiers.
2
  The literature has focused on CEOs or managers in detailed occupations. For work on CEOs’ productivity, see
Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez, Wolfenzon (2007), Bennedsen, Nielsen, Perez-Gonzalez, Wolfenzon(2007), Bertrand
and Schoar (2003), Jenter and Lewellen (2010), Kaplan, et.al. (2008), Perez-Gonzalez (2006), Perez-Gonzalez and
Wolfenzon (2012), and Schoar and Zuo (2008). The sports sector offers opportunities for strong papers on the
effects of coaches on performance (Bridgewater, Kahn, and Goodall, 2011; Dawson, Dobson, Gerrard, 2000; Frick
and Simmons, 2008; Goodall, Kahn, and Oswald, 2011; Kahn, 1993; and Porter and Scully, 1982). Recent work in
education studies the effects of principals (Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin, 2012). Regarding hierarchy and
managers in law firms see Garicano and Hubbard (2007). Regarding university leaders, see Goodall (2009a, b).
Regarding national leaders, see Jones and Olken (2005). Regarding church leaders, see Engelberg, Fisman, Hartzell,
and Parsons (2012). Regarding personal traits and leadership, see Kuhn and Weinberger (2005) and Borghans, ter
Weel, and Weinberg (2008). Early theoretical work includes Herbert Simon on firm size and compensation (1957)
and Rosen on the span of managerial control (1982). For more recent work on leadership, see Hermalin (1998),
Rotemberg and Saloner (2000), and Lazear (2012).

                                                        3
important relationship in the workplace.
        The neglect is even more striking when contrasted with the interest in peer effects. There
is a large literature, both theoretical and more recently empirical, that has focused on the effects
of workers on their peers and team members.3 Peer effects may be important, but except in a few
industries, like academia, where the structure is very flat and workers have much authority over
what they do, the relationship with one’s boss is likely to be as or more important than that to
any other worker. At a minimum, this remains an open question and one that should be
investigated.
        By using data from a large service company, it is possible to examine the effects of
bosses on their workers’ productivity and to compare them to individual worker effects. Daily
productivity is measured for 23,878 workers matched to 1,940 bosses over five years from June
2006 through May 2010, resulting in 5,729,508 worker-day measures of productivity. The
productivity data are from one production task that we label a TBS job, or “technology-based
service” job.     The workers are monitored by a computer which provides a measure of
productivity. Companies that have TBS jobs like this one include those with retail sales clerks,
movie theater concession stand employees, in-house IT specialists, airline gate agents, call center
workers, technical repair workers, and a host of other jobs in which an employee is logged into a
computer while working. Because of confidentiality restrictions, details about the day-to-day
tasks of the workers cannot be revealed for this company.
        The primary findings are:
                1. Bosses vary greatly in productivity. The difference between the best bosses
                    and worst bosses is significant. Replacing a boss who is in the lower 10th
                    percentile of boss quality with one who is at the 90th percentile increases a
                    team’s total output by about the same amount as would adding one worker to
                    a nine member team.
                2. Using what we believe is a conservative normalization, the average boss adds
                    about 1.75 times as much output as the average worker, which is in line with
                    the differences in pay received by the two types of employees.
                3. The idiosyncratic component that differentiates the effect of particular bosses

3
  For theory, see Kandel and Lazear (1992). For empirical examples, see Mas and Moretti (2009), and Falk and
Ichino (2006). For work on teams and complementarities, see Ichniowski and Shaw (2003).

                                                     4
                    on workers is not highly persistent. About one-fourth of the boss-specific
                    effect remains one year after the worker leaves a particular boss.
                 4. The worst bosses are more likely to separate from the firm. Bosses in the
                    lowest 10% of the quality distribution are over twice as likely to leave the firm
                    as bosses in the top 90% of the distribution.
                 5. Workers who are assigned to better bosses are more likely to remain with the
                    firm , which is another aspect of boss productivity.
                 6. The effect of good bosses on high quality workers is greater than the effect of
                    good bosses on lower quality workers, but the effect of sorting is not large.


I. Theoretical Framework
          A. Human Capital and Effort
          An individual worker i’s output at time t, qit, depends on human capital, Hit, which
reflects both innate ability and previously learned skills, and on effort, Eit. A natural (although
not necessary) specification is multiplicative: harder work results in greater returns to human
capital
          (1)   qit = Hit * Eit .
          A worker’s stock of human capital at time t depends on experiences with current and
previous bosses, other variables, the set of which is denoted Xit, and some innate ability, denoted
αi. Then
          (2)   Hit = H(Xit, αi, bit)
where bit is the quality-adjusted boss time that a worker has encountered over his career up to
time t. If the team m to which the worker is assigned contains one boss and Nm workers, then
          (3)   bit = b(djt/Nθjt, dm t-1 / Nθm t-1 , ..., dp 0 / Nθp 0 )
where djt is an index of the difference between the quality of boss j with whom worker i is paired
at time t and the mean boss quality, Njt is the size of that team, dmt-1 is the quality of boss m with
whom the worker is paired at time t-1, Nmt-1 is the size of that team, and so forth, and θ is a
parameter that relates to the public or private nature of boss time. Note that the identity of boss m
may be the same or may differ from that of boss j. Furthermore, this specification allows past
bosses to affect the worker’s output at time t because some of the knowledge and work habits
acquired from those bosses may be retained.

                                                          5
         If boss time is like individual tutoring, then θ=1. Boss time is purely private so that time
spent with one worker cannot be spent with another and has no spillover value to other workers.
If boss time is like a lecture, then θ=0. The boss’s instruction or motivation improves all workers
and there is no congestion. For 0< θ<1, there is some public good aspect to boss time and some
private good aspect. A private good is one with total congestion.4
         Analogously, effort is
         (4)      Eit = Z(Xit, αi, bit)
Substituting (2), (3) and (4) into (1) yields
         qit= H(Xit, αi, b(djt/Nθjt, dm t-1 / Nθm t-1 , ..., dp 0 / Nθp 0 )) x
                                                  Z(Xit, αi, b(djt/Nθjt, dm t-1 / Nθm t-1 , ..., dp 0 / Nθp 0 ))
or
         (5)      qit = f( Xit, αi, b(djt/Nθjt, dm t-1 / Nθm t-1 , ..., dp 0 / Nθp 0 )) .


         The linear form is a specific version of (5) that will be used in the empirical analysis and
(5) becomes


(6) qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +(d0t/Nθ jt + d0t-1/Nθ m t-1 +...+ d00/Nθ p 0) + djt/Nθ jt + dm t-1/Nθm t-1 +...
                           + dp0/Nθp0


where α0 is the ability level of the mean worker and d0t is the ability level of the mean boss.
Thus, the expectation of both the αi and of the djt is definitionally zero. Although this model
writes α0 and d0t as separate parameters, identifying them separately is difficult in practice.
         A contemporaneous-effects only version of (6) is


(7) qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +d0t/Nθ jt + djt/Nθ jt.


         The contemporaneous boss effect on any single worker is then (djt+ d0t)/Nθjt and the effect

4
  Lazear (2001) proposes a teaching model that has a public good structure, with congestion of a particular form. It
relates more closely to classroom teaching, however, because the actions of one student have a direct and particular
effect on another. The form used in (3) is less well-structured than that in Lazear (2001), but allows for a more
general characterization of workplace interaction, where boss-worker instruction could be purely private. In Lazear
(2001), there is no private instruction; all students are learning or no students are learning. Formally, there is no
allowance for one student learning while the other is not unless classroom size was reduced to one student.

                                                           6
of boss j on all workers that she supervises is
Njt ((djt+ d0t)/ Nθ jt) or


(8)      Boss effect on productivity = (djt+ d0t)Njt1-θ.


         The boss effects can vary over time for three reasons. First, the worker’s boss today may
differ from the one that he had in the past. Second, the influence of a boss may diminish (or
even possibly increase) as time passes. Third, the second day with a boss does not necessarily
have the same value as the first day. It may be that most of what is to be learned gets learned
quickly, in which case the marginal effect of boss time on worker productivity diminishes with
time spent with that boss. An alternative is that it takes time to learn to communicate with a
boss, which would mean that the second day with her is more valuable than the first. Note that
this time effect is different from that of boss effects diminishing with time that has passed since
the boss encounter. Because (6) allows the identity of the boss at time t-q to differ from that at
time t-q-1, the structure allows for diminishing or increasing returns to spending time with given
boss as well as allowing bosses who were encountered longer ago to have different effects from
those encountered more recently.
         Why would the boss effect persist over time? Bosses, in the context in which we study,
are most important in their ability to teach and to motivate workers. For the most part, they do
not engage in task assignment, hiring, or other aspects of the supervisor job, although they may
play some role in firing and in promotion. One might expect that the motivation effect of bosses
works primarily through effort and that the teaching role of bosses works primarily through skill
level, but there is nothing in the specification that requires this. A good boss may teach or
motivate and these effects may persist over time.
         Bosses also have some endowment of skills and these skills need not be uni-dimensional.
For example, it may be that nature endows boss skills such that good teachers are also good
motivators. Or the endowments may be negatively correlated: Good drill sergeants may make
terrible psychotherapists. There may be some ability to trade these skills off. A boss with any
given set of endowed skills might be able to turn one into another by spending a larger fraction
of time focused on teaching or motivating.
         This framework suggests the following empirical questions:

                                                    7
E1: Do bosses matter? Specifically, do they raise workers’ output? If so, by how much?
E2: Do bosses vary in their quality or are they homogeneous?
E3: Do past bosses influence workers’ current output? Are boss effects persistent?
           B. The Allocation of Bosses to Workers
           Allocating bosses to workers may have significant effects on productivity. There are two
aspects of allocation that may be important. The first involves team size. The second is pairing a
given worker with the right boss for him.
           Consider team size first and the simplest problem of allocating N identical workers
among two bosses, j and k. Boss j has a team of Nj workers, which leaves boss k with N-Nj
workers. As before, since the workers are identical, the i subscript is dropped. Then the goal is
to choose Nj so as to maximize the output of the two teams taken together. Thus, choose Nj to
maximize

(9)        Nj qj + (N-Nj) qk

where qj and qk are given by (6).

           Optimization requires that the first order condition holds

                    (1+θ) (d0+dj)/Njθ - (1+θ)(d0+dk)/(N-Nj)θ   =0
or that

(10)                (d0+dj)/Njθ = (d0+dk)/(N-Nj)θ

Eq. (10) implies that as long as θ > 0, team size increases in dj.5 The larger team is allocated to
the boss with the greater effect on productivity. This makes sense. If there were no constraints
on boss time, all workers would be allocated to the best boss. But spreading a boss too thin hurts


5
    Using the implicit function theorem on (10),

N j            /  d j
     | ( 10) 
d j           /  N j

                                
                d j / N
            
                            j

                  S.O.C.

which is positive since the second-order condition is negative for an interior maximum.


                                                     8
worker productivity so the lower quality boss gets some workers as well as long as θ>0. Were
θ=0 so that boss time was completely public, it would make sense to choose the corner solution
of assigning all worker to the highest quality boss.
         A second question is whether good bosses should be matched with good workers or with
bad workers. It is conceivable that good bosses are more valuable to less able workers because
the most able workers can learn by themselves and are innately highly motivated. The reverse is
also possible. The best workers may be able to take better advantage of the knowledge and
motivation that a good boss passes on. Below, the assumption of no interaction effects between
boss quality and worker quality is tested and found to be very close to true.
         Additional empirical questions associated with worker allocation are:
E4:    Are team sizes adjusted in a way consistent with optimality that gives the higher quality
bosses larger teams?
E5: Comparative Advantage: To which workers should the best bosses be assigned? Do good
bosses improve productivity more for the best workers (stars) or more for the worst workers
(laggards)?


         II. Data
         The data are from an extremely large service company that has daily records on worker
output, linked to the boss to which the worker was assigned on each day.6 The period covered is
June, 2006 to May, 2010. There are 23,878 workers and 1,940 bosses. The unit of analysis is a
worker-day and there are about 5.7 million worker-days over the entire period.
         The company has multiple service functions, but the data used come from one task
classification where workers are involved in general customer transactions. The task is one that
is repeated, but each experience has some idiosyncrasies. The choice of one task for analysis
ensures that all workers in the sample are engaged in approximately the same activity.
         To provide some context, consider an example of a technology-based service job:
workers doing computer-based test grading. In most states, students take standardized tests, such
as the “Star” tests in California. The students’ handwritten essays (in subjects from science to
English) are scanned into a computer, and then the graders of these tests sit in large rooms,

6
 In reality, the boss is recorded as the regular boss for that day. If there was a substitute boss, say because the usual
boss was absent, this would not be picked up in the record.

                                                           9
where they grade each essay on a computer. The graders’ work is timed and checked for quality.
Graders must be at their desk a certain percent of the day (defined as ‘uptime’ below), which is
recorded, and have modest amounts of incentive pay. They are given frequent feedback on their
performance. Their bosses sit with them to teach them grading skills and to motivate the
workers. While this may seem like an unusual example, we made a number of plant visits to
companies like this and all visits shared this typical scenario.
        These jobs are labeled technology-based service jobs because the company uses some
form of advanced IT system to record the beginning and ending time for each transaction, or to
record the daily volume of transactions, for each worker. As described above, many production
processes in services now fit this description.             The technology that is used to measure
performance may be a new computer-based monitoring system (as in the standardized test
grading above), an ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system that records a worker’s
productivity each day (such as the number of windshield repair visits done by each Safelite
worker (Lazear, 1999; Shaw and Lazear, 2008)), cash registers that record each transaction under
an employee ID number, call centers, or computer-monitored data entry. These technology-
based service jobs are likely to be widespread and represent a major IT-based shift in
computerization and measurement of worker productivity. Although some of these jobs are
outsourced to firms outside the U.S., many remain in the U.S., particularly when the customer
interaction is face-to-face or the work is idiosyncratic and skilled (as in test grading).
        The technology-based service workers studied herein are constantly learning.                    New
products or processes are introduced over time so there is learning by workers and the potential
for teaching by bosses on the job.
        Work takes place in “areas” and the group of workers associated with a given area is
labeled a “team.” The average daily team size is 9.04 workers and each team is managed by one
boss. The team is identified through the worker’s link to a boss identification number; all
workers with the same boss that day are said to be part of the team. As in the grading example,
there is no obvious interaction among team members. Workers switch bosses about three to four
times per year.7 It is these switches to different bosses that permits estimation of the effect of
bosses on workers’ productivity.

7
 The worker-boss pair is defined by the usual worker-boss pairing. If a boss were absent on any given day, the
usual boss would be the one of record.

                                                     10
          The measure of productivity is output-per-hour (OPH). The core data measures the time
it takes for each transaction, and from this the number of transactions per hour is calculated.
Slack time, when the worker is not facing a transaction, is not measured because OPH is
calculated as (60 / average minutes per transaction).                      Each worker handles about 10.3
transactions per hour.8
          A second measure of performance is uptime. In any hour at work, workers miss some
time for breaks and personal time, leaving their work areas and thereby slowing the entire
system. This is rare. The mean uptime is 96.3%.                 Most of the variation is in output-per-hour
rather than in uptime. The standard deviation of output-per-hour is 30.8% of its mean; the
standard deviation of uptime is 2.8% of its mean. Consequently, the empirical analysis focuses
on output per hour.


III. The Basic Results
      The empirical approach is to estimate the stochastic version of equation (6) above written as


(11)       qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +d0t/Nθ jt + d0t-1/Nθ m t-1 +...+ d0p/Nθ p 0 + djt/Nθ jt + dm t-1/Nθm t-1 +...
                            + dp0/Nθp0+ νit


Each boss j’s quality is assumed in (11) to be invariant over time, although it is possible
conceptually, but not econometrically (the boss tenure data is not observed), to allow boss effects
to vary with boss tenure just as worker productivity varies with worker tenure. To ensure
notation is clear, the t subscript on djt/Nθ jt is the effect of boss quality on current productivity, qit,
when a worker is matched with boss j at time t. Indexing by t captures the history of past boss
assignments, allowing the effect of past bosses to persist in a general way.
          The error term, νit, may simply be classical error or it may be composed of two
components: classical error, εit, and a term, φijt, which captures interaction or match effects
between the worker and the boss with whom the worker is paired at time t. It is conceivable that
worker i is better suited to boss j than to boss k and φij allows that generality. In that case, (11) is
written as


8
    In Lazear, Shaw and Stanton (2013), the relation of productivity to demand conditions is explored in more detail.

                                                          11
(12) qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +d0t/Nθ jt + d0t-1/Nθ m t-1 +...+ d0p/Nθ p 0 + djt/Nθ jt + dm t-1/Nθm t-1 +...
                          + dp0/Nθp0+ φijt + φijt-1 + …+ φij0 + εit


A contemporaneous-effects only version of (12) that will be used in some of the estimation is


(13) qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +d0t/Nθ jt + djt/Nθ jt + φijt + εit.


Estimation begins with equation (13). A version of (13) that constrains θ to be equal to 0, i.e.,
assumes that boss effects are completely public, is also estimated as


(14) qit = α0 + αi + Xitβ +d0t + djt + φijt + εit.


        A. A Preview of Estimation Issues
        Before discussing the estimates, it is important to flag a few potential problems that may
arise in estimation. First, there may be non-random assignment of workers to bosses. While
there may be non-randomness, non-random assignment is not pronounced. Much of the technical
analysis that follows in section VII below documents this fact.
        Second, if worker quality can be measured well and the functional form of the estimating
equation is properly specified9, then non-random assignment is not a problem. A standard
control for worker quality is the inclusion of worker effects.                    If good workers are more
frequently assigned to good bosses, there is no bias in the estimates of the boss effect so long as
the model controls adequately for worker quality. In addition to adding worker effects to control
for worker quality, there are more sophisticated and more comprehensive ways both to test for
the extent of the non-random assignment problem and to treat it. A variety of methods will be
used and described in more detail in the subsequent analysis of Section VII. All approaches
yield the same qualitative conclusions. Bosses are both important to worker productivity and
vary in their effectiveness.

9
 Required is that the error term after accounting for worker quality is not correlated with boss assignment. In many
contexts with linked employer-firm data, one may be concerned that the workers who switch firms differ from the
workers who do not switch. In the company studied here, workers switch bosses frequently and these switches
occur at pre-specified times, alleviating some concern that only a selected set of workers switch bosses.

                                                        12
          B. Estimation Methods
          The first step in estimating the impact of bosses on productivity is to estimate the
productivity regression (13) to recover the effects of contemporaneous bosses on output.
Equation (13) restricts the effect of past bosses on current worker output to be zero, but permits
bosses’ effects to have a public and private component, θ, and also allows the effect of boss j on
one worker to differ from that on another worker through the match effects, φijt.
          The first set of estimates shown in Table 2 employs a mixed model specification. 10 The
mixed effects specification treats αi and dj as random effects but allows arbitrary correlation
between the random effects design matrix Z = [A B M] and X, where A, B, and M are matrices
of worker, boss and match indicators and X is the matrix of other right hand side variables. This
is in contrast to the more widely known random effects estimator that requires orthogonality
between the random effects design matrix Z and X. The identifying assumptions are: E(α|X) =


E(d|X)= E(φ|X)=E(ε|X,A,B,M)=0,           and                                                   where I#W,


I#B, and      are identity matrices with sizes corresponding to the numbers of workers and bosses
and the number of distinct matches in the data, respectively. R is the covariance matrix of the
errors,         The covariance parameters          ,    , and    are estimated via restricted maximum
likelihood, using the procedure detailed in Abowd, Kramarz, and Woodcock (2006).
In some later applications, recovering individual boss, worker, and match effects rather than just
the distributional parameters is necessary. To do so, we use Henderson’s mixed model equations
to recover best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPS) of the individual effects (see Abowd,
Kramarz, and Woodcock (2006) for a discussion on the history of this method).                      Letting


                                 , then the BLUPS are the solutions for the random effects from




                                                                 .




10
   Throughout the remainder of the paper, details about the estimation procedures are contained in the notes
accompanying each table.

                                                       13
          C. Results
          The key message in Table 2 is that bosses matter and differ substantially. Column 1
reports the results from the estimating equation (13). The standard deviation of the boss effect is
large, equaling 4.74 units of output, whereas the standard deviation of worker effects is only
1.33.11    There is a large literature in labor economics that emphasizes how differences in
workers’ underlying ability affect their productivity or their wages rates. Here, the variance of
the boss effects dwarfs that of worker effects.
          The estimate of θ equal to .3 in column (1) implies that bosses are engaged in both public
and private mentoring. 12 Were boss time completely private, θ would equal 1 and, from (7), the
total effect of the boss would simply be djt. At the other extreme, if θ=0, then the effect of boss
time would be djt˟Njt. With an estimated θ of 0.30 and an average team size of 9.04, the boss
effect equals 4.67 djt., which means that boss time is about half way between being purely private
and purely public. One interpretation is that about half of what a boss teaches is done in a
common setting, with the rest taking the form of private tutoring.
          Columns 2 through 4 present other variations of the model. All specifications contain
tenure controls given by a fifth order polynomial in tenure.13 14 Not surprisingly, and consistent
with prior work in other industries,15 worker output is increasing and concave in tenure.
Regressions that include only contemporaneous boss effects include day of the week dummies




11
    The standard deviation of boss effects is calculated as the standard deviation of the boss random coefficients, a
parameter that is estimated directly, times (average team size)1-θ. The expectation of the mixed effects is zero over
the entire sample, so pairing a boss with the typical worker yields a boss effect that has an expected value equal to
djt. It is that standard deviation that is reported in Table 2.
12
     The estimate of θ is recovered using an outer loop to search over θ; in an inner loop the REML estimates
condition on each guess of θ. This is repeated until a value of θ is found that maximizes the REML likelihood.
13
    For these jobs, a portion of the learning is firm-specific and a portion is occupation-specific, and the regressions
do not hold constant the latter because the data contains only the start date with the current firm, not general
occupational experience. Therefore, the tenure coefficients combine firm-specific learning with occupational
learning for those who did not arrive with previous occupational experience, but estimate firm-specific learning for
those who arrived with previous experience.
14
   For fixed effects models, because the month dummies and the tenure profile are nearly collinear within person, we
estimate the tenure profile as                                                                                    ,
where f is a fifth order polynomial over the first year. Estimates of ࣦ suggest that the discrete jump at day 365 is less
than 3% of the total effect of tenure. Alternative assumptions about the tenure profile do not change the magnitude
of worker and boss effects.
15
   See Lazear (2000), Shaw and Lazear (2008) for examples of estimated productivity-tenure profiles.

                                                          14
and month dummies, which capture technological change and demand conditions, to the extent
that they are relevant.16
         Column 2 estimates equation (12) introducing lagged boss effects. The lags are based on
the identity of the bosses six and twelve months ago.17 Because the data do not include complete
production histories for experienced workers at the time our sample begins, we use only
observations on experienced workers with greater than six months of tenure. In column 2, the
value of θ is constrained to be .3 from column 1.18 When the lagged boss effects are included,
the standard deviation of contemporaneous boss effects is 4.08. Although the standard deviation
drops somewhat from that estimated in column 1, the estimate is in the same range and still much
greater than that for worker effects.19 It is possible to infer the degree to which boss effects
persist over time by comparing contemporaneous effects to lagged effects. More is said on this
below in section F.
         Column 3 of Table 2 constrains θ to be zero and deletes lagged boss effects for the
estimation of equation (14). The variation of bosses on productivity remains high, with the
standard deviation of boss effects now equal to 4.104.
         For completeness, column 4 presents boss effects estimated using the more widely-
known method, which employs standard fixed effects estimation. In this case, a productivity
regression is run that includes boss and worker fixed effects. This specification imposes the
assumption that the boss effect is completely public, that is, that θ=0. Now, the standard
deviation of the boss effects is 3.44, which is still about 2.5 times as large as the standard
deviation of the worker fixed effects themselves.20 It is reassuring that the basic conclusion is

16
   Although the measure of output is average transaction time (from which output-per-hour is inferred), it is possible
that workers might speed up when there is a long queue of customers waiting for service. Whether market
conditions affect output depends on how good the firm is at adjusting the number of employees at work so as to keep
the transaction arrival rate close to constant for any given worker, despite varying demand conditions. In our
discussions with the firm, we know that the firm attempts to adjust the number of hours worked so as to minimize
slack. Still, there is variation in part because the firm must observe slack persisting for a long enough period of time
before it makes sense to send some workers home.
17
   The data have gaps, so if the worker was not observed in the data exactly 6 or 12 months previously, we use the
identity of the worker’s last boss prior to this date. We have also estimated the model after aggregating to the
monthly level, using the modal boss in a month as an indicator for the lagged boss. Results using daily data or data
aggregated to the monthly level are qualitatively similar.
18
   The value of θ is constrained rather than estimated in models with lags because of computational complexity. As
the number of random effects dimensions increases, the computational difficulty in fitting the model increases,
making it difficult to estimate θ.
19
   In this specification, θ is constrained to be .3 to be consistent with that obtained in column (1).
20
   This is calculated by taking the standard deviation of the estimated boss fixed effects, weighted by the number of

                                                          15
not sensitive to the version of the model that is estimated or to the estimation method used. That
said, there are numerous advantages to the mixed effects method over the fixed effects method.
First, the mixed effects specification allows estimation of worker-boss match effects. Second,
fixed effects suffer from a problem with sampling error, so determining the true variance of the
boss effects is difficult. The mixed effects specification permits estimation of the variance of
boss, worker, and match effects directly. Still, no matter the estimation method, there is
significant variation in the quality of bosses that is reflected in the amount by which they can
affect the productivity of the teams that they supervise.
         D. The Impact of Bosses
         The fact that there is variation in the effects of bosses on output means that bosses must
affect output in the first place. There are two notions of the impact of bosses. One is the
increase in productivity that a typical worker would achieve by moving from a poor boss to a
good boss. The other is the increase in the productivity of all team members resulting from more
time with the average boss.
         Mixed estimation assumes a normal distribution of boss effects, which implies that the
boss who is at the 90th percentile of the boss quality distribution increases productivity by 6.07
units/hour more than the boss at the 50th percentile. Comparably, replacing a boss who is in the
lowest 10th percentile of boss quality with one who is at the 90th percentile increases a team’s
total output by about the same amount as would adding one worker to a nine member team.
         It is important to remember that the estimates of boss effects are lower bounds on the
variance in boss effects because of selection. The worst conceivable boss is not likely to be in
our sample of bosses. Consequently, the observed distribution is likely to be a truncated version
of the underlying potential distribution of boss effects. Even if the distribution of boss effects
had no variance, this would not mean that bosses did not matter. It would merely imply that all
bosses affected worker output to the same extent. The conclusion is that even among the
selected sample of those who are employed as bosses, there is large variation in the effect of
bosses on worker output.


worker-day observations. A boss effect estimated with a small numbers of workers for that boss will have more
sampling error than a boss fixed effect estimated off a large number of workers. Because of the inconsistency of the
individual fixed effects estimates in short panels, sampling variation is non-negligible. Weighting the fixed effects
by the observations in the sample reduces the influence of sampling error on estimates of the distribution of the true
fixed effects. This is done in the last column of Table 2.

                                                         16
         The fact that bosses vary significantly in their productivity-enhancement effects implies
by necessity that bosses must matter. It can only be the case that a good boss affects productivity
by much more than a bad boss when bosses affect productivity in the first place. If bosses were
mere decorations, one would expect no variation in boss effects beyond sampling error. The fact
there is wide variation in boss effects implies that there is a substantial productivity effect that
bosses confer on their teams.
         There are a number of ways to estimate the absolute productivity level of the boss effect
and none is without problems.21 One normalization that may be reasonable and on which
evidence is provided below, is based on the idea that those who are bosses are promoted from
worker to boss are superior to the best workers. Bosses obtain and retain their jobs only by being
more productive as bosses than they would be as workers. Otherwise, comparative advantage
would dictate that they operate as workers rather than bosses.22 It is also reasonable to expect
that those who are promoted to boss are identified as being more able than the average worker
because they were exceptional producers when they were workers themselves. Of course,
promotion mistakes can be and are made, but they tend to be weeded out (as shown later).23
Therefore, let us assume that the poorest bosses have productivity that is equal to that of the
better workers. Specifically, assume that the boss who is at the 10th percentile of the boss quality
distribution is as productive as a worker who is at the 90th percentile of the worker quality
distribution. The 10th percentile boss is then worth about 12 transactions per hour, which is the
number of units that the 90th percentile worker produces in a typical hour. Given this benchmark
and knowledge of the parameters of the distributions governing worker and boss effects, it is
possible to calculate the level of productivity for every boss.
         This normalization implies that the average boss produces about 18 transactions per hour
in enhanced productivity of that boss’s subordinates. Were no bosses present, the typical team of
nine workers would handle 18 fewer transactions per hour on a mean of about 100 transactions.
This implies that the average boss is about 1.75 times as productive as the average worker. This
is consistent with our discussions with the firm on levels of compensation. No compensation


21
   For example, implicit in (13) is an estimate that comes from d0, but this places very heavy weight on variations in
team size to identify the effect of the boss on workers. The major concern is that team size variation is modeled to
affect output only through the boss effect, but any other effects would also be captured in d0.
22
   For a model that analyzes the choice of boss versus production worker and other hierarchies see Garicano (2000).
23
   See Lazear (2004) for a theoretical exposition of promotion decisions under uncertainty and the effects of error.

                                                         17
data are available to us, but we were told that bosses, who are almost twice as productive as
workers by this measure, earn between 1.5 to 2 times as much as workers.
        E. The Boss Effects are Identified
        The intuition behind identifying the boss effects comes from the fact that workers switch
bosses frequently. The change in worker productivity associated with the switch to a new boss
provides the relevant information for identifying the boss effect. In order to estimate the effect
of a boss on workers’ productivity, the same boss must work with different workers, whose
abilities are known through the worker effects. For any given boss, the boss effect is therefore
estimated as the average increase across all workers who work for that boss when they switch to
that boss (or average decrease when they switch from that boss).
        More precisely, the boss effects are estimated within “groups” of connected workers in
the graph-theoretic sense.24 If a separate group of bosses and workers is not connected, no
worker nor boss ever interacts with any other worker or boss in the non-connected group.
Within each group, there must be one normalization of the boss effects and one normalization of
the worker effects.
        The data are sufficient to estimate the boss effects within each connected group. For each
worker, there is an average of 240 days of daily productivity data (or about a calendar year of
data). Each worker changes bosses about 4.7 times during this interval. Therefore, when the
boss is the unit of analysis, her team members have, on average, touched 4.7 other bosses. Given
the average number of workers per boss, the number of worker changers per boss is 49 (or 80 if
weighted by the number of observations per boss). These are sizable numbers. As a result,
99.99% of the daily data is in the largest connected group, with only 560 of the 5.7 million
observations and 11 of the 1,940 bosses outside of the largest connected group.
        F.      Persistence of Boss Productivity Effects
        Some of the knowledge or motivation that bosses pass to their subordinates may be
fleeting, but some may persist for extended periods of time. Skills that are taught might stay
with the worker longer than contemporaneous motivation that comes from encouragement or
threats that vanish once the boss is no longer present. It is tempting to refer to the part of the


24
  Paraphrasing, “When a group of [workers] and [bosses] is connected, the group contains all the [workers] who
ever worked for any of the [bosses] in the group and all the [bosses] to which any of the workers were ever
assigned” (Abowd, Kramarz, and Woodcock, 2006).

                                                     18
boss effect that persists as teaching and that which dies out quickly as motivation.
Unfortunately, no evidence on the cause or nature of the boss productivity is available.
Consequently, we choose to refer simply to persistence, which is the amount of the boss effect
that is retained for six or twelve months. The results in column 2 of Table 2 shed some light on
this issue.
        To see this, recall that d      0t-x   + dj t-x is defined as the effect of the boss with whom the
worker was paired at time t-x on output at time t. Define d* 0t-x + d*j t-x as the effect of the boss
with whom the worker was paired at time t-x on output at time t-x. Then the persistence
parameters, λ0x and λx, are the part of the effect of the boss on output at time t-x that remains at
time t, or
        d 0t-x + dj t-x = λ0x d*0t-x + λx d*j t-x

The two persistence parameters have different interpretations. λ0x is the amount of the average
boss effect from time t-x that persists until time t whereas λx is the part of the idiosyncratic boss
effect from time t-x that persists until time t. It follows that
        σdj t-x = λx σd*j t-x
If the dj distribution is stationary, then σd*j t-x = σd*j t , which implies that


         σd*j t-x = σdj t
so an estimate of λx is given by


(15)             λx = σdj t-x / σdj t


which can be obtained from column 2 of Table 2.
        Because there are six and twelve months lags included in the specification, λ6 and λ12 can
be estimated from the ratio of the standard deviations in the relevant dj t - x. The estimates of λ6
and λ12 suggests that about 35 percent of the current boss effect persists for six months and 26
percent persists for one year.
        This result does not imply that what bosses do does not persist. For example, it might be
the case that most of what bosses do is convey skills that workers learn early and keep with them
for a long time. If all bosses are equally good at providing persistent skills, then this effect is


                                                        19
contained in the d0 component, rather than in the dj component. Although there is persistence, it
does not differ in the cross-section of bosses and therefore is not reflected in the ratio of the
standard deviations. It is also possible that bosses differ in their ability to motivate workers.
Once the worker leaves the boss, contemporaneous motivation is lost. That would be picked up
in the dj factor. These contemporaneous motivation effects might die out rapidly, which would
be consistent with two-thirds being gone after six months.
          Even if most of the effect, including that which does not vary across bosses, was
contemporaneous, this would not imply that bosses are unimportant. If the effect of having a
good boss is fleeting, keeping the worker paired with a good boss is all the more important.
Were the skills that were learned kept forever, then it would only be necessary to make sure that
a worker encountered a good boss at one point, preferably early, in his career. If the boss effects
die out quickly, then having a larger stock of good bosses is required to achieve the same level of
output.


IV. Another Measure of Boss Productivity: Worker Retention
          The adage, “workers don’t leave bad firms, they leave bad bosses” can be tested. Since
turnover is costly, a boss who causes workers to leave when the firm would profit by having
them retained is implicitly a low productivity boss. Let us define “bad boss” by the dj that is
estimated by examining the effect of the boss on worker output-per-hour. If workers dislike
bosses with low dj, then one might expect that there would be a correlation between worker
departure hazard rates and dj. This is not unreasonable. Workers may prefer to work with bosses
who make them productive, perhaps because good bosses enhance worker promotion
probabilities the most.
          Table 3 reports the results of a Cox proportional hazard model where worker departure is
the dependent variable. Because the data do not contain details about attrition versus promotions
out of the sample, the analysis is conducted on two separate samples. The first four columns of
Table 3 provide estimates of the model on a sub-sample of workers with fixed effects αi below
the mean. These workers are unlikely to be promoted, alleviating concerns about classification
error in measuring departures. The remaining columns include the full sample of workers.
          Coefficients and standard errors are presented in Table 3, but the exponentiated
coefficients are most easy to interpret. The first row of Table 3 (labeled “Boss Effect x Team

                                                 20
Size ^ -θ”) shows that the effect of dj on turnover is negative. Good bosses as measured by their
best linear unbiased predictor of the boss effect do indeed reduce worker turnover. This is true in
every specification and the effect is significant. The effect is not only statistically significant, it
is sizeable. A boss who is one standard deviation above the mean quality in dj (the standard
deviation of dj equals 1.015 at the individual worker level) experiences a 12 percent reduction in
the turnover hazard among her workers.
           It is also true (see columns 2 and 4), that workers who are in the lowest decile of
productivity as measured by their individual effects (αi) are more likely to leave the firm. There
is no significant interaction effect. It is not the case that good bosses are better at losing the worst
workers in the firm (row 3).


V. Worker - Boss Match Effects
           The treatment effect of boss quality on worker productivity may vary with the quality of
the worker. Heterogeneity in the treatment effect was permitted in equation (13) and Table 2,
through the match effect             . At a conceptual level, good bosses, especially those with teaching
skills, may be most useful for those workers who have the toughest time learning or for those
who have the most to learn. But it is possible that the reverse is true: our most distinguished
academics teach the best Ph.D. students, not kindergarteners, because the basic skills learned
when young are easily taught by less skilled individuals.
           It is unclear, a priori, whether a new boss has a comparative advantage with a high human
capital or a low human capital worker. From (1), (2) and (4), note that
                                               q    E    H
                                                  H    E    .
                                               b    b    b

Even if ∂E/ ∂b and ∂H/∂b were greater for the high H than for the low H workers, because high
H workers have greater stocks of human capital, the sign is indeterminate. As such, it is
important to estimate this to determine how bosses should be sorted so as to make the most of
comparative advantage.
           With estimates of           in hand from Table 2, it is possible to calculate whether good
bosses should be matched to good workers or to bad workers.25 Note that the assumption of a

25
     We thank John Abowd for suggesting this approach and making clear its statistical properties.

                                                           21
diagonal covariance matrix of the boss, worker, and match effects does not imply that the effect
of a boss is uniform on each worker. The possibility that better bosses should be matched with
better workers can be assessed through the match effects. There is nothing in the estimation that
restricts cov(α+φ, d+ φ) to be zero.
         Bosses are classified as “good” or “bad” according to whether their estimated boss effect,
dj, is above or below the median. Workers are also classified as “star” or “laggard” according to
whether their estimated worker effect, αi, is above or below the median.
         The designations of good/bad bosses and star/laggard workers are formed from the
distributions of the random boss and worker effects holding constant the match effect. Because
the match effects are unbiased, so too are the designations. There are four cells of (good-boss,
good-worker), (good-boss, bad worker), (bad-boss, good-worker), and (bad-boss, bad-worker).
To obtain estimates, all that is required is that some good bosses are matched with good workers,
some bad bosses are matched with good workers, and some good bosses are matched with bad
workers, and some bad bosses are matched with some bad workers. Each of our four cells of
boss/worker pairs for the good/bad combinations will measure the mean outcome for the quality
groups designated.
         The results are contained in Table 4. The top panel of Table 4 provides cell means for
regression (13) with θ=.30 (based on column 1 of Table 2) and the bottom panel provides cell
means for regression (14) for θ=0 (based on column 3 of Table 2). The results do not differ
between the two panels, so concentrate on the first more flexible model in the top panel.
         The issue here is one of comparative advantage: how best to allocate the bosses. The
results in Table 4 provide a clear answer. There are two choices. Either good bosses are paired
with stars, which implies that bad bosses are paired with laggards, or bad bosses are paired with
stars, which implies that good bosses are paired with laggards. Combining good bosses with stars
and bad with laggards yields an average match effect of .100-.063 =.037. Combining bad bosses
with stars and good with laggards yields an average match effect of -.083+.051=-0.032. The
value of bosses is maximized by assigning the better bosses to the better workers. Workers and
bosses should be matched positively because good bosses (defined as good for the average
worker) increase the output of stars by more than they do of laggards. Still, the effects are not
large.   The net average gain from proper assignment over incorrect assignment is .037-(-
.032)=.069 on a mean output-per-worker hour of 10.26. This is less than 1% of output.

                                                 22
VI. Determination of Team Size across Bosses
        Equation (10) implies that better bosses should have larger teams and yields a specific
functional form for the relation of team size to boss effect. It is impractical for the firm to adjust
team size on a minute-by-minute basis, but it is reasonable to expect that over long periods of
time and within a particular establishment, team size could be altered to assign more workers to
the better bosses. If (10) holds, then team size is an endogenous variable, which means that the
estimates might not be consistent. Set aside the issue of endogeneity and assume instead that the
dj boss effects are estimated appropriately in (13), as reported in column 1 of Table 2. Using the
dj BLUPS from that model, it is possible to compute the correlation between the estimated
dj (which reflects the entire four year time period) and the within-site-within-time period team
size. The correlation is essentially zero, at -.019. Notwithstanding the endogeneity issue, there
does not seem to be much of a relationship between the number of workers assigned to a boss
and that boss’s productivity.
        This is both good and bad. It is good because to the extent that the dj are close to what
they would be taking endogeneity into account, ignoring endogeneity is not much of an issue. It
is bad because it raises the question as to why the firm is not adjusting team size appropriately.


VII. Non-random Assignment of Workers to Bosses
        There may be non-random assignment of experienced workers to bosses. This section
presents evidence to assess whether non-random assignment is a concern for the estimates. The
most likely source of non-random sorting is through assignment based on match-specific
productivity, which is captured already.26 Still, it is useful to examine non-random assignment
and to consider any possible sensitivity of the estimates of the boss effects to non-random
assignment that might result because of a specification different from the one assumed in (12)-
(14). A series of tests suggests that non-random assignment, in this context, is unlikely to be a
significant problem for the estimates of boss effects.
        A. A Specification Test
        The mixed effects estimator provides a specification test to assess whether bosses and

26
  Recall that unbiased estimates of the mixed effects model do not hinge on random assignment of workers to
bosses on match-specific productivity because that model includes boss-worker interactions (the φijt terms).

                                                    23
workers are sorted based on their idiosyncratic match effects. To understand the logic behind the
test, consider an alternative method to estimate the match effects based on the fixed effects
estimator. Jackson (2012) calls this alternative method the “orthogonal match fixed effects
estimator,” in which the match effects are calculated as the mean of the residual for each boss-
worker pair after fixed effect estimation, where the mean is over all periods during which the
boss and worker are together. The orthogonal match fixed effects estimator imposes that the
mean of the match effects for each worker and each boss (although not for each boss-worker
pair) is zero by construction. In contrast, the mixed effects estimator allows the observed match
effects to deviate from zero for each boss and each worker. The mixed effects estimator instead
imposes that the potential match effects are zero. This means that if a boss and worker were
paired at random, the expected match effect for bosses and for workers would be zero, but there
is nothing that restricts the match effects to be mean zero for the actual subset of matches that do
occur.27
        The implication is that the mean of the match effects for each worker and each boss
(taking unique workers and then unique bosses as the units of analysis, respectively) will be zero
in the mixed effects estimation if the assignment of workers to bosses is not based on the
idiosyncratic match quality component. If the assignment of workers to bosses is not random,
then the estimated match effects from Table 2 are likely to deviate from zero within workers and
within bosses because the worker to boss assignment process will reflect match specific
productivity gains. Workers would be expected to spend more time with those bosses with whom
they are better matched, resulting in a positive mean effect for both workers and bosses.
        Using the boss as the unit of analysis (which means taking the mean of the match effects
across workers for a given boss), the average boss match effect is 0.0014 with a standard error of
the mean of 0.0018 (for estimates from column 1 of Table 2). When using the individual worker
as the unit of analysis (which means taking the mean of the match effects across bosses that a
given worker has had), the mean of the workers’ average match effect across workers is 0.0014
with a standard error of the mean of 0.0011. 28 These results are consistent with the identifying


27
   If the data were balanced, meaning that every boss and every worker were paired, then the match effects
recovered from the orthogonal fixed effects estimator and the mixed effects estimator would both be mean zero.
28
   Due to the limited number of observed assignments, some workers or bosses with a sequence of lucky pairings are
likely to have match effects that deviate from zero. However, under the null hypothesis that assignment is
independent of the latent match effect between bosses and workers, as the number of boss assignments increases for

                                                       24
assumptions. The zero means of the observed match effects within workers and bosses suggests
that there is little sorting of workers to bosses on the basis of the expected match-specific
component of productivity.
         B. Using Randomly Assigned Workers to Validate the Estimates
         Other tests are available. The first examines whether the estimated boss effects predict
well out of sample. Interview evidence from visits to the company revealed that for the first
assignment after being hired, the worker is randomly assigned to bosses, filling in on teams for
workers who have departed.29 Because this is a high turnover job, much of the assignment is
driven by the stochastic nature of quits, reflecting the fact that new workers randomly fill open
slots.30 31
         The assessment uses new workers who were allocated randomly to their first boss to
conduct an out-of-sample validation exercise. We estimate boss quality using data from older
workers and then assess whether the boss quality measures recovered from these experienced
workers predict the productivity of new workers.                  If non-random sorting is confounding
estimation of individual boss quality, the estimated boss effects should have little predictive
power on the sample of randomly assigned new workers.
         To test this, in step one, boss effects are estimated on a subset of data for experienced
workers who have had at least two previous bosses.                     The BLUPS (best linear unbiased
predictors) from step one are saved and used in step two, where daily output per hour of new
workers is regressed on estimates of boss quality obtained from the experienced worker sample.
         The test is conducted for the models with θ=0 and with θ=.3 in the public model with θ=0
from column 3 of Table 2, boss quality is measured using the bosses’ BLUP                            , estimated
from the set of experienced workers. The estimating equation for the test is then


worker i, the mean match effect for worker i should converge to 0. The same logic applies to the mean match effect
for boss j.
29
   There remains the possibility that even the first assignment is not completely random if departures are more
common for workers who are assigned to low quality bosses. But even if this were true, new workers would be more
likely to be assigned to low quality bosses, but the quality of the workers assigned to those bosses would still be
random.
30
    There are two sources of non-random assignment with subsequent worker movements between teams.
Experienced workers may be assigned to older bosses because both groups get their preferred shift choices. Star
workers may be assigned to star bosses when stars are given their preferred boss or shift as a reward for their
success.
31
   We are unable to test whether observable characteristics of new workers are balanced across bosses because the
data contain only worker identifiers, their start dates, and production histories.

                                                        25
          (16)
where         contains year x month dummies, day of week dummies, and a fifth order tenure
polynomial. In the model with θ=0.3 from column 1 of Table 2, boss quality is measured as

             yielding an estimating equation for the test

          (16’)

Assessing whether the boss quality measures predict well out of sample (i.e., beyond the
experienced group on which they were estimated) implies a null hypothesis that                         .
          Testing this hypothesis raises two difficulties. First, while the boss BLUPS contain very
little sampling error, measurement error is not eliminated entirely. This will bias estimates of
     toward zero, resulting in over-rejection of the null that                 . Second, the standard errors
from estimating the above models will be smaller than the true standard errors because there is
no accounting for the fact that the boss quality measures are generated regressors; this also
results in over-rejection of the null.
          The results in Table 5, Columns 1 and 2, suggest that the estimated boss quality measures
predict well out of sample, but they are statistically different from 1 at the 5% level using a t-test
with standard errors clustered by boss.32 However, given the difficulties with inference, the boss
quality measures that are estimated using the experienced sample of workers do a reasonable job
of predicting the productivity of the new hires who are assigned randomly. The parameter
estimates are 0.8 and 0.72 for the models with θ=0 and θ=0.3, respectively. On average, a good
boss for experienced workers is a good boss for new, arguably randomly assigned workers.
          Of course, it is possible that the initial assignment is not random, invalidating the
maintained hypothesis and the test. As a result, two additional tests of non-randomness are
presented that do not rely on this maintained hypothesis.
          C. Testing for Non-random Boss Transitions
          The remaining columns of Table 5 test for non-random sorting on unobservables.
Consistent estimation of the individual boss quality measures requires orthogonality between the
design matrix of boss assignments and the concurrent and lagged residuals in the productivity


32
  The observation counts in Columns 1 and 2 reflect the fact that only workers on their first boss spell are in the
sample.

                                                        26
equation. While a test cannot be carried out using concurrent residuals, it is possible to test
whether residuals from the initial boss assignment predict the quality of future bosses. Two tests
are implemented. The first is a test to determine whether the quality of future bosses predicts the
mean residual calculated for each worker after estimating equation (16) or (16’). The test is
implemented by regressing the mean worker residuals on dummy variables for the quartiles of
the distribution of the subsequent boss. That is, the mean residual for each worker from (16) or
(16’) is regressed on dummies for quartiles of the quality distribution of a worker’s second boss.
Because the residuals are calculated after random assignment to a boss, sorting does not
contaminate the estimates of these residuals.
         Under the null hypothesis of no sorting on unobservables, the dummy variables for
quartiles of the distribution of future bosses should not predict the mean residuals from a
worker’s first spell.33 A Wald test cannot reject that the quartile indicators for the second boss
assignment are zero in columns 3 and 4, providing additional reassurance that the boss quality
measures are not contaminated by sorting on unobservables.34
         A second test assesses whether the mean residual by worker from the first boss spell,
estimated from (16) or (16’), predicts second period boss quality. These results are contained in
the last two columns of Table 5. The dependent variable is the boss BLUP (column 5) or boss
random coefficient (column 6) on each worker’s second boss spell. Some statistical evidence for
predictability is detected, as the parameter estimates associated with the residuals from (16) and
(16’) are statistically different from zero. However, the parameter estimates are very small,
suggesting that non-random sorting is unlikely to be problematic.
         While these tests cannot speak to the allocation of bosses that occurs later in a worker’s
career, when coupled with the external validation of the estimated boss effects on a separate
sample of workers, the results suggest that non-random sorting is unlikely to be a problem for
estimation.


33
   Using quartile indicators for boss quality is a stronger test than regressing the residuals on linear boss quality
because additional information about changes over the distribution can be captured.
34
   Although this test may under-reject because of problems with measurement error regarding the quality of future
bosses, using quartile indicators alleviates some of this concern. Suppose that the measurement error is independent
of the true boss effect. Then if the concern is that the best bosses are assigned workers with the best residuals, it is
very unlikely that measurement error is responsible for the failure to reject the null because the parameter estimates
are non-monotonic. This suggests that attenuation bias is not driving these results.


                                                          27
VIII. Boss Attrition
         It seems reasonable to suppose that the boss selection process is such that the observed
bosses are the best candidates among the pool of potential bosses. However, the firm’s forecast
of future boss productivity is likely subject to error. As the firm learns about boss productivity,
the worst bosses are likely to be replaced.
         To test this prediction, boss attrition is analyzed. The approach is to estimate Cox
proportional hazard models of the probability of boss exit. The model includes indicators that
the boss’s estimated fixed effect is below the 10th percentile of the distribution or above the 90th
percentile. The prediction is that bad bosses leave and good bosses stay. Results are presented
using two versions of the estimated boss effects – those with the public/private boss effect
estimated to be θ=.30 and those with the public boss effect in the regression in which θ=0.
         The results are in Table 6. The exponentiated coefficients imply that bosses in the
bottom 10% are more than twice as likely to exit the firm as bosses outside of the bottom 10%.
This is true for both specifications in which θ=.30 and θ=0.35 To ensure that this result is not due
to noise (the concern being that the estimated boss quality measures for short-lived bosses are
most likely to be in either tail of the distribution), the specifications include indicators for bosses
above the 90th percentile. These coefficients are small and are not statistically different from
zero.


IX.      Peer Effects
         There is a growing literature on peer effects.36 If the best bosses are also likely to be
matched with the best team members, peer effects may confound the estimates. To test for this,
the basic specification with boss and worker fixed effects is run while adding a peer effect:
         (17)     qijt= Xitβ + αi + δj + ξ pijt + εijt
where the peer effect, pijt, is specified in two ways.


35
   Regressions are also run with boss tenure, where boss tenure is inferred from the time that we observe bosses, and
thus is left-censored. The hazard rate models are unchanged.
36
   Most current peer effects papers test whether workers learn from each other due to proximity, or adjust their effort
in response to those who work around them (Falk and Ichino, 2006) or who watch them (Mas and Moretti, 2009).
Few papers test for the complementarity of skills within the teams that are formed among peers, because skills are
unobserved and most data has come from production functions (like store clerks) that are largely individual output,
not team output. That is true of these data as well.

                                                         28
         One way to estimate peer effects is to use peers’ fixed effects as measures of the peer
output, estimated using a two-step non-linear least squares routine.37 The estimating equation for
the joint model is
         (17’) qijt= Xitβ + αi + δj + ξ Peer                                            + εijt
where summation over                      captures the fixed effects of worker i’s team on day t with boss
j while excluding worker i. This specification allows the estimated peer effect to depend only on
the permanent effect of co-workers on the team, αk, not on concurrent qijt. Estimation of the joint
model is not feasible on the full set of data because of memory constraints.38 Because workers
and bosses rarely move establishments, the joint procedure can be applied using subsets of
establishments. The estimation algorithm is a two-step procedure. The outer-loop guesses a
value of ξ    Peer,   the effect of increasing peers’ mean innate ability on productivity, and then
computes the remaining parameters via a linear conjugate gradient procedure in an inner-loop
conditioning on the value of ξ Peer. Search is then over ξ Peer.
         The main result is that peer effects are not economically significant relative to boss and
worker effects. The regressions in column 1 of Table 7 use a subset of the data corresponding to
a typical region, because joint estimation of worker effects and unconstrained peer effects is only
feasible on subsets of the data. The estimated peer effects are close to zero.
         Another method to estimate peer effects uses a peer’s first few months of output as a
proxy for the peer’s current output. These results are provided in column 2. Again, the
coefficient is close to zero.
         The conclusion is that peer effects are very small relative to boss effects.39 Note that this
production environment has relatively little teamwork because each worker primarily interacts
with a customer, not with other workers.40 Although the workers can see each other and may



37
   It is not possible to use a mixed effects model, as estimates of the individual worker fixed effects are necessary to
ξ Peer.
38
   Storage of the matrix of peer-indicators, even in sparse form, requires an order of magnitude more memory than
storage of the data with only worker and boss indicators.
39
   There is also possible sorting of workers into teams of correlated peers, because good workers will work together
if given the choice of their preferred shift and there are similar preferred shifts for all workers. If this sorting is
temporal, based on recent performance (as it is), introducing worker fixed effects for peer effects will reduce the
bias. If the sorting is based on permanent performance, there will be an upward bias in the estimated peer effects.
Given that the peer effects are zero or negative, this is not a concern.
40
   The same is true in Mas and Moretti (2009), who also find significant, but small peer effects.

                                                          29
learn from each other or compete with each other, the workers do not appear to be complements
in production.


X.     Conclusion
       Supervision and management are fundamental in personnel economics and in the theory
of the firm. Although we take as given that managers matter, neither the mechanisms through
which they affect productivity nor the actual size of the effects have been documented
previously. By using a data set that reports daily output on workers and that records the
supervisors to which they are assigned on each day, it is possible to examine the effects of bosses
on worker productivity.
       Boss effects are large and significant. Most important, bosses vary substantially in their
quality. A very good boss increases the output of the supervised team over that supervised by a
very bad boss by about as much as adding one member to the team. Using one normalization, the
value of the average boss is about 1.75 times that of a worker. There is some documented
persistence of boss effects, but much of the idiosyncratic aspect of what bosses do is fleeting.
Additionally, the poorer quality bosses are less likely to remain with the firm and workers who
are paired with the better bosses are more likely to remain with the firm. Finally, comparative
advantage does not seem to be a major factor in this firm. Sorting of the good bosses to good
workers only slightly increases the firm’s total output.




                                                 30
References

Abowd, John, Robert Creecy, and Francis Kramarz. 2002. “Computing Person and Firm Effects
Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data.” LEHD Program Technical Paper TP-
2002-06, U.S. Census Bureau.

Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and Simon Woodcock. 2006. “Econometric Analysis of Linked
Employer-Employee Data.” Working Paper, Cornell University.

Bennedsen, Morten, K. M. Nielsen, F. Perez-Gonzalez, and D. Wolfenzon. 2007. “Inside the
Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(2): 647-691.

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon.        2007.   “Do CEOs
Matter?” Working Paper No. 13-2007, Copenhagen Business School.

Bertrand, Morten, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. “Managing with Style: The Effect of
Managers on Firm Policies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1169-1208.

Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg. 2008. “Interpersonal Styles and Labor
Market Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 43(4): 815-858.

Branch, Gregory, Eric Hanushek, and Steven Rivkin. 2012. “Estimating the Effect of Leaders on
Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals.” Working Paper No. 17803, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Dawson, Peter, Stephen Dobson, and Bill Gerrard. 2000. “Estimating Coaching Efficiency in
Professional Team Sports: Evidence from English Association Football.” Scottish Journal of
Political Economy 47(4): 399-421.

Engelberg, Joseph, Raymond Fisman, Jay Hartzell, and Christopher Parsons. 2012. “Human
Capital and the Supply of Religion.” Working Paper, Columbia University.

Falk, Armin, and Andrea Ichino. 2006. “Clean Evidence on Peer Effects.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24(1): 39-57.

Frick, Bernd, and Robert Simmons. 2008. “The Impact of Managerial Quality on
Organizational Performance: Evidence from German Soccer.” Managerial and Decision
Economics 29(7): 593-600.

Garicano, Luis. 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production.”
Journal of Political Economy 108(5): 874-904.




                                             31
Garicano, Luis, and Thomas Hubbard. 2007. “Managerial Leverage is Limited by the Extent of
the Market: Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of Lawyers’ Human Capital.”
Journal of Law and Economics 50(1): 1-43.

Goodall, Amanda H. 2009a. “Highly Cited Leaders and the Performance of Research
Universities.” Research Policy 38(7): 1079-1092.

Goodall, Amanda H. 2009b. Socrates in the Boardroom: Why Research Universities Should Be
Led by Top Scholars. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Hermalin, Ben E. 1998. “Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership: Leading by Example.”
American Economic Review 88(5): 1188-1206.

Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2003. “Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of
the Value of Complementary Human Resource Management Practices.” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17(1): 155-180.

Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2012. “Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker Mobility: Direct
Evidence from Teachers.” Review of Economics and Statistics. Accepted for Publication.

Jenter, Dirk, and Katharina Lewellen. 2010. “Performance Induced CEO Turnover.” Working
Paper, Stanford University.

Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. “Do Leaders Matter: National Leadership
and Growth Since World War II.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 835-864.

Kahn, Lawrence M. 1993. “Managerial Quality, Team Success, and Individual Player
Performance in Major League Baseball.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 46(3): 531-547.

Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear. 1992. “Peer Pressure and Partnerships.” Journal of
Political Economy 100(4): 801-817.

Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen. 2012.              “Which CEO
Characteristics and Abilities Matter?” Journal of Finance 67(3): 973-1007.

Kuhn, Peter, and Catherine Weinberger. 2005. “Leadership Skills and Wages.” Journal of
Labor Economics 23(3): 395-436.

Lazear, Edward P. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic Review
90(5): 1346-1361.

Lazear, Edward P. 2004. “The Peter Principle: A Theory of Decline.” Journal of Political
Economy 112 (S1): S141-S163.




                                            32
Lazear, Edward P. 2012. “Leadership: A Personnel Economics Approach.” Labour Economics
19(1): 92-101.

Lazear, Edward P., and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2008. “Tenure and Output.” Labour Economics 15
(2008): 710-724.

Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2013. “Making Do with Less:
Working Harder During Recessions.” Working Paper, In Progress.

Mas, Alexandre, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Peers at Work.” American Economic Review
99(1): 112-145.

Matsa, David, and Amalia Miller. 2012. “A Female Style in Corporate Leadership? Evidence
from Quotas.” Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco. 2006. “Inherited Control and Firm Performance.”           American
Economic Review 96(5): 1559-1588.

Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2012. “Death of CEOs: Impact on Firm
Performance.” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Porter, Phillip K., and Gerald W. Scully. 1982. “Measuring Managerial Efficiency: The Case
of Baseball.” Southern Economic Journal 48(3): 642-650.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1982. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings.” Bell Journal of
Economics 13(2): 311-323.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Garth Saloner. 2000. “Visionaries, Managers, and Strategic Direction.”
RAND Journal of Economics 31(4): 693-716.

Schoar, Antoinette, and Luo Zuo. 2011. “Shaped by Booms and Busts: How the Economy
Impacts CEO Careers and Management Styles.” Working Paper, MIT.

Shaw, Kathryn L., and Edward P. Lazear. 2008. “Tenure and Output.” Labour Economics
15(4): 710-724.

Simon, Herbert. 1957. “The Compensation of Executives.” Sociometry 20(1): 32-35.




                                              33
Table 1: Summary Statistics

                    Variable                            Obs         Mean       Std. Dev.      Min          Max

Output Per Hour                                      5,729,508     10.26         3.16          0.1         40.0
Uptime                                               4,870,610      0.96         0.03          0.5          1.0
Output Per Hour* Uptime                              4,870,610     10.01         3.00          0.4         40.0
Tenure                                               5,729,508     648.91       609.83         1.0        4,235.0

Number of Workers                                     23,878
Number of Unique Bosses Per Worker                    23,878         3.99        2.78          1.0         19.0
Daily Team Size                                      633,818         9.04        4.54          1.0         29.0

Number of Bosses                                       1,940
Number of Unique Workers Per Boss                      1,940        49.15        35.41         1.0         250.0
Mean Number of Other Bosses for Each Worker            1,940         4.69         1.51         0.0          11.3

Notes:

The data contain daily worker productivity records from June 2006 to May 2010. Output per hour is the daily
average of the number of transactions per hour. Uptime is the daily percent of time that the worker is available to
handle transactions. These measures are recorded by computer software. There is some missing data on uptime.
The missing uptime data is concentrated toward the beginning of the sample period. The mean of output per hour
when restricting the sample to the 4,870,610 worker-days with non-missing uptime is 10.38 with standard deviation
3.08.




                                                        34
Table 2: Regressions of Output-per-Hour on Boss Effects

                                                                                    Mixed Effects                         Fixed Effects
                                                                         (1)              (2)               (3)                   (4)


Standard Deviation of Boss Effects x Average Team Size^(1‐θ)           4.74              4.08             4.104                  3.44

θ                                                                        0.3             0.3                0                     0

Standard Deviation of 6 Month Lagged Boss Effects x Average
                                                                                         1.41
Team Size^(1‐θ)
Standard Deviation of 12 Month Lagged Boss Effects x Average
                                                                                         1.06
Team Size^(1‐θ)

Standard Deviation of Worker Effects                                   1.33              1.33              1.35                  1.32

Standard Deviation of Match Effects                                   0.758              0.59             0.752

Lambda 6: St. Dev. of 6 month lagged boss effect / St. Dev. of
                                                                                         0.35
Current Boss Effect
Lambda 12: St. Dev. of 12 month lagged boss effect / St. Dev.
                                                                                         0.26
of Current Boss Effect

Theta Estimated                                                        Yes           Constrained       Constrained        Constrained
Number of Observations                                              5,729,508         4,747,015         5,729,508            5,729,508
Number of Workers                                                    23,878            21,886            23,878               23,878
Number of Bosses                                                      1,940             1,857             1,940                1,940




Notes: All results weight the boss effects by the average team size of 9.04. In specifications with θ not equal to zero, the weighting
multiplies the standard deviation of boss random coefficients by 9.04^(1‐θ). All specifications contain a fifth order polynomial function of
tenure and year x month dummies. To be included in the sample for column 2, a worker either had to have less than 6 months of tenure or
the boss 6 months previously must have been observed. For workers with greater than 1 year of tenure, the boss 12 months previously
must have been observed. Column (1): Mixed effects estimates of equation (13) in the text. Θ is estimated in a two‐step procedure with
search in an outer loop over θ. The inner loop uses the lme4 package in R to estimate the model. For all mixed models, lme4 is used.
Column (2): Mixed effects estimates of equation (12) in the text. Θ is constrained to the estimate from column 1. Match effects lagged 6
months and 12 months were also included in the specification. The standard deviations of these match effects are 0.62 and 0.61,
respectively. The correlation between current and 6 month and 12 month lagged boss BLUPS is 0.10 and 0.16, respectively. Column (3):
Mixed effects estimates of equation (14) in the text. Θ is constrained to be 0. Column(4): Fixed effects estimates of equation (14) in the
text. Θ is constrained to be 0. The standard deviation of worker and boss fixed effects is calculated based on weighting by observations in
the sample. A conjugate gradient algorithm is used to recover the parameters.




                                                                    35
Table 3: Estimates of Worker Attrition from Cox Proportional Hazard Models


Sample                                            Workers with α below the mean                                                Full Sample
                                       θ=0.30         θ=0.30         θ=0                θ=0               θ=0.30          θ=0.30         θ=0              θ=0
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)

Boss Effect BLUP x                     -0.111           -0.099        -0.180          -0.164              -0.123           -0.117        -0.197          -0.189
Team Size ^ - θ                        0.895             0.906         0.084          0.085                0.884           0.890         0.821           0.828
                                       (0.020)         (0.022)        (0.041)         (0.045)             (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.029)         (0.030)
Dummy for worker in bottom                              0.187                          0.192                               0.134                          0.139
10% of distribution of α                                1.205                          1.212                               1.143                          1.149
                                                       (0.027)                        (0.027)                             (0.026)                        (0.026)
Interaction of boss effect                              -0.043                        -0.027                               -0.032                        -0.011
and bottom 10% worker                                    0.958                         0.974                              0.969                           0.990
                                                       (0.033)                        (0.083)                             (0.030)                        (0.078)

N                                     3,012,703      3,012,703       3,012,703       3,012,703           5,573,233      5,573,233       5,573,233      5,573,233




Notes: Each cell contains the coefficient, exp(coefficient) and the standard error in parentheses after estimation of cox proportional hazard models of worker
attrition. All specifiations contain establishment and year x month fixed effects. The boss effects in columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 are the BLUPS from column 1 of Table 2.
The boss effects in the remaining columns are from column 3 of Table 2. Sample sizes differ from prior tables because the last month of data is excluded to be able
to characterize exits separately from the end of the sample. Results are qualitatively similar after dropping left censored workers.




Table 4: Analysis of Match Effects by Boss and Worker Quality Cells



Panel A: Match Effects from Column 1, Table 2 (θ=0.3)

                                                                                                   Boss
                                                                  Good                                                           Bad

                        Star                                     0.100                                                         -0.083
Worker
                        Laggard                                   0.05                                                         -0.063


Panel B Match Effects from Column 3, Table 2 (θ=0)

                                                                                                   Boss
                                                                  Good                                                           Bad

                        Star                                     0.104                                                         -0.077
Worker
                        Laggard                                   0.04                                                         -0.066


Notes: Good bosses and star workers are those above the median of the distribution of boss and worker effects, respectively. The
cells contain the means of the estimated match effects.




                                                                                36
Table 5: Out of Sample Validation of Boss Effects and Tests for Non-Random Assignment


                                                                                                    Sorting Test 1: Do quantiles of
                                                                                                      future boss quality predict               Sorting Test 2: Do lagged residuals
                                                           Out of Sample Validation                           residuals?                            predict future boss quality?


                                                                                                                                                                  Boss coefficient
                                                                                                 Mean residual by Mean residual by            Boss BLUP from
                                                                                                                                                                   BLUP from
               Dependent Variable:                          Oph                 Oph               worker from      worker from               experienced sample
                                                                                                                                                                experienced sample
                                                                                                   Column (1)       Column (2)                   (Theta = 0)
                                                                                                                                                                   (Theta = 0.3)

                     Sample:                                       assignment                                   assignment                     New workers' on 2nd boss assignment
                                                             (1)                 (2)                     (3)                  (4)                     (5)                    (6)

Boss BLUP estimated from experienced                       0.8008
sample (Theta = 0)                                        (0.0814)
Boss random coeff. estimated from experienced                                  0.7163
sample x Team Size ^ -0.3 (Theta = 0.3)                                       (0.0669)

Dummy for boss in the bottom 25% of Blups                                                             -0.1039             -0.0560
(column 3) or random coefficients (column 4)                                                          (0.0620)            (0.0698)
Dummy for boss in 25%-50%                                                                             -0.0382             -0.0895
                                                                                                      (0.0582)            (0.0667)
Dummy for boss in 50%-75%                                                                             -0.1115             -0.0404
                                                                                                      (0.0618)            (0.0618)
Mean residual by worker from Column (1)                                                                                                             0.0036
                                                                                                                                                   (0.0016)
Mean residual by worker from Column (2)                                                                                                                                    0.0109
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0038)

Wald statistic that quartile differences are zero                                                      4.9012                2.0311
P-Value                                                                                                0.1792                0.5660

R-squared                                                 0.1058               0.1076                  0.0366                0.0299                 0.2404                 0.4010
Number of Observations                                    782,778              782,778                 10,935                10,935                 10,935                 10,935



Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by boss. Wald tests are calculated using a variance‐covariance matrix clustered by boss. The sample in columns 1‐4 contains workers
on their first assignment prior to the first boss switch. The sample in columns 5 and 6 track the workers from columns 1‐4 after their first boss change. To be included, workers must
have had at least 20 days of tenure on the first boss spell; this removes data from a training period. Boss BLUPS or random coefficients are calculated using a partitioned set of workers
as follows: First, using a sample including only workers after their second boss switch, we compute boss effects for this sample by regressing oph on a tenure polynomial, month, and
day of week fixed effects, along with boss, worker, and match random effects (or random coefficients in the case of Theta = 0.3). We then recover the individual boss BLUPs (or
random coefficients). Second, we merge the boss quality measures onto the sample of workers on their first boss. The models in columns 1 and 2 have controls for tenure and
monthly time dummies. The models in columns 3‐6 add establishment fixed effects.




                                                                                          37
Table 6: Estimates of Boss Attrition from Cox Proportional Hazard Model



                                                                     θ=0.30                              θ=0
                                                                       (1)                               (2)

Dummy for Boss Effect Below 10th Percentile                          1.000                               0.591
                                                                     2.720                              1.805
                                                                     (0.090)                            (0.090)

Dummy for Boss Effect Above 90th Percentile                          0.040                              0.083
                                                                     1.040                              1.086
                                                                     (0.100)                            (0.100)

N                                                                    620,130                           620,130




Notes: Each cell contains the coefficient, exp(coefficient) and the standard error in parentheses. The boss effects in
column 1 are from estimation of equation 13 in column 1 of Table 2. The boss effects in column 2 are from the estimation
of equation 14 in column 3 of Table 2. Sample sizes differ from Table 1 because the last month of data is excluded to be
able to characterize boss exits. Results are qualitatively similar after dropping left censored bosses and in specifications
with and without left censored bosses that include controls for boss tenure time effects.




                                                             38
Table 7: The Effect of Peer Quality on Output-per-Hour

Estimation method:                                                                        Joint         Peer Proxies

R-squared                                                                                0.2356             0.243

Coefficient on Peers’ Mean Ability                                                       0.001             -0.022

Standard Deviation of Peer Effects                                                       0.0004             0.009
Standard Deviation of Boss Effects (Weighted by worker-days)                              2.85               3.44
Standard Deviation of Worker Effects (Weighted by worker-days)                            1.65               1.32

Number of Workers                                                                        1,679            23,878
Number of Bosses                                                                          155              1,940
Number of Observations                                                                  391,730          5,729,508

Notes:

All specifications contain a fifth order polynomial function of tenure (with a 365 day cutoff and cutoff indicator),
monthly time dummies, day of week dummies, and boss and worker fixed effects. In column 1, the joint estimation
procedure uses non-linear least squares, taking the mean of the team members’ individual fixed effects as a measure
of peer quality. The joint estimation procedure is computationally demanding; an “outer” loop is used to search over
the peer effect coefficient, while an inner loop conditions on the outer loop value and solves for the parameters using
a conjugant gradient procedure. The joint procedure is not possible on the full data because of memory issues in
Matlab; storage of the matrix of peer fixed effects requires an order of magnitude more memory than using a single-
dimensional index of peer quality. In column 2, the peer proxies use mean output on the first three months on the
job as the value of peer quality. If a worker’s first three months are not observed, then the mean value of all
observed workers’ first three months is used. To calculate the standard deviation of peer effects, it is assumed that
one peer’s output increases by a standard deviation change in output per hour, or 3.16 units. This is then multiplied
by the Coefficient on Peer’s Mean Ability and divided by (9.04-1), the mean number of other team members.




                                                         39
