NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESIDENT NETWORKS AND FIRM TRADE
Lauren Cohen
Umit G. Gurun
Christopher J. Malloy
Working Paper 18312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18312
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

This paper previously circulated as "Channels of Influence." We are grateful for funding from the
National Science Foundation. We thank Joshua Aizenman, Gennaro Bernile, Lee Branstetter, Geoffrey
Booth, Bill Cready, Robert Feenstra, Fritz Foley, Rob Hansen, George Korniotis, John McLaren, Florian
Peters, and seminar participants at the NBER International Trade and Investment Meeting at Stanford,
Brigham Young University, Australia National University, Ozyegin University, Michigan State University,
University of Alabama, University of Arizona, Baruch College, University of Amsterdam/Duisenberg
School of Finance, University of Melbourne, University of Miami, University of South Florida, University
of Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, Washington University in Saint Louis, University of Mannheim,
and Tulane University, for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lauren Cohen, Umit G. Gurun, and Christopher J. Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Resident Networks and Firm Trade
Lauren Cohen, Umit G. Gurun, and Christopher J. Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 18312
August 2012, Revised April 2013
JEL No. F16,F30,G14
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate that simply by using the ethnic makeup surrounding a firm’s location, we can predict,
on average, which trade links are valuable for firms. Using customs and port authority data on the
international shipments of all U.S. publicly-traded firms, we show that firms are significantly more
likely to trade with countries that have a strong resident population near their firm headquarters. We
use the formation of World War II Japanese Internment Camps to isolate exogenous shocks to local
ethnic populations, and identify a causal link between local networks and firm trade links. Firms that
exploit their local networks (strategic traders) see significant increases in future sales growth and profitability,
and outperform other importers and exporters by 5%-7% per year in risk-adjusted stock returns. In
sum, our results document a surprisingly large impact of immigrants’ economic role as conduits of
information for firms in their new countries.
Lauren Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
Umit G. Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu

Christopher J. Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu

Firms buy and sell goods in a global marketplace. As this becomes increasingly true,
understanding how firms differentially navigate this marketplace is critical to identifying
which firms will ultimately succeed, and how investors should allocate capital amongst
these firms. Success in this global setting depends not only on the goods or services
that firms can provide, but also on the information networks that firms can access. We
show that these networks have a first-order impact on the trade decisions undertaken by
these firms, both in terms of imports and exports. We further explore how quickly the
capital markets can separate the “strategic” importers and exporters from other firms,
and show that the market appears to have a difficult time deciphering even openly
observable channels.
Increasing exposure to foreign operations has been a consistent time-series trend
in the United States. The Bureau of Economic Analysis’s National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) broad measure of economy-wide firm profits shows that the
percentage of NIPA national profits coming from overseas has increased from roughly
21% in 2000 to 38% in 2010 (Hodge (2011)).

Further, this is not a small firm

phenomenon, as the entire S&P 500 received 46% of their sales revenue from overseas in
2010, growing from only 30% ten years prior.
Although a large and growing number of public firms engage in international
transactions, we still do not have a full understanding of why firms choose to trade with
firms in certain countries, and how these decisions affect firm value. To shed light on
this question, we exploit variation in ethnic population breakdowns across metropolitan
statistical areas (MSAs) in the U.S. Specifically, we examine how local residents’ ties to
their home-countries can play a role in creating bilateral trade linkages and whether
(and importantly which of) these trade links are value-enhancing for firms.
We do this by focusing on the import and export activity of all US publiclytraded firms for the past seventeen years. We obtain import and export data through
public records that must be reported by shippers, and then made publicly available
through customs and port authorities. We use this data to ask the question of whether
there are strategic trade decisions that a firm can make, given the immigration patterns
that result in concentrated ethnic populations close to certain firms.
1

An example of our identification strategy is the following. Suppose we consider a
firm located in Jersey City, New Jersey, where a common ethnicity is Indian. We first
test whether this firm is more likely to trade (either import or export) with a firm in
India, than a firm located in Bangor, Maine, where Indian is not a common ethnicity.
We hypothesize that local ethnicities may help lower the information barriers for local
companies, and thus that firms may enjoy benefits from this local advantage. In
addition, ethnic make-up may also proxy for local demand for a firm’s goods, which can
impact optimal importing decisions. We then test the value enhancement of these links.
We find evidence that firms export more to (and import more from) countries
with which they have stronger information links. We measure firm-country information
networks as the share of residents in a firm’s headquarter MSA that have the same
ethnicity as the country to which the firm is exporting/importing (a variable we call
“Connected Population”). A one standard deviation increase in connected population
increases the amount the firm exports to (imports from) a country by 63%, t=4.71
(33%, t=2.66).
Next we use the formation of World War II Japanese Internment Camps to
isolate exogenous shocks to local ethnic populations, and identify a causal link between
local networks and firm trade links.

These internment camps were established

throughout the country to house Japanese and Japanese-Americans originally from the
West Coast who were relocated to camps following the bombing of Pearl Harbor in
1941. The camps represented a sizable shock to the Japanese populations surrounding
them, and had an enduring impact on these areas as many internees ultimately settled
around these camps, having no home or work to return to when the war ended. We
find that sixty years later, these internment camp locations had significantly higher
Japanese populations. Further, using the instrumented value of Japanese population
(with internment camp locations as an instrument), we show that this exogenously
determined Japanese ethnic population density had a large and significant impact on
local firm trading decisions, establishing more cleanly a causal link from surrounding
ethnic population to firm-level import and export decisions.

2

We also show that this increased importing (and exporting) provides a tangible
benefit to the firm in terms of increased sales and increased profitability in their
respective industries. For instance, “strategic exporters” (i.e., firms that export to a
country that has a large connected population immediately surrounding its firm
headquarters) significantly increase their future profitability (EBITDA/Assets) by over
0.9%, relative to a median profitability figure of roughly 8.3%.
We next go on to explore whether the market understands the value of the
strategic use of information networks, and the resultant import and export decisions of
firms. We find evidence that it does not. For instance, strategic exporters outperform
other firms that export to the same countries but that do not have local information
networks by 50 basis points per month (t=2.15) in excess returns, and 57 basis points
per month (t=2.78) in 4-factor abnormal returns. Importantly, this outperformance is
unaffected by known risk determinants, and does not reverse, suggesting that this
strategic trading behavior is truly important for fundamental firm value, but is only
gradually realized by the market.
We also run a number of tests to better establish our proposed mechanism. For
example, if it really is these information linkages that are increasing the amount of
importing (and exporting) to the countries represented by the connected population,
then we might expect that when these connections are more valuable, we should see
these connections utilized more heavily. We test this idea by looking at tariff controls
between the US and a given connected country for a given product. Consistent with
lower (higher) tariffs increasing (decreasing) the value of the information network
connection, we see significantly more strategic trading by firms (i.e., trading to the
country of the connected population) where US import tariffs are lower. In addition, we
show that the benefits of networks are more pronounced when importing differentiated
products (products that are not traded over organized exchanges).1 These findings are
consistent with the variation in the value of the network causing variation in strategic
trading.

1

See Rauch (1999, 2001) and Rauch and Trindade (2002) for evidence that network benefits in trade are
strongest for differentiated products.

3

Next, we dig deeper into the exact manner in which the information is
transferred across the network, and thus profitably used by firms. While we cannot
obtain the ethnic make-up of the entire employee base or management of all firms, we
do collect the ethnic makeup of the firm’s entire board of directors for all firms in our
sample. From this data, we can identify one channel, through the board of directors,
that this information network may be utilized.

We first show that local ethnic

population is a strong predictor of a board’s ethnic make-up (i.e., if there is a larger
Chinese population in a given firm’s MSA, the exporting/importing firm’s board is
significantly more likely to have Chinese board members). We then find that when a
strategic importer (exporter) has a connected board member on its firm board, it trades
significantly more with the connected country. For instance, firms export 68% more
than the median firm (t=2.87) to countries from which they have a connected board
member. Further, as is the case with strategic importers (exporters), the market does
not fully understand the value of these connected board members: firms that exploit
these connected board members in their trading decisions have predictable future
positive abnormal stock returns.
We show that in addition to market participants not fully realizing the value of
the information network for strategic importing and exporting firms, sell-side analysts
make the same mistakes. Specifically, analysts are significantly less accurate in their
earnings forecasts of strategic importers and exporters. Further, when their increased
sales and profitability are reported at quarterly earnings announcements, strategic
importers and exporters have significantly more positive earnings surprise returns.
Lastly, we show that the effect of networks in international transactions is not confined
to imports and exports. Using information disclosed in segment filings, we show that
firms are more likely to have international sales in countries that have an ethnic
presence around their firm headquarters.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief
background and literature review. Section II describes the data, while Section III
documents the impact of the connections on firm-level trade. Section IV provides
evidence of a causal link using the Japanese Internment Camps of World War II.
Section V establishes the returns to strategic importers and exporters that utilize these
4

connected information networks, while Section VI documents other business transactions
that firms engage in with countries linked by local population. Section VII concludes.

I. Background and Literature Review
Our research adds to a large literature analyzing the strategic entry mode choices
of firms seeking to expand their businesses to overseas markets. According to Agarwal
and Ramaswami (1992), these choices include exporting, joint venture, licensing, and
direct investment. The underlying theme in this literature is that few companies can
afford to do business in all countries at the same time; therefore firms should weigh the
relative advantages of these entry modes in different regions of the world. The early
marketing

literature

that

provides

normative

guidelines

on

the

process

of

internationalizations include Cavusgil and Nevin (1981) and Green and Allaway (1985),
among others; whereas recent research on the topic focuses on the consequences of entry
mode on firm operations. For example, Pan, Li, and Tse (1999) show that early entrants
have significantly higher market shares and profitability than late followers. In addition,
several papers investigate whether cultural proximity of foreign markets to local markets
affects entry timing and mode, and find conflicting results. For example, the findings in
Mitra and Golder (2002) suggest that cultural distance to domestic market is not a
significant factor in entry timing; whereas Loree and Guisinger (1995) argue that it is.
Our paper demonstrates that local ethnic populations around the headquarters of a firm
impact the bilateral trade relations to connected countries. We also show that board
members who are connected to trade partners through their nationalities provide
information advantages that generate value for firms.
Our paper also links to a vast literature investigating the drivers and implications
of international trade. Bernard et al. (2007) argue that, when investigating the causes
and implications of international trade, the literature emphasizes several factors
including comparative advantage, increasing returns to scale and consumer preference
for variety, but focuses less on the firms that actually drive trade flows. They show that
firms that export differ substantially from firms that solely serve the domestic market in
several dimensions: across a wide range of countries and industries, exporters have been
5

shown to be larger, more productive, more skill- and capital-intensive, and to pay higher
wages than non-trading firms. Gould (1994) shows that immigrant ties in the United
States (and Canada) play a role in increasing bilateral trade flows and conclude that
immigrant ties (or links) provide knowledge of home-country markets, language,
preferences, and personal contacts that have the potential to decrease trading
transactions costs.
In particular, we add to the growing literature on the role that social networks
and informational barriers play in impacting international trade. For example, Rauch
(1999) argues that informational barriers play a key role in hampering trade, and shows
that geographic proximity is more important for trade in non-homogenous (i.e.,
differentiated) goods.

Rauch and Trindade (2002) demonstrate that ethnic Chinese

networks, proxied by ethnic Chinese population shares, help increase bilateral trade,
particularly for differentiated products.

2

Meanwhile Chaney (2012) develops a

theoretical model where firms only export to countries where they have a contact, and
shows that firms use their networks of contacts to search for new trading partners; he
also shows empirically that this model is consistent with the dynamics of firm-level
exports in France.3 Finally, within-country evidence also highlights the importance of
social networks for trade; for example, Combes, Lafourcade and Mayer (2005)
demonstrate that networks facilitate trade between regions within France; Garmendia,
Llano, Minondo and Requena (2012) show that social and business networks have a
particularly strong impact on the extensive margin of trade in Spain; and Burchardi and
Hassan (2013) show that West German regions that have closer social links with East
Germany grew faster and invested more into East Germany after the German
reunification. We add to this literature by isolating the effects of local ethnicities as a
determinant of firm-level imports and exports to foreign trading partners.
Lastly, our research is broadly related to prior studies that analyze investors’
delayed and biased reactions to information.
2

The basic theme of this strand of

See also Rauch (2001) and Casella and Rauch (1998) for theory and evidence on information-sharing
networks among internationally dispersed ethnic minorities.
3
For broader evidence on the impact of firm-level networks, see Hidalgo, Klinger, Barabási and
Hausmann (2007) for evidence on how the network connectedness of products impacts country-level
development, and Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) for evidence that
microeconomic idiosyncratic shocks can be transmitted through supplier-customer links and impact
aggregate volatility in the economy.

6

literature is that, if investors have limited resources and capacity to collect, interpret,
and finally trade on value-relevant information, we would expect asset prices to
incorporate information only gradually. One of the contributions of our paper is to
highlight the importance of scrutinizing local resources in understanding asset prices. If
investors pay too little attention to firms exploiting local advantages, asset prices may
exhibit predictable patterns. There is an extensive literature on investors’ limited
attention to information. On the theoretical side, numerous studies, such as Merton
(1987), Hong and Stein (1999), and Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003), argue that, in
economies populated by investors subject to binding attention and resource constraints,
delayed information flows can lead to expected returns that are not explained by
traditional asset pricing models.

Subsequent empirical studies find evidence that is

largely consistent with these models’ predictions. For example, Huberman and Regev
(2001), Barber and Odean (2006), DellaVigna and Pollet (2006), Hou (2006), Hong,
Torous, and Valkanov (2007), and Cohen and Frazzini (2008), Huang (2011), and
Nguyen (2011) find that investors respond quickly to information that catches their
attention (e.g., news printed on the New York Times, stocks that have had extreme
returns or trading volume in the recent past, and stocks that more people follow), but
tend to ignore information that is less salient yet nonetheless essential to firm values.
In addition, Cohen and Lou (2011) find that investors have difficulty in incorporating
industry news into conglomerates (as opposed to simple stand-alone firms in the same
industry), while Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2011) find that investors do not
understand and price the predictable innovation ability of firms. These behaviors on
the part of investors usually result in significant asset return predictability in financial
markets. We document exactly this type of return predictability by showing that the
stock market is slow to recognize the value of firms’ strategic use of information
networks, and the resultant import and export decisions of firms.

II. Data
We obtain data from several sources. Our international trade data comes from
Journal of Commerce’s Port Import Export Reporting Service (Piers), a subsidiary of
7

UBM Global Trade. Piers collects “bill of lading” level import and export data from
three major sources: U.S. Customs and Border Protection Automated Manifest System,
Piers’ own reporters located in 88 major ports in the U.S., and foreign partners whose
national Customs authorities provide comparable data. A bill of lading is a legal
document between the shipper and the carrier that outlines the type, quantity and
destination of the good being carried. Our data includes standard information provided
on the bill of lading and value added fields such as content (HS Code level) and the
value of the cargo, both of which are estimated by Piers. We match Piers data to public
firm names using shipper (for exports) and receiver (for imports) firm names using name
matching algorithms. Panels A and B of Table I report the firm characteristics of public
firms that import and export, and Panel C of Table I provides industry breakdowns of
exporters and importers. Appendix Table A1 provides the analogous firm characteristics
for non-importers and non-exporters. Table II reports the top 4 destination and target
ports for imports and exports.4
We obtain local ethnicity data as follows. We use metropolitan statistical area
(MSA)-level population data drawn from the American Communities Project (ACP),
provided by Spatial Structures in the Social Sciences at Brown University.5 The Census
Bureau uses a standard set of definitions of the area included in each MSA. In most
cases an MSA includes both a central city (or sometimes two or more central cities) and
the ring of surrounding suburbs. ACP data contain data for 331 MSAs. To match MSA
to zipcodes of firm headquarters, we use Census U.S. Gazetteer files for 1990 and 2000.6
Unlike Census data, ACP data help identify the national origins of Hispanic and
Asian ethnicities. ACP data allows us to disaggregate Hispanic ethnicities to 19 nations
and Asian ethnicities to 7 nations. In cases where we cannot map a given nation that
exists in export/imports files, we use the mapping in ethnicity to identify a nation that
4

According to U.S. Customs and Border protection rules, importers may request their company name not
to be disclosed on vessel manifests, and on occasion Regulations and Rulings, Privacy Branch of U.S.
Customs and Border protection grant these requests for a period of two years.
(https://help.cbp.gov/app/answers/detail/a_id/285/kw/19%20CFR.%20103.31/session/L3NpZC9Tbmxm
dW5Haw%3D%3D). Our sample, thus, does not contain these firms. Upon inspection of our sample, we
find out that almost all large firms appear to exist in our sample without a two-year consecutive break in
the database, which suggests firms that constitute the majority of the import activity have not applied for
custom’s privacy protection throughout the sample period.
5
http://www.s4.brown.edu/cen2000/data.html.
6
http://www.census.gov/geo/www/gazetteer/gazette.html.

8

is more likely to proxy for population of that nation’s presence in the U.S.

For

example, we use Filipino population figures to proxy for Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, Cambodia and Malaysia. Appendix Table A2 presents our country-to-MSA
population mappings.
In various robustness tests, we also use coarser definitions of ethnicity drawn
directly from the 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census, and which are available at the state level.
The ethnicity information in the Census is based on self-identification questions in
which residents choose their origin(s) or descent(s). Appendix Table A3 presents these
country-to-Census ethnicity mappings.
We determine the nationality of corporate board members using biographical
information provided by BoardEx of Management Diagnostics Limited, a private
research company specialized in social network data on company officials of US and
European public and private companies.
Finally, we also obtain Harmonized System Code (HS Code) level tariff
information from the TRAINS dataset provided by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD). A typical entry in this dataset is as follows: In
year 2003, U.S. applied a 4% tariff rate for Brazil nuts (HS Code 080120) to Brazil.
Tariff information contains not only most favored nation (MFN) tariff rates, but also,
rates agreed upon in various preferential regimes including regional trade agreements
(RTA), preferential trade agreements (PTA) and bilateral agreements. If tariff data is
missing for a particular importing country in a particular year for a given HS code, we
use the most recent values as major tariff changes take place very infrequently.

III. The Impact of Connections on Firm-Level Trade

A. Import and Export Decisions of Firms
We first test the hypothesis that firms export more to (and import more from)
countries with which they have stronger information links. We measure firm-country
information networks as the share of residents surrounding a firm’s headquarters that
have the same ethnicity as the country to which the firm is exporting/importing (a
variable we call “Connected Population”), where we use the fine measure of
9

Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) to define surrounding area (with an analogous
state-level measure included in Appendix Table A4). As joint location can be influenced
by many factors, Section III can be seen as documenting the base relationship between
surrounding ethnicities and firm trade decisions, while we establish a cleaner causal
relationship in Section IV.
The dependent variable in our tests is a firm’s import/export behavior in a given
year. Specifically, for each firm in each year we compute its “Export Ratio” as the total
amount that a given firm exports to a destination country in a given year scaled by the
total amount of exports by the firm in that year (Eict /Sum(Eit)).7 We define “Import
Ratio” analogously for imports. All export and import figures are converted to U.S.
dollars, and represent the dollar value of exports and imports by a given firm.
In Table III we present results from a panel regression of firm-level export and
import behavior on firm-country information networks, plus a host of fixed effects. The
unit of observation in these regressions is firm-country-year, and all standard errors are
clustered at the year level to broadly allow for any correlations that impact all firms
over a given year (i.e., tariff changes, conflicts, shipping blockages, etc.). 8 Panel A
presents the results with Export Ratio as the dependent variable; each specification
shows that Connected Population (CPct) is a positive and significant predictor of a
firm’s country-level export share. We add fixed effects across specifications in Columns
1-4 for firm, year, MSA, country, firm x year, and MSA x country, with the coefficient
on Connected Population remaining large and significant. In terms of magnitude, the
coefficient of 0.039 (t=4.71) on CPct in Column 2 implies that for a one-standard
deviation increase in CPct, a firm’s Export Ratio increases by 1.30%; relative to median
Export Ratio 2.06%, this implies a 63% increase. In Column 5, we also investigate the
extensive margin of exporting and find that a firm’s connected population around its
corporate headquarters is a significant predictor of a firm’s likelihood of exporting to a

7

If we instead scale by exports of all U.S. public firms to the given country in the same year, we also find
strong and significant results. The magnitudes are actually quite close, on average roughly 4-7% larger
than in Table III, while each analogous specification is highly statistically significant (p<0.01).
8
We have run these analyses also clustering standard errors at the firm level, MSA level, and state level,
which give comparable standard errors, and all results remain significant.

10

given country.9 A one-standard deviation increase in CPct increases the likelihood of
exporting to a given country by 1.46%. Compared to the mean export extensive margin
of 0.38%, this implies a large economic impact in magnitude.
Panel B presents the identical set of tests using Import Ratio as the dependent
variable.

As in the export tests, we find that ethnic information links are strong

positive predictors of firm-level import behavior. The magnitude of this effect is again
large: the coefficient of 0.032 (t=2.70) on CPct in Column 2 implies that for a onestandard deviation increase in CPct, a firm’s Import Ratio increases by 1.05%, which
this translates into a 34% increase (when compared to the median Import Ratio of
3.14%). Furthermore, Column 5 implies that a one-standard deviation increase in CPct
increases the likelihood of importing from a given country by 1.85%. Compared to the
mean import probability of 3.22%, this again implies a significant impact.

A.1 Connected Board Members and Trade Decisions
We next explore in more depth the exact manner in which the information is
transferred across the network.

While we cannot obtain the ethnic make-up of the

entire employee base or management of all firms, we do collect the ethnic makeup of the
firm’s entire board of directors for all firms in our sample.

From this data, we can

identify one channel, through the board of directors, that this information network may
be utilized. These directors are involved with important firm-level decisions, such as the
establishment and continuation of export and import relationships with foreign firms
(Gevurtz (2004)). We first show that local ethnic population is a strong predictor of a
board’s ethnic make-up (i.e., if there is a larger Chinese population in a given MSA, the
exporting/importing firm’s board is significantly more likely to have Chinese board
members). Specifically, the correlation between the percentage population from a certain
country and having that country represented on the board of a firm in that MSA is
highly significant (=0.20, p<0.01).
9

These tests are constructed similarly to those in the first four columns of Table III, except that here we
include all possible trade partners in the world (whether or not the firm traded with these nations or not);
if the firm did trade with this country, the left-hand size variable is a dummy variable set equal to one,
and if not, the left-hand side variable is set to zero).

11

The variable we use to capture the impact of this ethnic link seen through the
board of directors is Connected Board Member, which is a categorical variable equal to
1 if the firm has board member whose nationality is the same as that to which the firm
is importing (exporting), and 0 otherwise. From Panel A and Panel B of Table III, this
connected board measure is a large and significant determinant of firms’ trading
decisions. For instance, in Column 4 of Panel A, the coefficient estimate of 0.014
(t=2.87) implies that a firm exports 68% more to countries from which it has a
connected board member.

B. Tariff and Differentiated Product Analysis
In our next set of tests, we exploit shocks to the value of firm-country links. In
particular, we use product-level data on imports for the firms in our sample, and
identify situations where country-specific tariffs set by the US on types of goods are
higher or lower. Thus our tests are similar to those in Table III, except that they are
now run at the product level, and hence the unit of observation in the regressions is the
firm-product-country-year. In addition, we include new variables designed to measure
the impact of tariffs, for example a variable called “Tariff” which is equal to the US
import tariff on the given product imported from the given country in the given year.
These tariffs are gathered from the TRAINS dataset maintained by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). We also include the interaction
term

between

tariff

cuts

and

firm-country

information

links

(Connected

Population*Tariff). Since US tariffs only bind for imports, we only run these tests using
the Import Ratio as the dependent variable.
Table IV presents the results of these tests. Specifically, we run panel regressions
of import ratios on firm-country information links, plus the tariff variables described
above, along with various fixed effects including firm-, year-, and product-fixed effects.
From Column 3, the coefficient on the interaction term (Connected Population*Tariff),
which is negative and significant (=-0.0022, t=4.49), suggests that Connected
Population has only roughly 20% the impact when tariffs are one standard deviation
larger to the country. In other words, precisely when it is more costly to utilize the
12

advantages of the Connected Population, Connected Population has a significantly
smaller effect on import decisions of firms.
In the last two columns, we also investigate whether the effects of networks are
more pronounced for certain types of products. For this purpose, we use the
differentiated versus homogenous product classification of Rauch (1999). Homogenous
products are those that one can obtain from organized exchanges. 10 Rauch (1999)
provides a theory that the immigrant-link effect on trade should be greatest for
differentiated products, and smallest for homogeneous products traded on organized
exchanges. Column 5 shows that the network effects we identify are indeed significantly
more pronounced when importing differentiated products as opposed to homogenous
products; however, we find no significant differential effect across product types for
exports.
Taken as a whole, the results in this section are consistent with firms exporting
(importing) significantly more to (from) countries with which they have stronger
information links.

Both effects are economically large, and consistent with firms

exploiting their information networks when making their trade decisions. Further, at
times when particular products are more attractive (such as after a tariff cut), the
impact of these information linkages on product-level import behavior is more
pronounced.

IV. Japanese Internment Camps of World War II
Although we have shown a strong correlation between surrounding ethnic
population and trade activity, nothing up to this point has addressed the direct causal
impact of ethnic population on import/export activity.

This relationship could be

driven by a number of factors and not necessarily by a direct causal channel from ethnic
population to trade. For instance, it could be that groups of firms are simply bringing
10

We thank James Rauch for providing product classifications
(http://weber.ucsd.edu/~jrauch/research_international_trade.html).
We use the conversion tables maintained at United Nations to map these Standard International Trade
Classification (SITC Rev. 2) based classification to HS Codes used in vessel manifests
(http://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/conversions/HS%20Correlation%20and%20Conversion%20tables.htm).

13

in the foreign population when they plan to import/export to the resultant country. It
may also be that some outside factor is causing both people of a certain ethnicity, and
firms planning to trade with their home country, to locate in the same location, but the
ethnic population themselves have no direct impact on trade. One example of this is
geographic distance. For instance, it is both easiest for Vietnamese immigrants to reach
California (as opposed to New York), along with it being cheaper for California firms to
ship goods to and from Vietnam (relative to a New York firm). Although we control for
this particular channel in Table III, other types of these common attributes could drive
both ethnic population and trade, but have no causal path.
In order to establish causality, we need exogenous variation, such as exogenously
“dropping” firms in random locations, or exogenously “dropping” ethnic populations in
random locations, and then running our tests to see if these exogenously matched firmsurrounding ethnicities product the same impact. We run exactly this latter experiment
by examining the Japanese Internment Camps of World War II.

A. Japanese Internment Camps, Current Population, and Trade
The Japanese Internment Camps were part of a program by the United States
government to relocate and intern Japanese and Japanese-Americans following the
attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. The relocation stemmed from a worry11 that if there
was an invasion by Japan, these citizens might work against US interests. The camps
were constructed in 1942, and held nearly 115,000 Japanese and Japanese-Americans.
The internment camps were distributed unevenly throughout the US, as shown in the
Figure I, with peak populations shown in the accompanying table.

An additional

important aspect of the relocations is that they represented substantial increases in
terms of Japanese-origin population for states of the relocation camps.

To illustrate

this, we collected data from the 1940 US Census for the states that had internment
camps, and show this in Figure 1. From this data, for instance, Arkansas had only 3
people of Japanese descent in the 1940 census, compared to roughly 17,000 Japanese

11

The order to create the camps and authorize the relocations themselves was Executive Order 9066,
signed into law on February 19, 1942.

14

and Japanese Americans relocated to the internment camps. Accordingly, the number
of Japanese that were interned in these camps represented a substantive shock to the
total Japanese population in these states.
The camps were fully evacuated by 1946 (Burton et. al (2000)). However, prior
to internment, many of these internees had to quickly sell their homes and other assets
before leaving, as they were not sure what would happen to them, nor how long they
were to be interned (Okamoto (2000)). Added to this, many internees that did try to
return to their former West Coast home cities faced acts of violence and discrimination
(Ina et al. (1999)). Both of these resulted in many internees resettling in the regions
surrounding their internment camps (Ina et al. (1999)). Our identification comes from
these internees who decide to remain, settle, and form communities in the regions
around the internment camps.
However, we need to formally establish the fact that the internees who decided to
stay do materially impact the population of Japanese origin in the decades following,
and particularly during our sample period. This first-stage regression is shown in Panel
A of Table V. It is simply testing whether the states that housed internment camps see
a larger percentage of Japanese origin population today. The dependent variable is thus

Connected Population from Table III, the percentage of the population of Japanese
origin. The independent variable Japanese Internment is then a categorical variable
indicating whether there was an Internment Camp in that state or not. In this analysis
we are restricting the sample solely to connections to Japan, and so are estimating the
varying connections to Japan given the Japanese Internment relocation camp locations.
From Panel A of Table V, we see that MSAs in states that had a Japanese
Internment camp during World War II have a significantly higher fraction of Japanese
origin connected population today. Columns 1 and 2 run the test on the sample of firms
that export to Japan, while Columns 3 and 4 run the test on the sample of firms that
import from Japan.

All four columns deliver this same message.

Columns 2 and 4

include an additional control of Immigration from Asia, which measures the immigration
growth from all other Asian ethnicities listed in the US Census (other than Japanese)

15

from 1940 — 1990 (before the internment to the beginning of our sample period).12 The
idea of including this control is that immigration may have been growing in general in
all states over this time period, and for some reason these internment states may have
been the recipient of a shock of immigration. From Column 2, the coefficient of 0.0079
(t=3.41) on Japanese Internment implies an over 3.5 times larger current Japanese
population in areas surrounding Japanese Internment Camps of World War II relative
to areas without. The Column 4 coefficient of 0.0098 (t=4.65) on Japanese Internment
implies a difference of over 4 times as large.
This provides strong evidence for the first stage of the instrumental variable test.
For the second stage, we then regress trade activity today on this instrumented value of
connected population to see its impact.

In other words, we examine the impact on

trade activity of solely the part of the Japanese connected population today that was
determined by having (vs. not having) a Japanese Internment Camp in the surrounding
area in World War II. These second stage regressions are shown in Panel B of Table V.
All four columns show that this instrumented connected population has a large and
significant impact on trade activity today. For instance, the coefficient in Column 2 of
11.670 (t=2.84) implies that a one standard deviation increase in connected population
increases the Export Ratio by 65% (from 22.5% to 37.2% of exports to Japan). For
imports, the estimated coefficient in Column 4 of 7.992 (t=3.62) implies that a one
standard deviation increase in connected population increases the Import Ratio by 62%
(from 21.9% to 35.5% of imports from Japan). These are similar in magnitude to the
estimates from Table III.13

B. Placebo Tests and Corroborating Evidence
The Japanese Internment Camps of World War II appear to have lasting impacts
on their surrounding areas.

We explore these impacts further with a number of

12

For an image copy of the full 1940 census instructions, see
http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/guides/popcensus/images/1940enu.pdf.
13
These Table V tests are robust to many specifications. For instance, we can include fixed effects for
those states along the western coast of the US that are closest to Japan. Our estimates are nearly
unchanged in magnitude and significance. In addition, we have clustered by year which produces slightly
smaller standard errors (so larger t-statistics) for both stages of the analysis than those that we report
clustered by state.

16

corroborating pieces of evidence. First, many cities in the states housing the Internment
Camps to this day have organization chapters that serve former internees and their
children (Ina et al. (1999)).

Second, to get another measure of long-lasting ties to

Japan, we gather the list of all sister cities to United States cities.14 In Panel C of Table
V, we then run a simple regression of number of sister cities in Japan of a given state on
Japanese Internment (whether or not the state had an internment camp during WWII).
We collapse this analysis at the state level, and use the 44 states that have reported
census data on ethnicity going back to 1940, so there are 44 observations in this
regression. From Panel C of Table V, while the average state without an internment
camp had less than 3 sister cities in Japan, those with an internment camp had three
times as many, 9 Japanese sister cities. Despite the small sample of only 44 states, this
large difference of 6.22 cities is significant (t=2.10).
We then run a placebo test for our main analysis. If the areas that the camps
were located in were also centers of attraction for immigration that happened after
WWII, then it is possible that our instrument is essentially capturing the variation in
growth of immigration across states, rather than the presence of Japanese population
caused by the internment camps. However, if our Japanese Internment variable is truly
capturing something unique about the lasting link solely to Japan, then we should only
see it having a predictive ability for Japanese immigration.

To run this test, we

compare the ability of our Japanese Internment variable to predict Japanese linked
population connections compared to those of all other Asian ethnicities reported in the
census other than Japanese (specifically, as coded by the census: Korean, Chinese,
Hindu and Filipino). Again, we collapse measures of the Connected Population (to both
Japan and other parts of Asia) at the state level, so have 44 observations in these tests.
From the second column of Table V Panel C, when we collapse our analysis at
the state level we continue to see a strong and significant relationship between Japanese
Internment Camps and Japanese linked populations decades later. However, when we
run the placebo-test looking at the same link for other Asian ethnicities, we see a small
and statistically zero impact of having the Japanese Internment Camps during WWII.

14

This data was gathered from http://www.sister-cities.org/.

17

As a final way to highlight the unique importance of the Japanese Internment Camps in
determining connected populations, we run a specification including other Asian
ethnicities’ population in a state as a control variable to finely control for any reason
why immigration may have grown from Asia to any given particular state. The fourth
column of Table V, Panel C, shows these results. While the contemporaneous Japanese
connected population and other Asian ethnicities’ connected populations are (not
surprisingly) correlated, the Japanese Internment Camps represent a source of Japanese
connections completely orthogonal to this former relationship (as the magnitude and
significance of the Japanese Internment variable is quite similar in magnitude and
significance to Column 2).

C. Firms Founded before World War II
As a last remaining concern, one might that think that firms’ location choices
may still be impacted by the population ethnicities it observes.

So, although the

Japanese origin citizens are exogenously assigned, firms who plan to trade with Japan
may be responding by deciding to establish themselves around Japanese population
centers. In a sense, this is in line with our explanation, as firms’ trade decisions are still
impacted by the population ethnicity, and so given that part of that ethnic profile was
exogenously determined, it would simply mean that even firm establishment locations
are impacted by the same population ethnicities.
However, to more cleanly measure the impact of the exogenous population
ethnicity on firm decisions, we examine only firms that were founded before the
Japanese Internment Camps populations existed. 15 We thus restrict solely to firms
founded before 1946, the year in which the Japanese Internment Camps dissolved and
had released all internees. Although this obviously reduces the sample size, the same
results from Table V obtain. Namely, the first stage regressions still have large and
significant coefficients on the impact of Japanese Internment Camps on Japanese

15

We obtain firm founding date data from the Field-Ritter Founding Date Dataset available at:
http://bear.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/FoundingDates.htm, as used in Field and Karpoff (2002) and
Loughran and Ritter (2004).

18

population today, with the second stage coefficients on instrumented Connected
Population also being large and significant (despite the reduced sample size).
In summary, the main Japanese Internment Camp tests, the corroborating
evidence, and the placebo tests all deliver a consistent message: namely that the
Japanese Internment Camps were indeed an exogenously “dropped” population, and
that this exogenously dropped population did indeed have a causal impact on trade
flows to Japan.

V. Strategic Traders and the Returns to Information Networks
In this section we build on the results above, and examine to what extent firms
benefit from using their firm-country networks in their import and export decisions.
For example, one could imagine firms overweighting certain countries in their import
and export decisions due to a form of familiarity bias; alternatively one might expect
firms to tilt their trading focus as a result of superior private information about certain
countries.
We try to disentangle these two possibilities by examining the future outcomes of
firms that exploit their firm-country linkages in their trading decisions. We term those
firms that exhibit strong links between their ethnic environment and their major trading
partners as “Strategic Traders.” The essence of our approach is to isolate firms that
export primarily to countries where there is a match between the destination country’s
ethnicity and the firm’s headquarter location’s ethnic composition. Since each firm can
have an export/import relationship with several different countries over the same time
period, a goal of our approach is to identify firms that choose their export countries in
line with their various potential information linkages. Because some firms will trade
with only 1 country across a given time period, and others will trade with many, the
number of possible “informed” or “linked” shipments each month will vary by firm. As
a result, we first create buy/sell signals (to denote “linked” versus “non-linked”
shipments) based on a firm’s export amount in a given month, its destination country,
and the match between the destination country’s ethnicity and the firm’s headquarter
MSA’s (metropolitan statistical area) ethnic composition. We employ MSA-level
19

ethnicity shares, and match these to destination countries as shown in Appendix Table
A2. In every year for each MSA, we compute the share of each ethnicity that resides in
each MSA. We then rank the share of each ethnicity across all MSAs in the US. The
buy signal equals one if (i) a firm’s share of total industry exports to a given country in
a given month is ranked in the top 3,16 and (ii) the firm is located in an MSA where the
MSA’s ethnicity share across all MSAs in the US is ranked in the top 3. The sell signal
equals one if (i) a firm’s share of total industry exports to a given country is ranked in
the top 3, but (ii) the firm is *not* located in an MSA where the MSA’s ethnicity share
across all MSAs in the US is ranked in the top 3. For the real outcomes tests below, we
define a firm as a “Strategic Exporter” if the firm has at least one buy signal for any of
its exports in a given year; meanwhile a firm is defined as a “Non-Strategic Exporter” if
it has zero buy signals in a given year, and has at least one sell signal.
A simple example helps to clarify our approach. Consider two firms: A and B.
Firm A is located in an MSA (e.g., Jersey City, New Jersey) where the share of Indian
residents is in the top 3 across all MSAs. Firm A exports a significant amount (relative
to its industry) in a given month to India. By contrast, Firm B is located in a different
MSA (e.g., Bangor, Maine) where the share of Indians is not in the top 3 across all
MSAs (Bangor is ranked 156th in population share of Indians across all MSAs), and yet
Firm B also exports a significant amount (again relative to its industry) in a given
month to India. Thus although Firm A and Firm B are engaging in identical behavior
(exporting a significant amount to India in a given month), Firm A will be classified as
a “Strategic Exporter,” and Firm B will be classified as a “Non-Strategic Exporter.”
Using this classification procedure, we then examine the future real outcomes and
future stock returns of these strategic and non-strategic traders.

16

Our results are similar if we measure export intensity within-firm (e.g., using the “Top 3” export
amounts within a given firm in a given month), or if we use industry export decile breakpoints (top
decile) rather than a “Top 3” ranking. Finally, our results are also virtually identical if we use firm-level
export shares to a given industry rather than absolute amounts. For example, Firm A could export $100
worth of materials to Italy and $100 to Germany, while Firm could export $10 worth to Italy and $5 to
Germany; in absolute terms Firm A exports more, but its within-firm share (50%) would be smaller than
Firm B’s (66%) within-firm share; our results are similar for both of these ranking measures.

20

A. Future Real Outcomes of Strategic Traders
We first investigate whether strategic traders on average achieve superior real
outcomes in the future, relative to their non-strategic counterparts. To do so, we run
panel regressions of future sales and future profitability on lagged strategic trading
activity. The dependent variables are: 1) future sales (in year t+1) divided by lagged
assets (in year t); and 2) ROA (defined as future EBITDA in year t+1 divided by
lagged assets in year t). We include a series of control variables, including size (log of
market capitalization), B/M (log of the book-to-market ratio), leverage (long-term debt
in year t divided by lagged assets in year t), and cash (future cash in year t+1 divided
by lagged assets in year t). We also include fixed effects for time (year) and firm in all
of these regressions.
Table VI presents the results of these real outcome tests. Specifically, Column 1
shows that strategic exporters achieve higher sales in the future.

The coefficient of

0.026 (t=2.89) implies that relative to a median sales-to-lagged assets figure of 0.56,
strategic exporters achieve almost 5% higher future sales.

Meanwhile the coefficient

indicator variable for non-strategic exporters is close to zero, and insignificant. In terms
of future profitability (EBITDA/Assets), Column 3 indicates that strategic importers
achieve significantly higher profitability (coefficient=0.009, t=2.05); relative to a median
profitability of 0.083, strategic exporters experience roughly an 11% increase in
profitability. At the same time, non-strategic exporters show a statistically significant
decline in profitability (coefficient=-0.006, t=2.95) in the year after their non-strategic
export decisions, on the order of -7%. Columns 5-8 repeat the same tests for imports,
and reveal that strategic importers earn significantly higher sales (coefficient=0.019,

t=3.24), but do not achieve significantly higher profitability. Non-strategic importers
show no increases in sales or profitability in the future.

Collectively, the results in

Table VI suggest that strategic traders do receive real, tangible benefits from their firmcountry networks in their import and export decisions, as strategic traders achieve
higher sales (for both importers and exporters) and higher profitability (for exporters)
relative to non-strategic traders.

21

B. Future Stock Returns of Strategic Traders
Next we examine the future stock returns of strategic traders versus non-strategic
traders. The goal of these tests is to determine if the market properly prices the real
outcome benefits that strategic traders receive from their import and export decisions.
We begin with exports, and construct buy/sell signals for all export decisions as in the
real outcome tests from Table VI; however, since returns are available more finely
(monthly, unlike accounting variables), we now define a firm as strategic exporter if the
firm has at least one buy signal for any of its exports in a given month. A firm is
defined as a non-strategic exporter if it has zero buy signals in a given month, and has
at least one sell signal. Each month we construct calendar-time portfolios that buy
stocks of strategic exporters and sell non-strategic exporters. Portfolios are rebalanced
monthly, and stocks are held for one month. Importantly, all information used to create
the portfolio at month (t) was publicly available in month (t-1), so the market could
have updated to this information in month (t-1). Alternatively, any investor could have
traded exactly as our portfolios using this publicly available information to obtain these
portfolio returns.
Table VII shows the results. The first row of each panel presents excess returns
(raw returns minus the risk-free rate), the second row shows DGTW-adjusted returns,
the third row shows CAPM alphas, the fourth row shows Fama-French 3-factor alphas,
and the fifth row shows Carhart 4-factor alphas. In Panel B, we replicate the calendar
time portfolio approach from Panel A for our imports sample.
Panel A of Table V indicates that a portfolio strategy that buys strategic
exporters and shorts non-strategic exporters as described above earns large abnormal
returns.

The value-weight excess returns on this long-short portfolio equals 50 basis

points per month (t=2.15); the corresponding value-weight four-factor alpha is 57 basis
points per month (t=2.78). The long-short DGTW-adjusted returns are 39 basis points
per month (t=2.23).17 These estimates translate to annual abnormal returns of roughly
17

As we weaken the strength of the ethnic connection, for example by using a Top 5/Top5 cutoff or a
Top 10/Top 10 cutoff (rather than a Top 3/Top 3 cutoff as described in Section V.A) in order to define
our strategic importers, the results are weaker, as we would expect. For example, the DGTW-adjusted
returns on the long-short portfolio are 37 basis points per month (t=1.88) using a Top 5/Top 5 cutoff,
and 29 basis points per month (t=1.64) using a Top 10/Top 10 cutoff.

22

5-7% per year. Most of the return spread comes from the long side of the portfolio; for
example, the long portfolio return earns a 4-factor alpha of 53 basis points (t=2.82),
while the short portfolio alpha is small and insignificant.18 Panel B reveals similar, but
statistically weaker, results for importers. For example, the value-weight excess returns
on the imports long-short portfolio equals 45 basis points per month (t=1.75); the
corresponding value-weight four-factor alpha is 38 basis points per month (t=1.45), and
the long-short DGTW-adjusted returns are 45 basis points per month (t=1.92).
Collectively, the calendar-time portfolio results in Table VII indicate that
strategic traders (particularly strategic exporters) earn substantial abnormal returns
relative to their non-strategic counterparts. This result suggests that these firms are
not overweighting certain countries in their import and export decisions due to a form
of familiarity bias, but rather as a result of superior private information about certain
countries. Further, the market does not seem to recognize the advantage of these types
of strategic export/import decisions by firms, as the mimicking portfolios in Table VII
produce economically meaningful abnormal returns.

C. Connected Board Members and Future Returns
In this section, similar to Section B, we test whether the market realizes the
potentially positive impact to firm value of import and export decisions made by firms
who have the strategic link to their trading partners of a connected board member. The
measure we use for this is Pct of Board Strategically Connected, which is simply the
percentage of the board that is from countries to which the firm is actively engaged in
importing or exporting. In Table VIII, we run Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional predictive
regressions of future returns with this variable, controlling for other known return

18

As described in Section V.A, the short portfolio here includes the set of non-strategic exporters, i.e.,
firms that are located in regions without a strong ethnic link to a particular country, and yet choose to
export to that country anyway. We have also run tests where the short portfolio includes the subset of
non-strategic exporters who have a strong ethnic tie to at least one particular country, and yet choose to
export to a different country. These long-short portfolio returns are even larger in magnitude, and the
short portfolio returns are more negative, but the long-short portfolios contain fewer stocks, and hence
these returns are noisier and statistically insignificant. For example, the long-short CAPM, 3-factor and
4-factor alphas from Panel A are 78 basis points (t=1.08), 96 basis points (t=1.39) and 58 basis points
(t=0.86) for this finer specification, or roughly 7-11% per year.

23

determinants.19 If these connected board members are helpful in making strategically
valuable decisions, and the market does not fully understand this (much like the
strategic trading in Section B more generally), then we expect a positive coefficient on
Pct of Board Strategically Connected. This is precisely what we see in all four columns
of Table VIII. Examining both the full sample of firms, and solely the subsample of
firms that have at least 1 connected board member (to test whether the percentage of
board members, and not simply the existence of any connected board member relative
to zero), we see a large and significant coefficient on Pct of Board Strategically
Connected.

To give an idea of magnitude, the coefficient in Column 4 of 0.077

(t=2.13), implies that a firm with a strategically connected board member to the
country it is trading with has future returns of 60 basis points per month higher than a
firm trading with the same country but no connected board member.

D. Analyst Attention to Information in Imports and Exports
In Sections A-C above we showed that strategic importing and exporting had an
impact on real firm outcomes, but that this impact was not fully understood by
investors in setting market prices. In this section we test whether other, potentially
more sophisticated financial agents, namely sell-side securities analysts, are better able
to assess the large value of this strategic information link advantage. A large part of an
analyst’s job is to research, produce, and disclose reports forecasting aspects of
companies’ future prospects, and to translate their forecasts into earnings forecasts.
Thus, we test whether analysts understand the value-enhancing nature of these strategic
importing and exporting decisions by analyzing analysts’ ability to correctly impound
this information into their earnings forecasts of firms who exploit these strategic
networks versus firms that do not.
We report two sets of tests of this idea in Table IX.

The first test simply

examines whether analysts are more inaccurate in their forecasts of strategic trading
firms versus non-strategic trading firms.

We do this using the variable Earnings

19

Given the smaller number of firms that have board members from foreign countries in general, the
portfolio approach of Table VII yielded too thin of portfolios, and so we utilize the Fama-MacBeth
regression framework to test the thesis in Table VIII.

24

Forecast Error, which is defined as is the absolute value of the actual reported earnings
(EPS) minus the consensus mean of the most recent analyst forecasts of EPS (in the
month leading up to the announcement), scaled by the absolute value of actual EPS
reported.20 We regress Earnings Forecast Error for each firm on whether or not the firm
is a strategic importer (exporter), along with a number of other controls (from Table
VIII), and fixed effects for month and industry. Standard errors are clustered at the
monthly level. Columns 3 and 4 (and 7 and 8) tell a consistent story: analysts do not
seem to be correctly taking into account the information in strategic importing or
exporting, and so are significantly more inaccurate on these firms. To give an idea of
the magnitude, the coefficient in Column 4 of 2.874 (t=2.53) suggests that analysts are
15% less accurate on strategic exporting firms than on other firms. In contrast, we see
no such inaccuracy on non-strategic importers or exporters, as analysts appear to be
able to roughly correctly forecast their earnings, on average.
Given that firms’ strategic trading yields real value in terms of future sales
growth and profitability, and that both price setters and analysts seem to not fully
understand or impound this information into prices, earnings announcements might be
the exact times that the information embedded in these real quantities is impounded
into prices (as it is revealed to the markets in these quarterly statements). We test this
directly by examining whether the earnings surprise cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs) of strategic traders are predictably different than those of non-strategic traders.
Earnings Surprise CAR is defined as the cumulative abnormal return (t-1,t+1) around
the earnings date (t). The main independent variable of interest (strategic importer
(exporter)) remains the same, as do all controls and specifications, with the addition of
one new control variable, (Act EPS — Est), controlling for the magnitude and direction
of the actual earnings surprise itself. These regressions are in Columns 1 and 2 (and 5
and 6) of Table IX. All four columns show that strategic importers (exporters) have
significantly larger Earnings Surprise CARs, consistent with these being times that the
advantages of strategic trading are revealed to the market and impounded into prices.
Again, we see no such increased Earnings Surprise CARs for the non-strategic firms.

20

Following the literature (see DeGeorge et al. (1999)), we winsorize these at the 0.01 level to account for
extreme values of the forecast errors.

25

Taken together, the evidence in Section V indicates that it is precisely the firms
that exploit their ethnic information links that achieve higher sales growth and
profitability. Firms that exhibit the exact same behavior as these firms, but that do not
have these ethnic links (i.e., non-strategic importers and exporters), experience neither
of these favorable outcomes.

Further, the market does not fully understand or

incorporate this advantage into strategic firms’ prices, generating predictably large,
future abnormal returns (which also exist for firms exploiting connected boards).
Lastly, analysts also do not appear to take into account the advantages of strategic
importing and exporting, and so are significantly less accurate in their earnings forecasts
on these strategic trading firms.

VI. Other Transactions and Connections
In this section, we investigate whether firms that have connections to foreign
countries through their connected resident populations (or through board members)
report more business transactions in those countries. Specifically, we use geographical
segment information filed by corporations to measure the amount of sales originated
from a certain country or region, and test whether this is impacted by the firms’
surrounding ethnic populations (and connected boards).
The dependent variable we use is the Segment Sales Ratio, which equals the sales
of a foreign segment scaled by total sales reported in all foreign segments in that year.
Data on sales in geographical segments are drawn from the Compustat geographic
segment files. In these files, a geographic segment may refer to a specific country (e.g.
China) or a region (Asia). Because the segments reported are not standardized, we
created concordance files to map regions to companies using the United Nations
Cartographic maps. We exclude observations that do not contain any geographic
reference to a region or country. Our main independent variable of interest (as in Table
III) is Connected Population. Connected Population refers to the number of residents
in firm’s headquarter MSA connected to a foreign country scaled by total population in
that MSA (CPct). We also include Connected Board Member, which takes the value of
1 if the firm has a board member who has an ethnicity tie to that country. We also
include a number of control variables. The variable Number of Firms in Country equals
26

the total number of firms reporting a segment sale in that country. By including this
variable, we intend to capture the effect of the clustering of U.S. corporations doing
business in certain countries. Number of Countries is the total number of unique
countries a firm reported in its segment files. Segment Sales refers to sales of that
segment in that particular year. We also include year and country fixed effects in each
specification.
Table X shows that both Connected Population and Connected Board Member
are statistically significant predictors of the Segment Sales Ratio.

In terms of the

magnitude, a one standard deviation increase in connected population (connected board
member) increases segment sales by 1.8% (0.7%) in that country.

This represents

corroborating evidence to the results throughout the paper. Not only do surrounding
ethnic populations impact the importing and exporting decisions of firms, but they have
an impact on broader sales and expansion decisions of firms, as well.

VII. Conclusion
In this paper, we exploit variation in ethnic population across the U.S. to
examine how local residents’ ties to their home-countries can influence firms’
international trade decisions.

We exploit novel customs and port authority data

detailing the international shipments of all U.S. publicly-traded firms, and show that
firms import and export significantly more with countries that have a strong resident
population near their firm headquarters location. We use the formation of World War
II Japanese Internment Camps to isolate exogenous shocks to local ethnic populations,
and identify a causal link between local networks and firm trade.
We find that firms that exploit these local networks in their international trade
decisions (strategic traders) experience significant increases in future sales growth and
profitability. We show that although we can predict which trade links, on average, are
valuable for firms using simple measures of connected population that are publicly
available, the market seems to ignore this information.

In particular, strategic

importers and exporters outperform other importers and exporters by 5%-7% per year in
risk-adjusted returns.

The increased value of strategic traders is also missed by
27

analysts, who are significantly less accurate in their earnings forecasts on these firms,
with these firms having significantly more positive earnings surprises.
We then provide additional evidence on the mechanism by showing that at times
when the information network represents a more valuable link, specifically at times of
tariff cuts to the connected country, our effects are even larger.

We show that one

particular channel of the information network is through board members: a connected
local population predicts more board members from that same country, and a
significantly higher value for those firms that exploit connected board members in their
trade decisions.
While we focus on immigration and how demographic factors affect the import
and export behavior of firms, we believe that our approach can be readily adapted to
study other local advantage factors. Our research also provides new evidence on the
economic impact of immigration and ethnic diversity in the United States. Immigrants’
conduit roles in economic transactions surely stretch far beyond those we document in
this paper.

28

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012, The
network origins of aggregate fluctuations, Econometrica 80, 1977-2016.
Agarwal , Sanjeev and Sridhar Ramaswami, 1992, Choice of foreign market entry mode: Impact
of ownership, location and internalization factors, Journal of International Business Studies 23,
1-27.
Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on
the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial Studies 21,
785—818.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen Redding and Peter Schott, 2007, Firms in
international trade, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 105—130.
Burchardi, Konrad and Tarek Hassan, 2013, The economic impact of social ties:
Evidence from German reunification, Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming).
Burton, Jeffrey, Mary Farrell, Florence Lord, and Richard Lord, 2000, Confinement and
ethnicity: An overview of World War II Japanese American relocation sites, Western
Archeological and Conservation Center, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Casella, Alessandra and James Rauch, 2002, Anonymous market and group ties in international
trade, Journal of International Economics 58, 19-47.
Cavusgil, S. Tamer and John Nevin, 1981, Internal determinants of export marketing behavior:
An empirical investigation, Journal of Marketing Research 18, 114-119.
Chaney, Thomas, 2012, The network structure of international trade, Working paper, University
of Chicago.
Civil Liberties Public Education Fund (CLPEF), 1998, List of Detention Camps, Temporary
Detention Centers, and Department of Justice Internment Camps.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether and Christopher Malloy, 2013, Review of Financial Studies 26,
635-666.
Cohen, Lauren and Andrea Frazzini, 2008. Economic links and predictable returns. Journal of

Finance 63, 1977—2011.
Cohen, Lauren and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics 104,
383-400.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Miren Lafourcade and Thierry Mayer, 2005, The trade creating effects
of business and social networks: Evidence from France, Journal of International Economics 66,
1-29.
Daniel, Roger, 1993, Prisoners without trial: Japanese Americans in World War II, Hill and
Wang, New York, NY.

29

DeGeorge, Francois, Jayendu Patel and Richard Zeckhauser, 1999, Earnings management to
exceed thresholds, Journal of Business 72, 1-33.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua Pollet, 2006. Investor inattention, firm reaction, and Friday
earnings announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709—749.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, Journal of Finance 65,
1237—1267.
Field, Laura and Jonathan Karpoff, 2002, Takeover defenses of IPO firms, Journal of Finance
57, 1857-1889.
Garmendia, Aitor, Carlos Llano, Asier Minondo and Francisco Requena, 2012, Networks and
the disappearance of the intranational home bias, Economics Letters 116, 178-182.
Gould, David, 1994, Immigrant links to the home country: Empirical implications for U.S.
bilateral trade flows, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 302-316.
Green, Robert and Arthur Allaway, 1985, Identification of export opportunities using the shiftshare approach, Journal of Marketing 49, 83—88.
Hidalgo, César, Bailey Klinger, Albert-László Barabási, and Ricardo Hausmann, 2007, The
product space conditions the development of nations, Science 317, 482-487.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim and Siew Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extraneous events
and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289—2325.
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143—2184.
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein, 2007, Disagreement and the stock market, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21, 109—128.
Hong, Harrison, Walter Tourus, Rossen Valkanov, 2007, Do industries lead the stock market?,

Journal of Financial Economics 83, 367—396.
Hou, Kewei, 2007, Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns, Review
of Financial Studies 20, 1113—1138.
Huang, Xing, 2012, Gradual information diffusion in the stock market: Evidence from U.S.
multinational firms. UC Berkeley working paper.
Huberman, Gur and Tomer Regev, 2001. Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: a
nonevent that made stock prices soar, Journal of Finance 56, 387—396.
Ina, Satsuki, Kim Ina, Audrey Kasho-Wells, Stephen Holsapple and Emery Clay, 1999, The
children of the camps project, Public Broadcasting Service.
Loree, David and Stephen Guisinger, 1995, Policy and non-policy determinants of U.S. equity
foreign direct investment, Journal of International Business Studies 26, 281-299.

30

Loughran, Tim and Jay Ritter, 2004, Why has IPO underpricing changed over time?, Financial
Management 33, 5-37.
Merton, Robert, 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information, Journal of Finance 42, 483—510.
Mitra, Debanjan and Peter Golder, 2002, Whose culture matters? Near-Market knowledge and
its impact on foreign market entry timing, Journal of Marketing Research 39, 350-365.
Nguyen, Quoc, 2012. Geographic momentum. University of Illinois working paper.
Okamoto, Tomochika, 2000, Changes in the representation of "Japanese Americans" in U. S.
History Textbooks, 1952-1999, 52nd Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of Educational
Sociology.
Pan, Yigang, Shaomin Li and David Tse, 1999, The impact of order and mode of market entry
on profitability and market share, Journal of International Business Studies 30, 81-104.
Rauch, James, 1999, Networks versus markets in international trade, Journal of Economic
Literature 48, 7-35.
Rauch, James, 2001, Business and social networks in international trade, Journal of Economic
Literature 39, 1177-1203.
Rauch, James and Vitor Trindade, 2002, Ethnic Chinese networks in international trade,
Journal of International Economics 84, 116-130.

31

Figure 1: Japanese Internment Camps of World War II
This figure presents summary statistics on aspects related to the Japanese Internment Camps of World War
II. Panel A shows a map of the US, indication where the ten internment camps were located, delineating
them with a old text with a dot (Daniel (1993)). Panel B gives the location of the 10 internment camps,
along with peak populations in each camp (CLPEF (1998)). Panel C shows the Japanese population in 1940
in each of the seven states that would later house internment camps, from the United States Census of 1940.

Panel A: Map of 10 Internment Camps

Panel B: Populations of 10 Internment Camps

Center
Gila River
Granada
Heart Mountain
Jerome
Manzanar
Minidoka
Poston
Rohwer
Topaz
Tule Lake

State
AZ
CO
WY
AR
CA
ID
AZ
AR
UT
CA

Date of first
arrival
7/20/42
8/27/42
8/12/42
10/6/42
3/21/42
8/10/42
5/8/42
9/18/42
9/11/42
5/27/42

Peak
Population
13,348
7,318
10,767
8,497
10,046
9,397
17,814
8,475
8,130
18,789

Date of peak
12/30/42
2/1/43
1/1/43
2/11/43
9/22/42
3/1/43
9/2/42
3/11/43
3/17/43
12/25/44

Date of last
prisoner
left(??)
11/10/45
10/15/45
11/10/45
6/30/44
11/21/45
10/28/45
11/28/45
11/30/45
10/31/45
3/20/46

Panel C: Pre-Internment Camps Population (from 1940 census)
State

ST

Total Population

Japanese Population

Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Idaho
Utah
Wyoming

AZ
AR
CA
CO
ID
UT
WY

499,261
1,949,387
6,907,367
123,296
524,873
550,310
250,742

632
3
93,717
2,734
1,191
2,210
643

Table I: Summary Statistics for Importers and Exporters
This table presents summary statistics on the firms included in the tests. MVE is the market
value of equity calculated as the price end of calendar year prior to fiscal year end multiplied by
number of shares outstanding. B/M is the book to market ratio where the book value of equity is
calculated as sum of stock holders equity (SEQ), Deferred Tax (TXDB), Investment Tax Credit
(ITCB) minus Preferred Stock (PREF). Leverage is long-term debt (DLTT) plus debt in current
liabilities (DLC), divided by the numerator plus market equity. Past Return is the twelve month
return prior to fiscal year end. ROA (return on asset) earnings before tax and depreciation
(EBITDA) scaled by total assets (TA). PPE/TA is the ratio of plant, property, and equity
(PPENT) scaled by total assets. The unit of observation is firm-year. Panel A (B) reports the
summary statistics for public firms, which exported (imported) at least once in a given year. The
sample period covers 1994 to 2010. Panel C reports the industry breakdown of importers and
exporters by 2-digit NAICS code.
Panel A: Firm level data for exporters
MVE

B/M

Leverage

Past Return

ROA

PPE/TA

0.223
0.174
0.000
0.000
0.071
0.209
0.339
0.455
0.534
20,122

0.175
0.714
-0.558
-0.419
-0.177
0.081
0.365
0.754
1.158
19,713

0.119
0.146
-0.066
0.015
0.078
0.129
0.182
0.239
0.279
20,021

0.284
0.201
0.029
0.059
0.132
0.241
0.392
0.579
0.692
20,046

mean
sd
p5
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p95
N

4,929
20,899
9
19
74
404
2,044
8,598
20,142
20,073

0.723
1.591
0.125
0.185
0.314
0.527
0.858
1.345
1.822
20,073

mean
sd
p5
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p95
N

MVE
4,889
20,595
11
23
87
455
2,110
8,626
19,450
23,743

Panel B:
B/M
0.711
0.934
0.127
0.185
0.313
0.523
0.847
1.320
1.800
23,743

Firm level
Leverage
0.211
0.175
0.000
0.000
0.051
0.195
0.328
0.448
0.528
23,787

data for Importers
Past Return ROA
0.182
0.107
0.783
0.160
-0.583
-0.104
-0.434
-0.003
-0.187
0.068
0.078
0.122
0.371
0.175
0.789
0.232
1.208
0.273
23,298
23,687

PPE/TA
0.265
0.201
0.020
0.043
0.109
0.220
0.372
0.564
0.676
23,722

Table I: Summary Statistics (continued)
Panel C: Industry Breakdown of Exporters and Importers
NAICS 2 Importers Exporters Definition
11

17

16

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting

21

114

112

Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction

22

78

52

Utilities

23

43

39

Construction

31-33

2,358

1,994

Manufacturing

42

194

184

Wholesale Trade

44-45

340

274

Retail Trade

48-49

93

80

Transportation and Warehousing

51

290

163

Information

52

245

169

Finance and Insurance

53-54

221

159

Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services

56

77

58

Admin/Support/Waste Management and Remediation Services

61

8

4

Educational Services

62

36

32

Health Care and Social Assistance

71

19

13

Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation

72

59

43

Accommodation and Food Services

81

49

39

Other Services (except Public Administration)

Total

4,241

3,431

Table II: Major U.S. and Foreign Ports
This table reports the top 5 ports used by the sample firms for imports and exports in U.S. and
foreign countries. The figures reported are annual dollar value of imports and exports (in billions)
throughout the sample period (1994-2010).
Panel A: Top 5 Importing U.S. Ports
LOS ANGELES

185

LONG BEACH

159

NEW YORK

95

SEATTLE

62

NORFOLK

61

HOUSTON

Panel B: Top 5 Exporting U.S. Ports
110

LOS ANGELES

85

NEW YORK

75

NORFOLK

66

CHARLESTON

61

Panel C: Top 5 Origination Ports for U.S. Imports
HONG KONG
125
RICHARDS BAY
105
YANTIAN
76
KAOHSIUNG
63
SHANGHAI
61

Panel D: Top 5 Destination Ports for U.S. Exports
ANTWERP
66
ROTTERDAM
57
VANCOUVER
50
HONG KONG
43
SINGAPORE
37

Table III: The Impact of Ethnic Connections on Firm-Level Trade
Panel A (first four columns) of this table presents coefficient estimates of fixed effects regressions
of export ratio (ER) on Connected Population (CP) and control variables: ERict = b1+ b2* CPct
+ b3* Connected Board Member + fixed effects. Export Ratio (ER) is total amount a given firm
exports to a destination country in a given year scaled by total amount of exports of the same
firm in the same year (Eict /Sum(Eit) ). Connected population is the number of residents in a
firm’s headquarter MSA connected to the export country scaled by total population in that state
(CPct). Connected Board Member is a binary variable that takes a value of 1 if the firm has a
board member with an ethnic background the same as the export destination. The dependent
variable in the last column is a dummy variable, which takes a value of one if the firm has
exported to a given country in a given year. Panel B (first four columns) of this table presents
coefficient estimates of the following specification: IRict = b1+ b2* CPct + b3* Connected Board
Member + fixed effects, where import ratio (IR) is total amount a given firm imports from a
country in a given year scaled by total amount of imports of the same firm in the same year (Iict
/Sum(Iit)). The dependent variable in the last column is a dummy variable, which takes a value
of one if the firm has imported from a given country in a given year. T-stats, clustered by year,
are reported below coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Exports
Export
Ratio
(extensive
margin)
0.039***' 0.039*** 0.122*** 0.043*** 0.0457***
(5.14)
(4.71)
(4.35)
(5.42)
(30.34)

Export
Ratio
Connected Population

Export
Ratio

Export
Ratio

Connected Board Member

Export
Ratio

0.014***
(3.42)

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Firm x Year Fixed Effects
Country Fixed Effects
State x Partner Country Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

Adj. R2
Number of Observations

0.46
80,529

0.59
80,529

0.10
80,529

0.59
80,529

0.002
2,966,539

Table III: The Impact of Ethnic Connections on Firm-Level Trade (continued)
Panel B: Imports

Import
Ratio
Connected Population

Import
Ratio

Import
Ratio

Import
Ratio

0.022** 0.032*** 0.154*** 0.035***
(2.00)
(2.70)
(5.97)
(3.04)

Connected Board Member

Import
Ratio
(extensive
margin)
0.0578***
(25.56)

0.015***
(4.94)

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Firm x Year Fixed Effects
Country Fixed Effects
State x Partner Country Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

Adj. R2
Number of Observations

0.39
84,296

0.49
84,296

0.10
84,296

0.49
84,296

0.003
2,634,115

Table IV: Tariff and Differentiated Product Analysis
The first four columns in this table presents coefficient estimates of fixed effects regressions of product import ratio (PIR) on Connected
Population (CP) and control variables: PIRicpt = b1+ b2 * CPct + b3 * Tariff + b4 * CPct x Tariff + Fixed Effects. Product Import Ratio (PIR) is
total amount a given firm imports from a foreign country in a given year scaled by total amount of imports of the same firm in the same year (Iicpt
/Sum(Iit)). Connected population is the number of residents in a firm’s headquarter MSA connected to the import country scaled by total
population in that state (CPct). Tariff is the value of the US tariff on the given product to the given country, taken from the TRAINS dataset
maintained by United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). In the last two columns, we introduce a variable that denotes
whether the product is a differentiated product as defined by Rauch (1999). Fixed effects for firm, year, and product are included where indicated.
T-stats, clustered by year, are reported below coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
Product Import Product Import Product Import Product Import Product Import Product Export
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio
Connected Population
0.0046**
0.0046**
0.0074***
0.0020
0.0029***
0.0018***
(2.43)
(2.46)
(3.93)
(1.06)
(2.29)
(8.39)
Tariff

-0.00003
(0.18)

Connected Population x Tariff

0.0001
(0.73)

0.0004
(1.61)

-0.0022***
(4.49)

-0.0014***
(3.48)

Differentiated Product

0.0074***
(2.41)

0.0049***
(9.10)

Connected Population x Differentiated Product

0.0042***
(4.61)

-0.0011
(1.37)

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Product Fixed Effects
Adj. R2
Number of Observations

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

0.40
34,062

0.40
34,062

0.40
34,062

0.48
34,062

0.41
563,552

0.47
422,237

Table V: Instrumental Variable Analysis: Japanese Internment Camps
This table presents the instrumental variable estimation for exports (imports) in Columns 1 and 2
(3 and 4) of Panels A and B. The sample includes only the exports to (or imports from) Japan.
Export Ratio (ER) is total amount a given firm exports to a destination country in a given year
scaled by total amount of exports of the same firm in the same year (Eict /Sum(Eit)). Import ratio
(IR) is total amount a given firm imports from a country in a given year scaled by total amount
of imports of the same firm in the same year (Iict /Sum(Iit)). Connected population is the number
of residents in a firm’s headquarter MSA connected to the export (import) country scaled by total
population in that state (CPct). The instrument, Japanese Internment is a categorical variable
that takes a value of 1 if the headquarter of the firm is located in a state that housed one of the
internment camps. Immigration from Asia refers to the growth rate of Asian-Pacific Islander
ethnicities except Japanese (e.g. Korean, Chinese, Hindu and Filipino), measured as the ratio in
1990 to that of 1930. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level, and t-stats
using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: First Stage
Sample Trade Firms:
Dependent Variable:
Japanese Internment

Exporters

Exporters

Importers

Importers

Connected
Population

Connected
Population

Connected
Population

Connected
Population

0.0083***
(3.61)

0.0079***
(3.41)

0.0101***
(4.91)

0.0098***
(4.65)

Immigration from Asia

Year Fixed Effects
R2
Number of Observations

Panel B: Second Stage
Sample Trade Firms:
Dependent Variable:
Instrumented
Connected Population

-0.0006*
(1.70)
Yes
0.47
3165

Yes
0.49
3165

Yes
0.61
4804

Yes
0.62
4804

Exporters

Exporters

Importers

Importers

Export
Ratio

Export
Ratio

Import
Ratio

Import
Ratio

11.593***
(3.02)

11.670***
(2.84)

8.617***
(4.11)

7.992***
(3.62)

Immigration from Asia

Year Fixed Effects
R2
Number of Observations

-0.0005*
(1.78)

0.0001
(0.13)
Yes
0.03
3165

Yes
0.03
3165

-0.0091
(1.15)
Yes
0.04
4804

Yes
0.04
4804

Table V: Instrumental Variable Analysis: (continued)

Panel C: Corroborative Evidence and Placebo Test
Placebo Test

Dependent Variable:

Japanese Internment

# of
Japanese
Sister
Cities

Connected
Population
to Japan

Connected
Population
to Other
Asian
Ethnicities

Connected
Population
to Japan

6.22**
(2.10)

0.0028***
(3.42)

0.0015
(1.25)

0.0021***
(3.50)

Other Asian Ethnicities
Constant

R2
Sample Size (# of States)

2.95**
(2.70)

0.0016***
(5.23)

0.0024***
(5.56)

0.4965***
(6.49)
0.0004
(1.36)

0.10
44

0.22
44

0.04
44

0.61
44

Table VI: Real Effects of Strategic Trading Activity
This table reports panel regressions of different measures of future firm-level real outcomes on lagged
strategic trading activity. For exports, we first create buy/sell signals based on a firm’s export amount in a
given month, its destination country, and the match between the destination country’s ethnicity and the
firm’s headquarter MSA’s (metropolitan statistical area) ethnic composition. We use the American
Communities Project (ACP) ethnicity classifications, and match these to destination countries as shown in
Appendix Table A2. In every year for each MSA, we compute the share of each ethnicity that resides in
each MSA. We then rank the share of each ethnicity across all MSAs in the US. The buy signal equals one
if (i) a firm’s share of total industry exports to a given country in a given month is ranked in the top 3, and
(ii) the firm is located in an MSA where the MSA’s ethnicity share across all MSAs in the US is ranked in
the top 3. The sell signal equals one if (i) a firm’s share of total industry exports to a given country is
ranked in the top 3, but (ii) the firm is *not* located in an MSA where the MSA’s ethnicity share across all
MSAs in the US is ranked in the top 3. We define a firm as strategic exporter if the firm has at least one
buy signal for any of its exports in a given year. A firm is defined as a non-strategic exporter if it has zero
buy signals in a given year, and has at least one sell signal. The dependent variables are: 1) future sales (in
year t+1) divided by lagged assets (in year t); and 2) ROA (defined as future EBITDA in year t+1 divided
by lagged assets in year t). Control variables include Size (log of market capitalization), B/M (log of the
book-to-market ratio), Leverage (long-term debt in year t divided by lagged assets in year t), and Cash
(future Cash in year t+1 divided by lagged assets in year t). Fixed effects for time (year) and firm are
included in all regressions. t-stats, clustered by year, are reported below coefficient estimates. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Salest+1/Assetst

EBITDAt+1/Assetst

Salest+1/Assetst

EBITDAt+1/Assetst

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Strategic Exporter

0.026***
(2.89)

0.021**
(2.16)

0.009*
(2.05)

0.010**
(2.47)

Non-Strategic Exporter

-0.000
(0.01)

0.001
(0.15)

-0.006***
(2.95)

-0.006***
(3.14)

Strategic Importer

0.019***
(3.24)

0.021***
(3.86)

0.005
(0.64)

0.001
(0.015)

Non-Strategic Importer

0.002
(0.72)

0.004
(1.14)

0.001
(0.36)

0.001
(0.24)

Size

-0.048***
(13.47)

0.011**
(2.32)

-0.054***
(14.48)

0.011**
(3.13)

B/M

-0.122***
(7.99)

-0.063***
(4.82)

-0.134***
(8.53)

-0.070***
(6.03)

Leverage

-0.478
(1.72)

-0.014
(0.05)

-0.003
(0.01)

-0.419
(1.02)

Casht+1/At

-1.448**
(2.52)

-0.270
(0.40)

-1.686***
(3.33)

-1.508
(1.43)

Time Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adjusted R2

0.88

0.89

0.68

0.69

0.89

0.90

0.66

0.68

No. of Obs.

14,260

14,203

14,205

14,152

17,412

17,345

17,343

17,279

Table VII: Portfolio Returns to Strategic Trading Activity
This table presents value-weight returns to calendar-time portfolios that buys stocks of strategic
exporters and sell stocks of non-strategic exporters. In Panel A, we first create buy/sell signals
based on a firm’s export amount in a given month, its destination country, and the match
between the destination country’s ethnicity and the firm’s headquarter MSA’s (metropolitan
statistical area) ethnic composition. We use the American Communities Project (ACP) ethnicity
classifications, and match these to destination countries as shown in Appendix Table A2. In every
year for each MSA, we compute the share of each ethnicity that resides in each MSA. In every
year for each MSA, we compute the share of each ethnicity that resides in each MSA. We then
rank the share of each ethnicity across all MSAs in the US. The buy signal equals one if (i) a
firm’s share of total industry exports to a given country in a given month is ranked in the top 3,
and (ii) the firm is located in an MSA where the MSA’s ethnicity share across all MSAs in the US
is ranked in the top 3. The sell signal equals one if (i) a firm’s share of total industry exports to
a given country is ranked in the top 3, but (ii) the firm is *not* located in an MSA where the
MSA’s ethnicity share across all MSAs in the US is ranked in the top 3. We define a firm as
strategic exporter if the firm has at least one buy signal for any of its exports in a given month.
A firm is defined as a non-strategic exporter if it has zero buy signals in a given month, and has
at least one sell signal. Each month we construct calendar-time portfolios that buy stocks of
strategic exporters and sell non-strategic exporters. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly, and stocks
are held for one month. The first row of each panel presents excess returns (raw returns minus
the risk-free rate), the second row shows DGTW-adjusted returns, the third row shows CAPM
alphas, the fourth row shows Fama-French 3-factor alphas, and the fifth row shows Carhart 4factor alphas. In Panel B, we replicate the calendar time portfolio approach from Panel A for our
imports sample. t-stats are reported below coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Export Value-Weight Portfolio Returns
Long Return
0.92***
(3.07)

Short Return
0.42
(1.38)

(L-S) Return
0.50**
(2.15)

DGTW-adjusted returns

0.28
(1.52)

-0.11
(1.16)

0.39**
(2.23)

CAPM alpha

0.62***
(2.72)

-0.02
(0.19)

0.64***
(2.93)

Fama-French 3-factor alpha

0.64***
(3.30)

-0.02
(0.24)

0.66***
(3.18)

Carhart 4-factor alpha

0.53***
(2.82)

-0.04
(0.41)

0.57***
(2.78)

Excess returns

Table VII: Portfolio Returns to Strategic Trading Activity (continued)

Panel B: Import Value-Weight Portfolio Returns
Long Return Short Return (L-S) Return
0.87**
0.42
0.45*
Excess returns
(2.31)
(1.38)
(1.75)
DGTW-adjusted returns

0.34
(1.52)

-0.11
(1.36)

0.45*
(1.92)

CAPM alpha

0.43*
(1.75)

-0.02
(0.15)

0.44*
(1.71)

Fama-French 3-factor alpha

0.43*
(1.74)

-0.01
(0.06)

0.44*
(1.68)

Carhart 4-factor alpha

0.37
(1.48)

-0.01
(0.11)

0.38
(1.45)

Table VIII: Connected Board Members and Returns
This table reports predictive regressions of future month returns on connectedness of a firm’s
board from 1999-2010. The independent variable of interest is Pct of Board Strategically
Connected, which is equal to the percentage of the board of directors that are from a foreign
country to which the firm is either importing from, or exporting to, in the month prior. Other
control variables include Size, the natural logarithm of market capitalization, B/M, the natural
logarithm of the ratio of book value to market value, Past Month Returns, returns in the month
prior to the earnings announcement, and Past Returns (t-2,t-12), return from month t-2 to t-12.
In Columns 1 and 2, the full sample of firms are included, while Columns 3 and 4 are run on only
the sample of firms that have at least one strategically connected board member. Month fixed
effects and Industry-Month fixed effects are included where indicated. t-stats , adjusting for
clustering at the month level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Dependent Variable:

Future-month returns

Sample:

Full Sample
(1)

(2)

Only if have at least one
connected board member
(3)
(4)

0.082**
(2.41)

0.091***
(2.80)

0.075**
(2.10)

0.077**
(2.13)

0.000
(0.66)

0.000
(1.08)

0.000
(0.57)

0.000
(0.37)

-0.002***
(2.81)

-0.002***
(2.67)

-0.003***
(2.96)

-0.002***
(2.68)

B/M

0.011*
(1.87)

0.011*
(1.80)

0.012
(1.58)

0.011
(1.36)

Past Ret(t-2,t-12)

-0.002
(0.59)

-0.002
(0.54)

-0.001
(0.18)

-0.001
(0.18)

Past Month Returns

-0.034**
(2.33)

-0.032**
(2.27)

-0.026
(1.33)

-0.027
(1.48)

Time Fixed Effects

Yes

Pct of Board Strategically
Connected

Board Size

Size

Industry x Time Fixed Effects
2

Yes
Yes

Yes

Adjusted R

0.23

0.28

0.26

0.36

No. of Obs.

38,040

38,040

11,039

11,039

Table IX: Errors in Analyst Forecasts and Earnings Surprises
This table reports regressions of earnings forecast error and earnings surprise cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs) on strategic trading of firms. In the first two columns, the dependent variable is Earnings CAR.
This is defined as the cumulative abnormal return (t-1,t+1) around the earnings date. The dependent
variable in Column 3 and Column 4 is earnings Forecast Error. This is the absolute value of the actual
reported earnings (EPS) value minus the consensus mean of the most recent analyst forecasts (in the month
leading up to the announcement), scaled by the absolute value of actual EPS reported. This is then
winsorized at the 0.01 level. The main variables of interest, Strategic Exporter/Importer, are defined in
Table VI. Other control variables include Size, the natural logarithm of market capitalization, B/M, the
natural logarithm of the ratio of book value to market value, Past Month Returns, returns in the month
prior to the earnings announcement, Past Returns (t-2,t-12), return from month t-2 to t-12, and (Actual
EPS-Estimate), which is the magnitude of the earnings surprise in the earnings announcement. Month and
industry fixed effects are included where indicated. t-stats, adjusting for clustering at the month level, are
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
Earnings CAR

Forecast Error

Earnings CAR

Forecast Error

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Strategic Exporter

0.487*
(1.90)

0.577**
(2.24)

2.861**
(2.48)

2.874**
(2.53)

Non-Strategic Exporter

0.046
(0.36)

0.063
(0.50)

0.414
(0.78)

0.233
(0.43)

Strategic Importer

0.634**
(2.58)

0.665***
(2.66)

3.880***
(2.66)

3.886***
(2.64)

Non-Strategic Importer

-0.046
(0.41)

-0.03
(0.27)

-1.034*
(1.86)

-1.357**
(2.42)

Past Month Returns

-0.93
(1.15)

-0.914
(1.13)

-3.544
(0.91)

-3.841
(0.99)

-1.114
(1.40)

-1.131
(1.41)

-2.138
(0.65)

-2.036
(0.62)

-0.083**
(2.04)

-0.072*
(1.77)

-3.693***
(18.10)

-3.678***
(17.92)

-0.099**
(2.50)

-0.090**
(2.25)

-3.935***
(23.12)

-3.981***
(23.17)

B/M

-0.072
(0.60)

-0.053
(0.44)

6.378***
(14.41)

6.327***
(14.19)

-0.137
(1.31)

-0.136
(1.30)

6.569***
(15.21)

6.464***
(14.78)

Past Ret(t-2,t-12)

0.007
(0.04)

-0.007
(0.05)

-4.465***
(3.78)

-4.538***
(3.78)

-0.138
(0.77)

-0.14
0.79)

-4.519***
(5.39)

-4.639***
(5.46)

(Act EPS — Est)

3.594***
(12.40)

3.585***
(12.43)

4.189***
(17.01)

4.19***
(16.97)

Time Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Size

Industry Fixed Effects
2

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Adjusted R

0.08

0.08

0.11

0.11

0.07

0.07

0.11

0.11

No. of Obs.

15,951

15,951

15,951

15,951

20,383

20,383

20,384

20,384

Table X: Segment Reporting and Connections
This table presents coefficient estimates of fixed effects regressions of Segment Sales Ratio on
Connected Population (CP) and control variables: Segment Sales Ratio ict = b1+ b2* CPct + b3*
Connected Board Member + Year Fixed Effect+ Country Fixed Effect.
Segment Sales Ratio is sales of a foreign segment scaled by total sales reported in all foreign
segments in that year. Number of Firms in Country is the total number of firms reporting a
segment sale in that country. Number of Countries is the total number of countries a firm
reported in its segment files. If the reported segment is a country, Connected Population refers to
the number of residents in a firm’s headquarter MSA connected to a foreign country scaled by
total population in that MSA (CPct), and Connected Board Member takes the value of 1 if the
firm has a board member who has an ethnicity tie to that country. If the reported segment is a
region, Connected Population refers to the average of individual counties’ connected population in
a firm’s headquarter MSA scaled by total population in that MSA, and Connected Board Member
is the sum of connected board member values attached to each country in that region. T-stats,
adjusting for clustering at the year level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Connected Population

Segment Sale
Ratio
0.05736***
(4.14)

Connected Board Member

Segment Sales

Number of Firms in Country

Number of Countries

Year Fixed Effects
Country/Region Fixed Effects
Adj. R2
Number of Observations

Segment Sale
Ratio
0.0600***
(4.44)
0.0028***
(4.50)

0.0001***
(4.77)

0.0002***
(4.68)

0.0001
(0.54)

0.00003
(0.59)

-0.0054***
(18.20)

-0.0054***
(18.38)

Yes
Yes
0.330
39,140

Yes
Yes
0.336
39,140

Appendix:
Supplementary Tables for
“Resident Networks and Firm Trade”

Table A1: Summary Statistics on Firms that Do Not Import/Export
This table provides summary statistics of publicly traded firms that do not engage in importing
(or exporting). MVE is the market value of equity calculated as the price end of calendar year
prior to fiscal year end multiplied by number of shares outstanding. B/M is the book to market
ratio where the book value of equity is calculated as sum of stockholders equity (SEQ), Deferred
Tax (TXDB), Investment Tax Credit (ITCB) minus Preferred Stock (PREF). Leverage is longterm debt (DLTT) plus debt in current liabilities (DLC), divided by the numerator plus market
equity. Past Return is the twelve month return prior to fiscal year end. ROA (return on asset)
earnings before tax and depreciation (EBITDA) scaled by total assets (TA). PPE/TA is the ratio
of plant, property, and equity (PPENT) scaled by total assets. The unit of observation is firmyear. Panel A (B) reports the summary statistics for public firms, which did not export (import)
at all over the sample. The sample period covers 1994 to 2010.
Panel A: Firm level data for Non-Exporters
mean
sd
p5
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p95
N

MVE
1,896
11,222
3
7
24
108
555
2,569
6,854
144,330

B/M
16.515
1,721.287
0.063
0.132
0.301
0.579
0.974
1.605
2.339
144,330

Leverage
0.216
0.215
0.000
0.000
0.018
0.163
0.352
0.527
0.639
167,639

Past Return
0.172
1.084
-0.694
-0.547
-0.265
0.039
0.363
0.844
1.364
106,365

ROA
-0.011
1.646
-0.536
-0.255
-0.005
0.071
0.141
0.213
0.270
161,877

PPE/TA
0.271
0.277
0.003
0.010
0.039
0.161
0.448
0.741
0.840
163,223

mean
sd
p5
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p95
N

Panel B: Firm level data for Non-Importers
MVE
B/M
Leverage Past Return ROA
1,824
16.929
0.218
0.170
-0.012
10,942
1,743.596 0.216
1.084
1.665
3
0.061
0.000
-0.694
-0.541
6
0.130
0.000
-0.547
-0.259
23
0.301
0.019
-0.265
-0.006
102
0.581
0.165
0.038
0.071
521
0.980
0.354
0.361
0.141
2,418
1.617
0.530
0.838
0.214
6,523
2.353
0.641
1.357
0.271
140,660 140,660
163,974
102,780
158,211

PPE/TA
0.273
0.278
0.002
0.010
0.039
0.164
0.454
0.745
0.843
159,547

Table A2: Country-MSA Population Mapping

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Country Name
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
El Salvador
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy

Population in
US
Argentinian
White
White
Mexican
White
Mexican
Mexican
White
Filipino
White
Chilean
Chinese
Colombian
Costa Rican
Cuban
White
White
Dominican
Ecuadorian
Salvadorian
White
White
White
White
Guatemalan
Mexican
Honduran
Chinese
White
White
Indian
Filipino
White
White
White

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Country Name
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Latvia
Lithuania
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Romania
Russia
Singapore
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan, China
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yugoslavia(FR)
South Africa

Population in
US
Japanese
Korean
White
White
Filipino
White
Mexican
White
White
Nicaraguan
White
Panamanian
Paraguayan
Peruvian
Filipino
White
White
Puerto Rican
White
White
Chinese
Mexican
White
White
Chinese
Filipinos
White
White
White
Uruguayan
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
White
White

Table A3: Country-Census Ethnicity Mapping

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Country Name
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
El Salvador
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy

Ethnicity
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
WHITE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
WHITE
FILIPINO
WHITE
HISPANIC
CHINESE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
CHINESE
WHITE
WHITE
INDIAN
FILIPINO
WHITE
WHITE
WHITE

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Country Name
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Latvia
Lithuania
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Romania
Russia
Singapore
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan, China
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yugoslavia(FR)
South Africa

Ethnicity
JAPANESE
KOREAN
WHITE
WHITE
FILIPINO
WHITE
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
WHITE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
FILIPINO
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
CHINESE
HISPANIC
WHITE
WHITE
CHINESE
FILIPINO
WHITE
WHITE
WHITE
HISPANIC
HISPANIC
VIETNAMESE
WHITE
WHITE

Table A4: State-level Connected Population
Panel A of this table presents coefficient estimates of fixed effects regressions of export ratio (ER)
on Connected Population (CP) and control variables: ERict = b1+ b2* CPct + b3* Connected
Board Member + Firm Fixed Effect + Year Fixed Effect+ Ethnicity Fixed Effect + FirmxYear
Fixed Effect. Export Ratio (ER) is total amount a given firm exports to a destination country in
a given year scaled by total amount of exports of the same firm in the same year (Eict /Sum(Eit)
). Connected population is the number of residents in firm’s headquarter state connected to
export country scaled by total population in that state (CPct). Connected Board Member is a
binary variable that takes a value of 1 if the firm has a board member with an ethnic background
similar to export destination. Panel B of this table presents coefficient estimates of the following
specification: IRict = b1+ b2* CPct + Firm Fixed Effect + Year Fixed Effect+ Ethnicity Fixed
Effect + FirmxYear Fixed Effect, where import ratio (IR) is total amount a given firm imports
from a country in a given year scaled by total amount of imports of the same firm in the same
year (Iict /Sum(Iit)). T-stats, clustered by year, are reported below coefficient estimates. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Exports

Connected Population

Export Ratio

Export Ratio

Export Ratio

Export Ratio

0.027***'
(2.70)

0.025**
(2.50)

0.313***
(5.13)

0.027***
(2.94)

Connected Board Member

0.012***
(3.31)

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
FirmxYear Fixed Effects
Ethnicity Fixed Effects
StatexPartnerCountry Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

Adj. R2
Number of Observations

0.48
106,788

0.64
106,788

0.04
106,788

0.64
106,788

Table A4: State-Level Connected Population (continued)
Panel B: Imports

Connected Population

Import Ratio

Import Ratio

Import Ratio

Import Ratio

0.049***
(4.08)

0.058***
(4.46)

0.381***
(5.01)

0.061***
(4.85)

Connected Board Member

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
FirmxYear Fixed Effects
Ethnicity Fixed Effects

0.013***
(4.02)

State x Partner Country Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

Adj. R2
Number of Observations

0.39
103,829

0.57
103,829

0.06
103,829

0.57
103,829

