                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     THE NEED FOR ENEMIES

                                          Leopoldo Fergusson
                                          James A. Robinson
                                            Ragnar Torvik
                                            Juan F. Vargas

                                         Working Paper 18313
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18313


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




We thank Dario Romero for excellent research assistance and Daron Acemoglu, Torberg Falch, María
Teresa Ronderos and Bjarne Strøm for their comments and suggestions. We are grateful to seminar
participants at Berkeley, Georgetown, Universidad de los Andes, Universidad del Rosario, the World
Bank Office of the Chief Economist for Latin America and the Workshop on Governance, Development
and Political Violence, UCSD, June 2011, particularly our discussant David Laitin. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Leopoldo Fergusson, James A. Robinson, Ragnar Torvik, and Juan F. Vargas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Need for Enemies
Leopoldo Fergusson, James A. Robinson, Ragnar Torvik, and Juan F. Vargas
NBER Working Paper No. 18313
August 2012
JEL No. D72

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a political economy model where some politicians have a comparative advantage in undertaking
a task and this gives them an electoral advantage. This creates an incentive to underperform in the
task in order to maintain their advantage. We interpret the model in the context of fighting against
insurgents in a civil war and derive two main empirical implications which we test using Colombian
data during the presidency of Álvaro Uribe. First, as long as rents from power are sufficiently important,
large defeats for the insurgents should reduce the probability that politicians with comparative advantage,
President Uribe, will fight the insurgents. Second, this effect should be larger in electorally salient
municipalities. We find that after the three largest victories against the FARC rebel group, the government
reduced its efforts to eliminate the group and did so differentially in politically salient municipalities.
Our results therefore support the notion that such politicians need enemies to maintain their political
advantage and act so as to keep the enemy alive.


Leopoldo Fergusson                                   Ragnar Torvik
Universidad de los Andes                             Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Cra 1 No 18A - 12                                    N-7491 Trondheim
Bogotá, Colombia                                     Norway
lfergusson@uniandes.edu.co                           ragnar.torvik@svt.ntnu.no

James A. Robinson                                    Juan F. Vargas
Harvard University                                   Universidad del Rosario
Department of Government                             Department of Economics
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street                          Cl 14 No 4 - 80
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Bogotá, Colombia
and NBER                                             juan.vargas@urosario.edu.co
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
If an agent is hired by a principal to work until a particular task is completed, then by
completing the task the agent is putting himself out of a job. This phenomenon may be
particularly important in politics. It is often claimed that some politicians are elected
because “they are the person for the job” perhaps because they have a particular skill
or comparative advantage. Once the job is over this skill will be less valued and the
politicians, even if they have successfully completed the job for which they were selected,
may be replaced. A salient historical example may be Winston Churchill who, though
not particularly successful as a peacetime politician, was thought to be the man for the
job in 1940 to lead Britain to victory in the Second World War as prime minister. As
soon as the war was won in 1945, British voters, instead of rewarding him, immediately
removed him from office. A related example is Margaret Thatcher. She was selected as
the Conservative leader in 1975 because she was known to be very anti-trade union, and
after the Conservative government of Edward Heath had been effectively brought down
by the unions in 1974 the Conservative Party was bent on revenge. Just as important,
the median voter in Britain was swinging against the union movement so a rabidly anti-
union leader gave the party a strong electoral advantage over the Labour Party. After
being elected in 1979, Mrs. Thatcher passed a gamut of anti-union legislation and acted
very toughly, particularly during the miner’s strike of 1984-85, hence her catchphrase
“this lady’s not for turning”. She destroyed the power of the union movement, with the
private sector unionization rate falling from 57% in 1980 to 39% in 1990 (Visser, 2006),
and was rewarded by being removed by the party as it’s leader in 1990 and replaced by
John Major.
    In these cases Winston Churchill and Mrs. Thatcher did the job they were appointed
to do because the stakes were high. Not defeating Hitler would have been a disaster for
Britain and Churchill, and leaving the trade union movement unreformed would have
been a huge setback for the Conservative Party and Mrs. Thatcher. Nevertheless, when
the stakes are lower these examples suggest that other mechanisms may be important:
if Mrs. Thatcher had been less successful at decimating the trade union movement, the
Conservative Party would have needed her longer. Such a mechanism belongs to a class of
examples which the social anthropologist Frederick Bailey (1998) described as “the need
for enemies”. Both Churchill and Thatcher were selected because they were thought to
be particularly good at removing a particular threat, Nazi Germany and the trade union
movement. But in both cases they needed the “enemies” they faced in order to maintain
power themselves.
    In this paper we develop a political economy model of this need for enemies, showing
how a politician who is good at undertaking a particular task has an incentive not to
complete it fully since he needs to keep the task alive in order to maintain his strategic
advantage in an election. We focus on the particular case of an ongoing civil war where
incumbent politicians have to make a decision about whether or not to fight the insur-


                                            1
gents. There are two types of politicians, one of whom has a comparative advantage in
fighting the insurgency in the sense that if he did so he would have a greater probability
of defeating it. We show that such a politician’s incentive to fight the insurgents is miti-
gated by the fact that if he did so he would destroy his electoral advantage. He needs to
keep his enemy alive in order to sustain his political power.
    The model generates two main testable implications which stem from the compara-
tive statics of two key parameters. The first comes from the exogenous component of
the probability that if the incumbent politician decided to fight the insurgents he will
succeed. We show that (as long as rents from power are high enough)1 the higher this is,
the less likely the incumbent politician (with the comparative advantage in fighting the
insurgency) will actually fight the insurgents. This is because the greater is the exogenous
component of the probability, the higher is the chance that the insurgents will actually be
eliminated, removing the strategic advantage of the incumbent in the upcoming election.
The second testable result comes from the interaction between the exogenous compo-
nent of the probability of defeating the insurgents and the sensitivity of voters to policy
outcomes (captured in our probabilistic voting model by the density of swing voters).
The model suggests that the effect of a higher value of the exogenous component of the
probability is greater the more sensitive voters are to policy (the greater in the density
of the distribution of valence terms).2
    We test these implications of our model using data from Colombia. In 2002 Álvaro
Uribe was elected president on an explicit platform to fight against the left-wing insurgent
guerilla groups the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and Ejército
de Liberación Nacional (ELN). Uribe, whose father was murdered by the FARC, was
widely seen as having a major political advantage in his loathing for the groups, particu-
larly relative to the traditional politicians who had a long history of trying to negotiate
with them (see Kline, 2007, for the failure of the most recent attempt during the previous
presidency of Andrés Pastrana). Thus Uribe was a politician for the job who intensified
the fight against the guerilla. Moreover, this was a political environment where the stakes
were not too high. There was no chance of the FARC capturing any large city such as Bo-
gotá or Medellı́n, and Colombian politicians had happily coexisted for many years with
non-state armed actors, including the FARC and ELN. In such a situation our model
suggests that Uribe’s incentive to attack the guerilla would have been mitigated by the
fact that had he eliminated them, he would have removed his own electoral advantage.
To the extent that Uribe valued rents from office as well as peace, this could have reduced
his incentive to eliminate the FARC and ELN, just as our model predicts.
    We can test the predictions of the model by identifying events in the Colombian civil
   1
     Though in the case of Churchill and Thatcher the stakes for society were high, the rents for the
politicians were not because of the well functioning system of accountability.
   2
     In the model the fact that this exogenous component is realized after an election allows for citizens
to rationally elect the more competent politician even though they know that in part of the parameter
space he will not exert effort (and hence it would be better to have elected the less competent politicians
who would always exert effort).


                                                    2
war which correspond to a high probability of defeating the guerilla. These include the
release of information on May 24 2008 that the FARC’s long standing leader Manuel
Marulanda Vélez, known as Tirofijo (“Shureshot”) had died from natural causes, the
killing by the Colombian military of FARC’s spokesman and Secretariat member Raúl
Reyes in Ecuador on March 1 of the same year, and the rescue to long-time hostage
and 2002 presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt in ‘Operación Jaque’ on July 2 also of
2008. All three events were major positive shocks for the government in the sense that
they signalled that if the government would try to eliminate the FARC, they would have
a greater chance of success. In the case of Tirofijo and Reyes this was because of the
central military role these leaders played and in the case of Betancourt it was because
this was such a demoralizing defeat for the FARC which led to intensified defection by
its members. As such they capture a positive shock in the exogenous component of
the probability of defeating the FARC. Our model implies that such a situation would
lead to a reduced incentive to fight the FARC. To test this, we study the pattern of
government military activity against the guerrillas around these key events. We interpret
more military activity as indicating greater attempts by the government to fight the
FARC.
    Our model further implies that this effect should be differentially strong in places
which are politically salient in the sense that they contain a lot of swing voters. To
distinguish such municipalities, we take advantage of another key component of Uribe’s
presidency: his weekly Consejos Comunales (Community Councils). The councils were
held each weekend in a different municipality and broadcasted live on national television.
Uribe’s Consejos Comunales enable us to identify the municipalities where the president
believed voters were most responsive.3
    Examining these three events and sets of municipalities, we find evidence which is
highly consistent with the predictions of our model. First, in our regressions for govern-
ment military activity, the coefficient on a post–event dummy shows that such activity
significantly decreases after each of the three major events. Of course, there are alterna-
tive plausible explanations for a decrease in government military activity after a major
army achievement or guerrilla setback. Most obviously, it may take a while before a
new major operation can be planned and executed, or the guerrilla may seek refuge in
strategic safe havens right after a major setback. But the second major prediction in our
model is harder to reconcile with alternative interpretations, and we find strong support
for it: the decrease in government activity is more pronounced in places which are elec-
torally salient, or empirically where Uribe had held a Consejo Comunal. Our estimates
reveal that, after each one of the events, government military initiative dropped in places
where Uribe had organized Consejos Comunales, relative to areas where he had not. (In
other words, the coefficient on the interaction between a post-event dummy and a dummy
variable that equals one if Uribe had organized a Consejo Comunal in the municipality
is negative and significant). This result is robust to the inclusion of municipality-level
  3
      Tribin (2010) provides a political economy analysis of the Consejos Comunales.


                                                    3
fixed effects and to controlling for differential trends, parametrized as functions of various
observable baseline characteristics, suggesting that it is not driven by omitted variable
bias. Also, we test the validity of our key identification assumption (namely, the existence
of parallel trends between municipalities with and without Consejos Comunales before
these key events) by replicating our main regression one year before the events actually
took place. We find no significant effects in such regressions, assuaging concerns about
preexisting differential trends.
    Moreover, we perform a series of additional robustness checks to study alternative
mechanisms that could be driving our results. A major potential objection to our in-
terpretation is that the patterns of government activity after a major positive outcome
are in fact not so much determined by the government’s own initiative, but by reaction
to the guerrilla’s activity. It could be that after a major defeat the guerilla withdraws
making it harder for the government to find and attack them. However, an examination
of the behavior of guerrilla attacks reveals that they do not follow a similar pattern across
different municipalities after the major setbacks. Specifically, though guerilla attacks do
fall after these events they do not fall differentially in municipalities where Uribe held
Consejos Comunales. This casts doubt on this alternative interpretation. It could also be
that after a major success the army reduces its attacks because it needs time to re-build.
To examine this hypothesis we also run regressions for alternative “placebo” events. In
particular, we choose events that represented important army operations or attempts at
offensive measures against the guerillas, but did not turn out to be successful. If time
to undertake new operations (especially in some areas more than others) explain our
results, then we should see an effect in these types of regressions. We do not. Note also
that one of our key events, the death of Tirofijo, was from natural causes and not due
to the army. Finally, even though we control for differential trends based on observable
characteristics, we conduct an additional test to verify if our results are driven by other
traits that are correlated with Consejos Comunales but have little to do with the electoral
response of areas where Consejos were held. Specifically, we establish that the most im-
portant correlates of Consejo’s Comunales are the municipality’s total population, area,
level of poverty, and distance to the department capital. If these correlates, and not the
electoral responsiveness of the municipalities, were driving our results, then allowing for a
differential trend in government activity for municipalities categorized according to these
traits should render our main coefficients of interest insignificant. Again, we find that
our main results are still typically significant with the expected sign, which is reassuring
for the validity of our main conclusions.
    One could argue that it was not just President Uribe who was extracting rents from
maintaining the FARC but also the military. It could be that after a positive shock, such
as the death of Tirofijo, the military was scared that the FARC would collapse and so
they autonomously scaled back their activities.4 This idea is made more plausible by
   4
     Such a mechanism has been suggested elsewhere in the literature on civil wars as an explanation
for why they persist, for instance in El Salvador (Schwartz, 1991). See Giustozzi, 2011, pp. 174-175 for


                                                   4
the fact that there is a lot of evidence of military autonomy in Colombia such as the
“false positives” scandal where possibly 3,000 people were illegally executed by the army
to get promotions, pay increases and extra vacations (Acemoglu, Fergusson, Robinson
and Vargas, 2011). Though this theory could explain the fall in army attacks after big
positive shocks it cannot in itself explain why this effect should be differentially large in
politically salient municipalities. For this to be true, it must be that the army also wishes
to keep President Uribe in power. This is possible, but in this case the model would be
very close to the one we have now but with a different central mechanism. However,
the degree of presidential dominance in Colombia and the enormous amount of evidence
of President Uribe’s power in many policy areas, not least the military strategy, makes
it implausible that military autonomy can be the dominant mechanism generating our
findings.5
    Although we are not aware of any study that develops the same mechanism as our
model, our paper is related to a number of previous political economy contributions. The
most related paper is Bardhan and Mookherjee (2010) who show in West Bengal that
left-wing politicians who favor land reform refrain from doing it in office because they are
better able commit to do it in the future. This again is a case where a politicians refrains
from doing something they prefer in order to manipulate future election results.6 They
also provide empirical evidence supporting this hypothesis. This paper is part of a larger
literature developed by Aghion and Bolton (1990), Milesi-Ferretti (1995), Besley and
Coate (1998), Biais and Perotti (2002) and Robinson and Torvik (2005, 2009). These
papers all developed in different contexts the idea that incumbent politicians have an
incentive to set policy inefficiently to increase the demand for their own services, thus
inducing voters to support them. The mechanism through which this works is that current
policy influences a state variable which helps to determine future voting intentions of
citizens. For example, in Aghion and Bolton’s paper a conservative government which
dislikes taxing, borrowing and printing money, might be willing to create debt today so
as to create a large stock of debt in the future. This could be advantageous electorally
because the conservative government can then better commit to pay off the debt rather
than inflate it away, thus encouraging voters who hold the debt to vote for it. These
papers all differ in details and implications from the current analysis.
    Though none of these papers discuss civil war, the case study literature on civil wars
other similar examples, for instance in Pakistan.
   5
     Moreover, to directly test whether army members’ incentives may be driving our results, we compare
the military activity across army brigades which are led by different army officials. The motivation for
this exercise is that colonels and generals have different incentives to sustain conflict against the guerrilla.
More specifically, since colonels have yet to rise in the rank ladder, they typically have stronger incentives
than generals. However, in our regressions for military activity, we show that the interaction of the colonel
dummy with the post dummy is never significant.
   6
     An informal variant of this argument is made in the literature on the politics of Zimbabwe. The
delay is agrarian reform after independence in 1980 has been explained by the fact that President Mugabe
wanted to keep the issue “up his sleeve” because he needed to be able to use it when he became less
popular and he could credibly commit to do so. This explains why fast track land reform was only
promoted after 2000 when Mugabe faced strong political opposition (Meredith, 2007).


                                                       5
has noted phenomena akin to those we study. For example, in Nepal it is commonly
argued (see International Crisis Group, 2005) that after the civil war broke out in 1996
King Dipendra, who controlled the army, refrained from committing it to the war in
order to make himself more indispensable to the democratic politicians with the aim of
regaining some of the constitutional powers he had previously lost.
    One can also think of our model as related to the political economy literature on the
difficulty of making efficiency enhancing reforms, such as Fernandez and Rodrik (1991),
Alesina and Drazen (1991) and Drazen and Grilli (1993), in the sense that if the incumbent
is better able to reform the economy than the challenger the incumbent has the incentive
to delay reform to sustain the demand for this services. Cuckierman and Tommasi (1998)
also present a model where the politician who cares most about doing something is the
least likely to do it but their argument rests on asymmetric information.
    Finally there is also a large literature on social psychology on the notion of the need
for enemies (see for example Volkan, 1985, 1994, Barash, 1994, Murray and Meyers,
1999, and Abecassis, 2003), but we develop very different non-behavioral ideas based on
rational choice.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we set up a very simple
model, and in Section 3 we solve the model and yield our main theoretical results. In
Section 4 we test the main predictions from the model using data from Colombia. In
Section 5 we conclude.


2     Model
2.1    Private agents
The society we consider has M municipalities, each populated by a continuum of citizens
with measure normalized to unity, and thus the size of the total population is M . In
addition to the citizens there are two national politicians (or parties), denoted by I and
O respectively, and a guerilla group (the ‘enemy’) which has a local branch present in
each municipality.
    In period 1 a politician i ∈ {I, O} holds power, and at the end of period 1 there is
an election to decide who is in power in period 2. Private citizens derive utility from
private income y in each period, and additional net utility P > 0 if there is peace
in their municipality. There is peace if the guerilla group which is initially active is
eradicated. Thus the utility of peace may alternatively be interpreted as hatred of the
enemy. Denoting the probability of peace in municipality m in period t by Φm,t , expected
period t utility of income and peace for a private agent in municipality m is given by

                                        y + Φm,t P.

Agents also have preferences over ideology and other characteristics of politicians which
we will term popularity (our model is a version of the probabilistic voting model of


                                            6
Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987, and Persson and Tabellini, 2000). Each agent j has an
ideological bias σ j in favor of politician I. We assume that σ j is constant over time and
in a municipality m uniformly distributed on the interval [− 2s1m , 2s1m ] with density sm > 0.
We order the different municipalities according to the size of sm , where s1 ≥ s2 ≥ ... ≥
sM .7 The relative popularity of politician I in municipality m, which we denote ρm , can
potentially be affected by political campaigning, and is given by
                                                   I    O
                                       ρm = ρ + λ(Cm − Cm ),

where ρ is stochastic and is governed by a uniform distribution with support on the inter-
        1    1
val [− 2h , 2h ] and with density h > 0.8 If politician i ∈ {I, O} campaign in municipality
                                   i                                          i
m then the indicator variable Cm     = 1, while if he does not campaign then Cm = 0. λ ≥ 0
thus measures the effectiveness of campaigning in boosting popularity. We assume that
both politicians have the same time for campaigning at disposal, but that this time is too
limited for politicians to campaign in all M municipalities. Thus they need to choose in
which N < M municipalities to campaign.

2.2     Politicians
Politicians value rents and peace. A politician i ∈ {I, O} in political power in period t
receives rents Rti = R per period. If not in power the politician does not receive rents.
    In each period t ∈ {1, 2} the politician in power has to decide whether or not to try
to eradicate the guerilla group in each municipality. The probability of success for a
politician that attempts to eradicate the enemy depends on his own ability or effort, as
well as exogenous factors outside the control of the politician. Thus let the probability
of success if politician i attempts to eradicate the enemy be given by αq i ≤ 1, where q i
represents the ability or effort of the politician and α is a stochastic variable representing
exogenous factors affecting the possibility of eradication.
                                                            α has mean ᾱ, and a cumulative
                                                1
density function H(α) with support on 0, qI .
    The key assumption in our model is that the two politicians may differ in their pref-
erences or in their ability when it comes to eradication of the enemy. To model this in
the simplest possible way we can think of, let the politicians simply share the preferences
of the private agents so that the per period net payoff of an eradicated enemy is P in
each municipality, but in case politician I decides to try to eradicate the enemy he can
do that with a probability that is higher than the politician O, i.e. q I ≥ q O . Thus politi-
cian I has a greater chance of eradicating the enemy than politician O. An alternative
interpretation is that the abilities of politicians are the same, but that politician I hates
the enemy more than politician O (for instance in the Colombian case because FARC
   7
     Thus, as in other models of probabilistic voting, sm is a measure of voters’ responsiveness to policy
in each municipality. A high sm implies a municipality in which policy that marginally increases the
utility of voters will attract many additional votes because people care more about policy relative to
ideology.
   8
     This formulation follows closely from the work on lobbying by Baron (1994) and Grossman and
Helpman (1996), see also Strömberg (2008).

                                                    7
murdered the father of Uribe). This more intense hate induces higher effort which, in
turn, gives him a higher probability of success should he decide to try to eliminate the
enemy. The exact interpretation of the possible asymmetry between politicians is not
crucial for our analysis. However, if there is no asymmetry our mechanism is not present
as will be seen below.
    Since discounting does not matter for our mechanisms we assume that all agents value
the future in the same way as the present. The expected net present value of utility of
politician i at the start period 1 is then given by
                                             M
                                             X                          M
                                                                        X
                       U i = E1 (R1i ) + P       Φm,1 + E1 (R2i ) + P       Φm,2 ,                  (1)
                                             m=1                        m=1

where E1 (Rti ) is period 1 expectation of rents in period t.

2.3     Timing of events and equilibrium
The timing of events in this society is as follows.

   1. α is revealed and the politician i ∈ {I, O} in power decides whether to try to eradi-
      cate the enemy or not in each municipality m. If he decides to attempt eradication
      of the enemy in municipality m the indicator variable Aim takes value one, while if
      he decides not to attempt eradication of the enemy in municipality m the indicator
      variable Aim takes value zero.

   2. The outcome of the eradication decision is observed. If the enemy is eradicated in
      municipality m the indicator variable Bm takes value one, while if the enemy is not
      eradicated in municipality m the indicator variable Bm takes value zero.

   3. First period payoffs are realized, politicians decide where to campaign, the popu-
      larity shock ρ is revealed and agents vote.

   4. The politician i ∈ {I, O} with most votes takes office in period 2.

   5. If the enemy has not already been eradicated in municipality m, the politician in
      power decides whether to try to eradicate the enemy or not.

   6. Second period payoffs are realized and the game ends.

   As usual we look for the pure strategy subgame perfect equilibrium, and thus below
we solve the model by backwards induction.9
   9
    Note that we could have allowed a new drawing of the shock to α in period 2, by letting α be time
dependent and given by αt+1 = αt + v, where v is stochastic with expectation zero. This gives a solution
to the model which is identical to the one we have.




                                                    8
3     Analysis
3.1    Period 2
Consider first the municipalities where the enemy has been eradicated in period 1. In
these municipalities the politician in power in period 2 has no problem to solve. Consider
next the municipalities where the enemy has not been eradicated in period 1. In these
municipalities the politician in power in period 2 will attempt to eradicate the enemy, as
both politicians have a positive net payoff of peace. Given that politician i is in power
in period 2, the probability of second period peace in each of these municipalities is αq i .

3.2    Period 1
Assume that politician i ∈ {I, O} is in power, and denote the expected reelection proba-
bility of the incumbent politician i by Ωi . In case politician i decides to try to eradicate
the enemy in ΣM        i
                 m=1 Am ≤ M municipalities, his probability of successful eradication is αq
                                                                                            i

in each of them and thus his expected period 1 payoff is R + αq i P ΣM         i
                                                                         m=1 Am as given by
the first line in (2). The second and third lines in (2) show the expected period 2 payoff.
In the αq i ΣM      i
              m=1 Am municipalities where the enemy was eradicated in the first period,
                                                                                            
peace is maintained in period 2 giving a payoff of αq i P ΣM       i               i M
                                                             m=1 Am . In M − αq Σm=1 Am
                                                                                          i

municipalities the enemy is still around in period 2. With probability Ωi the incumbent
politician i wins the election and enjoys rents R. If he wins the election there is a proba-
                                                                             
bility αq i he succeeds in creating peace in each of the M − αq i ΣM       i
                                                                      m=1 Am municipalities
where the enemy has not been eradicated. With probability 1 − Ωi he loses the election,
gets no rents, and a probability of peace given by the probability of success of the other
politician (denoted by −i) αq −i in each of the municipalities where the enemy is still
around. Thus the expected net present value of utility of an incumbent politician i is
given by
                              M
                              X
       U i = R + αq i P           Aim
                          m=1
                        M                                              M
                                                                               ! !
                       X                                               X
               +αq i P     Aim    + Ωi     R + αq i        M − αq i        Aim P                       (2)
                       m=1                                             m=1
                                                     M
                                                              !
                                                     X
                          i   −i                 i
               +(1 − Ω )αq              M − αq          Aim       P
                                                     m=1
                                         M
                                         X
                      i             i
            = (1 + Ω )R + 2αq P              Aim
                                         m=1
                                                     M
                                                               !                          M
                                                                                                !
                                                     X                                    X
               +Ωi α(q i − q −i ) M − αq i               Aim       P + αq −i   M − αq i       Aim P.
                                                     m=1                                  m=1

   From (2) we note that the expected utility of an incumbent politician I is increasing
in his probability of winning the election ΩI . In the continuation we will also assume

                                                       9
that politician O prefers to win rather than to lose the election, i.e. that the utility given
by (2) is decreasing in ΩO .10
    Recall that the indicator variable Bm = 1 if in municipality m the enemy is eradicated,
while Bm = 0 if the enemy is not eradicated. Private agents vote for the candidate which
gives them the highest expected utility. Then a private agent j in municipality m supports
politician I in the election if

              y + Bm P + (1 − Bm )αq I P + σ j + ρm > y + Bm P + (1 − Bm )αq O P,

or alternatively if

                          σ j > −(1 − Bm )α(q I − q O )P − ρ − λ(Cm
                                                                  I    O
                                                                    − Cm ).
                                                                     I
The number of voters from municipality m who supports politician I, Sm , is then given
by
                           Z    1
                               2sm
                 I
                Sm    =                                             sm dj =
                             −(1−Bm )α(q I −q O )P −ρ−λ(Cm
                                                         I −C O )
                                                             m
                            1
                              + (1 − Bm )α(q I − q O )P sm + ρsm + λ(Cm
                                                                      I    O
                                                                        − Cm )sm .
                            2
Let Ω denote the election probability of politician I. (Thus if politician I is also the
incumbent Ω = ΩI ). Ω is given by
                                     (M               )
                                       X
                                             I    1
                              Ω = Pr       Sm  ≥ M ,
                                       m=1
                                                  2

which is equivalent to
                 (M                                                      )
                   X
                                      I   O                  I    O
          Ω = Pr       sm (1 − Bm )α(q − q )P + sm ρ + λsm (Cm − Cm ) ≥ 0 .
                       m=1

                                                 M
                                                 X
Denoting the average sm by s, so that                 sm = sM , this can be simplified to
                                                 m=1
                      (     M
                                                                         )
                         1 X
           Ω = Pr ρ ≥ −       sm (1 − Bm )α(q I − q O )P + λsm (Cm
                                                                 I    O
                                                                   − Cm ) =
                        sM m=1
                               M
                   1   h X
                     +     sm (1 − Bm )α(q I − q O )P + λsm (Cm
                                                              I    O
                                                                − Cm ).                                 (3)
                   2 sM m=1

       The election probability of politician O is given by 1 − Ω.
  10
     As seen from (2) this will always be the case provided R is not too small. A higher reelection
probability of politician O increases his expected rents, but decreases the probability of future peace
because politician I is more likely to succeed in creating peace than politician O. In isolation, the latter
effects pulls in the direction that politician O would like to lose the election. In such a case the model
becomes uninteresting, and thus we focus on the case where both politicians compete in the election
with the aim of winning.

                                                       10
    Thus both politicians chose where to campaign so as to maximize their expected
utility, subject to Ω being given by (3). The incumbent politician i ∈ {I, O} also chooses
where to attempt eradication of the enemy, subject to Ω being given by (3) and subject
to the expectation of Bm being given by αq i Aim . Thus the solution to the maximization
                                                                                 i
problem for an incumbent politician i consists of N campaign decisions Cm          , and M
decisions on eradication attempts Aim . The solution of the maximization problem for an
                                                           i
opposition politician i consists of N campaign decisions Cm  . As will be clear below a well
defined solution to the maximization problem of both politicians always exists.
    We start out with the solution for the campaign decisions. From (2) and (3) we
note that the only effect on utility from campaigning is through its effect on the election
probability. Thus since politician I aims to maximize Ω, while politician O aims to
minimize Ω, both politicians choose to campaign in the N municipalities where voters
are the most responsive, i.e. where sm is the highest. More formally, we have the following
proposition:

               I    O                  I    O
Proposition 1 Cm = Cm = 1 for m ≤ N , Cm = Cm = 0 for m > N .

    Proof. When politicians can campaign in N municipalities then from (3), irrespective
of the campaigning decision politician O, politician I increases Ω the most by campaigning
in the N municipalities where sm is the highest. In the same way, irrespective of the
campaigning decision of politician I, politician O decreases Ω the most by campaigning
in the N municipalities where sm is the highest. Thus for both politicians the dominant
strategy is to campaign in the N municipalities where sm is the highest, which due to
our ordering of municipalities according to the size of sm are those with m ≤ N .
    Thus, rather intuitively, both politicians campaign where voters are the most respon-
sive. Taking into account the campaigning decisions, the election probability for politician
I reduces to
                                                   M
                               1 hα(q I − q O )P X
                          Ω= +                        sm (1 − Bm ).
                               2         sM       m=1

    It is clear that since Bm in general depends on who is in power, the election proba-
bilities will also do so. Recall that above we defined Ωi as the reelection probability of
politician i. Thus, given that politician I is in power, taking into account that in that
case Bm has expectation αq I AIm , we can calculate his expected reelection probability as
a function of his eradication decision variables AIm , to be
                                               M
                      I     1 hα(q I − q O )P X
                    Ω     =   +                  sm (1 − αq I AIm )
                            2      sM         m=1
                                                           M
                                                                      !
                            1                        αq I X
                          =   + hα(q I − q O )P   1−        sm AIm        .             (4)
                            2                        sM m=1

There are two noteworthy implications of this expression. First, the reelection probability
is decreasing in AIm . Thus the more municipalities where eradication is attempted, the

                                            11
lower is the expected reelection probability of the most able incumbent. The intuition
for this is that the more municipalities that remain with an active guerilla, the more
important is it for the voters that the most able politician holds future power. Second, the
expected reduction in the reelection probability with an eradication attempt is stronger
in municipalities where voters are more responsive, that is the higher is sm . The intuition
for this is that in municipalities where voters care much about political results relative
to ideology, the expected gain in votes by keeping the enemy alive is higher.
    In contrast, should the least able politician O hold power his reelection probability is
increasing in AOm , as it is given by

                                                            M
                                                                      !
                                                          OX
                              1                        αq
                      ΩO = − hα(q I − q O )P 1 −               s m AO
                                                                    m   .                (5)
                              2                        sM m=1

   The least able politician has a disadvantage if there are many municipalities without
peace, as voters realize he will be less likely to succeed in creating future peace.
   To characterize the remaining part of the solution to the maximization problem,
namely the M eradication decisions of the incumbent, we proceed in two steps. First, we
look at a municipality and ask: for given eradication decisions in other municipalities,
what is the optimal eradication decision in the municipality we are looking at. Second,
we move to the full characterization of the solution to the maximization problem.
   We start out with the following proposition:

Proposition 2 Consider a municipality k for given eradication decisions in all other
municipalities.
   (i) Let politician I be in power in period 1. Then in municipality k there may or may
not be an attempt to eradicate the enemy.
   (ii) Let politician O be in power in period 1. Then there will always be an attempt to
eradicate the enemy.

    Proof. Consider first the case where politician I holds power. Let all eradication
decisions in all other municipalities than k be given. Denote by UAI k =1 the total expected
utility of the incumbent when attempting eradication in municipality k (for given erad-
ication decisions in all other municipalities m) and by UAI k =0 his total expected utility
when not attempting eradication in municipality k (for given eradication decisions in all
the other municipalities). A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for an eradication
attempt, AIk = 1, is that DkI = UAI k =1 −UAI k =0 > 0 for all combinations of eradication deci-
sions in other municipalities. A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for an eradication
attempt not to be made, AIk = 0, is that DkI = UAI k =1 − UAI k =0 < 0 for all combinations of
eradication decisions in other municipalities. Inserting for (4) in (2), and then inserting




                                              12
for AIk = 1 when eradication is attempted and AIk = 0 when it is not, we find
                                                             M
                                                                   !!
                             2 I       O 2
                          hα  (q   − q  )  P s k
                                                            X
     DkI =     2 − αq O −                          M − αq I    AIm    αq I P
                                  sM                        m=1
                                                    M
                                                                   !!!
                                                 I
                 1                           αq     X
             −     + hα(q I − q O )P 1 −               sm AIm + sk      α2 q I (q I − q O )P (6)
                 2                           sM m=1
                  hα2 q I (q I − q O )P sk
              −                            R.
                            sM
Part (i) then follows from noting that (for all combinations of possible eradication deci-
sions Am in all other municipalities m) the sign of DkI in (6) may always be positive or
may always be negative. (In particular it will always be negative for a sufficiently high
R and always positive for a sufficiently low h).
    Part (ii) follows straight forward from (5) in (2), since by this for all combinations of
eradication attempts in the other municipalities an eradication attempt in municipality
k both increase the probability of peace and also the reelection probability of politician
O.
    Note that in this society all politicians and private agents agree that the per period
net utility gain of eradicating the enemy in a municipality is P > 0. Despite of this,
however, when the politician in power is the most able one he may choose not to try
to eradicate the enemy. Per se there is no conflict of interest in the eradication of the
enemy - everyone agrees that the enemy is a problem. The reason the able incumbent
may choose not to eradicate is a commitment problem: voters cannot commit to vote
for a politician independently of which problems remain unresolved. In turn, when the
incumbent has a comparative advantage in solving the problem, this creates an incentive
for him not to solve it. In particular we note from (6) that this incentive is stronger the
higher the rents from holding office, since when these rents are high an increase in the
reelection probability is more valuable.
    When politician O is in power it follows from Proposition 2 that he will always attempt
eradication in all municipalities. The interesting case that remains to fully analyze is thus
when politician I holds power. In the remainder of the analysis we thus focus on this
case.
    To fully characterize the possible solutions to the maximization problem when politi-
cian I is the incumbent, it is useful to start with the following proposition:

Proposition 3 Suppose politician I is in power, and consider a municipality k. The
incentive for eradication is weaker the more responsive voters in the municipality are,
that is the higher is sk .




                                                13
       Proof. From (6) we note that11
                                                                                   M
                                                                                              !!!
       dDkI    hα2 q I (q I − q O )P                                               X
            =−                          R + α(q I − q O )P      M − αq I      1+        AIm         < 0.
       dsk              sM                                                         m=1



    Thus, irrespective of eradication decisions in other municipalities, it is always less
attractive to eradicate the enemy in a municipality k the more responsive the voters in the
municipality are. The reason for this is that not eradicating the enemy in a municipality
increases the reelection probability of politician I by more, the more responsive voters in
the municipality are. In turn, a large increase in the reelection probability of politician
I has a stronger negative impact on the incentive for eradication for two reasons. First,
a large increase in the reelection probability means that the expected increase in rents
by avoiding eradication is higher. Second, a large increase in the reelection probability
means a large increase in the probability that it will be the most able politician that will
undertake future eradication attempts. Thus the increase in the expected future value of
peace is higher the more the reelection probability of politician I increases.
    We now have sufficient information to fully characterize the possible solutions for
eradication decisions by politician I: if the rents of power R are sufficiently high there
will not be eradication attempts in any municipality. For lower values of the rents of
power R there may be eradication attempts in some or all municipalities. When there
is an eradication attempt in less than all municipalities, say in G < M municipalities,
then there will only be an eradication attempt in the G ≥ 0 municipalities with the least
responsive voters. Thus AIm = 0 for m ≤ M − G, AIm = 1 for m > M − G. Finally, it can
be verified from (6) that when R and h are sufficiently low there will be an eradication
attempt in all municipalities.12
  11
      To avoid unnecessary notation we have here assumed that there are sufficiently many municipalities
                                                                                                   dD I
that a marginal increase in sk does not affect the average s. Obviously the property that dskk < 0 is
independent of this.
   12
      Note that the solution to the maximization problem of the incumbent is the combination of eradica-
tion decisions that yields the global maximum of U I . This involves the investigation of all combinations
of eradication decisions that has the properties stated in the text (but no other combinations of erad-
ication decisions). Since this is a simultaneous problem a closed form solution cannot be derived. We
have now found all properties of this solution that are necessary for our purpose. Nevertheless, it is also
instructive to explain the intuition for the simultaneity in the solution procedure to the maximization
problem of the incumbent: consider, for example, a situation where R and h are sufficiently low that an
eradication attempt is undertaken in all municipalities, and then let R increase so that an eradication
attempt is (viewed in isolation) no longer profitable in municipality 1. Then the utility of politician I
increases if the attempt is not made. Moreover, not making the eradication attempt in municipality 1
reduces the incentive to make eradication attempts also in other municipalities, which can be verified by
the fact that from (6) DkI is increasing in AI1 . Thus it might be that utility is now higher also by avoiding
eradication in for example municipality 2. In turn this just strengthens the reason for not undertaking
the eradication attempt in municipality 1. It may also be that, given that an eradication attempt is not
made in municipalities 1 and 2, it is not optimal in municipality 3 either, and so on. This means that any
solution to the maximization problem must have the properties stated in the text, and also makes clear
why the M equations given by (6) can only be used to present sufficient, but not necessary conditions,
for a global optimum of the maximization problem.



                                                     14
    We next investigate how better possibilities to eradicate the enemy affects the incen-
tives of eradication. When exogenous factors make it more likely an attempt of eradication
will be successful, that is when the draw of α is high, we get the following:

Proposition 4 Suppose politician I is in power. A high α, i.e. a good opportunity to
eradicate the enemy, may increase or decrease the incentive of eradication. When the
rents of power R are sufficiently high the incentive to eradicate decreases.

   Proof. We use (6) to find after some calculations that
                 dDkI
                            2 − αq O − αq I q I P − 3hα2 q I (q I − q O )2 P 2
                                               
                      =
                  dα                                                        !
                                                             M
                             4hα3 (q I )2 (q I − q O )2 P 2 X
                           +                                   sm AIm + sk               (7)
                                          sM                m=1
                                                                       M
                                                                              !
                             hα2 q I (q I − q O )2 P 2 sk           I
                                                                      X
                                                                            I
                           −                               3M − 4αq      Am
                                         sM                           m=1
                              2hαq I (q I − q O )P sk
                           −                          R.
                                       sM
We note that this may take any sign, but that if R is sufficiently high the incentive to
eradicate will always decrease (for all combinations of eradication decisions).
    Thus an exogenous increase in the probability that the enemy will be eradicated,
should eradication be attempted, may actually make it less likely that the incumbent will
aim to eradicate the enemy. The intuition for this result is on the one hand that when α
increases, the expected payoff of trying to eradicate the enemy is higher simply because
one is more likely to create peace. This pulls in the direction of making eradication
more attractive. But on the other hand a higher α also makes the competitive edge that
politician I gets by not attempting eradication larger, thus pulling in the direction of not
trying to eradicate. If the rents of power are sufficiently high this effect will dominate.

3.3    Discussion and hypothesis
We have seen that the most able politician may decide not to attempt eradication of
the enemy in period 1. For voters this, in isolation, is an argument against voting for
the most able politician before period 1. On the other hand, the most able politician is
also the most likely to create peace should he make an attempt. This is, in isolation,
an argument in favor of voting for the most able politician. Thus before period 1 voters
face a trade-off: electing the most able politician means a higher probability of successful
eradication conditional on an eradication attempt being made, but a lower probability
an eradication attempt is actually made. Thus even if voters realize that the most able
politician is the least likely to attempt eradication, it may still be the case that expected
eradication is higher with the most able politician.
    Interpreting the model in the light of the Colombian situation it seems clear that
Uribe built his popularity on being seen as more likely to eradicate the guerilla. Thus

                                             15
under ‘normal circumstances’ in the sense of a close to expectation drawing of α, Uribe
could have been expected to aim for eradication in most or all municipalities. However,
circumstances did not become normal. Within a short time period in 2008 the guerillas
faced unprecedented setbacks that produced a unique possibility to eradicate them. In
the interpretation of the model; the drawing of α became unusually high. A remaining
question is if it is possible that a president that under normal circumstances will aim at
eradication in all municipalities, may in fact choose to not attempt eradication in some
municipalities when the expected success of such eradication improves.13 The following
corollary answers this question:
    Corollary 1 There always exist a h < h∗ and a R > R∗ such that when α = ᾱ
the most able politician I attempts to eradicate the guerilla in all municipalities, and
when α increases then the incentive to eradicate the guerilla decreases (at least) in the
municipalities where voters are the most responsive.
    Proof. See Appendix A.
    Thus even if Uribe was expected to be the man for the job under normal circumstances,
it may be that, as found in Proposition 4, when the prospects of eradication improved
this may in fact have produced an incentive not to eradicate. And moreover, because
of Proposition 3, the model predicts that in such a case the incentive not to eradicate
shall be particularly strong (or only present) in the municipalities where voters are the
most responsive, that is in the municipalities where sm is high (since as we have seen in
Proposition 3 the incentives to eradicate is always lower in such municipalities). Finally,
because of Proposition 1, the model predicts that this is the same municipalities where
Uribe held Consejos Comunales (prior to the 2008 events).
    We now aim to test if in fact it was the case that Uribe reduced military activity
when the possibilities to eradicate the guerrilla improved and, more importantly, if such
effects are more pronounced in municipalities where the voters are the most responsive.


4      Empirical Evidence
4.1     Background
Colombia has a long history of rebel activity. The roots of the current internal armed
conflict can be traced back to at least the period known as La Violencia which began
in the late 1940s. A brutal civil war between the Liberal and Conservative parties, this
period finally ceased in 1958 when the parties signed a peace treaty and set up a system
of power sharing institutions known as the National Front. The National Front ended the
historical bipartisan conflict, but also excluded other political groups from power. Liberal
and Communist guerillas of La Violencia transformed themselves into armed groups.
  13
    The existence of a parameter space where this holds is not obvious, because those parameters that
                                                             dD I
make it likely that DkI > 0 may also make it unlikely that dαk < 0. Thus the existence of such a
parameter space needs to be proven and cannot simply be assumed.



                                                 16
    In particular, in 1964 the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) were formed. FARC and ELN survive to date and
their armed opposition is active, especially in the case of FARC. These ‘left-wing’ guerilla
groups were relatively small during the 1960s and 1970s, but began to expand rapidly
in the 1980s. While they have increasingly been accused of being terrorists financed by
illegal activities like drug traffic, both groups fight with the stated claim of wanting to
take over political power.
    In addition to the rebels and the government forces, the conflict has featured a third
armed group since the late 1970s: the so called “paramilitary forces.” These right-wing
militias were originally created by local elites, landowners and drug lords to counter-
act guerrilla extortion and ransom in the rural areas of Colombia. The paramilitaries
were effectively private armies. By the mid 1990s these groups joined forces in order to
boost their counterinsurgency effort under an umbrella organization (called Autodefensas
Unidas de Colombia, AUC).
    A major peace negotiation process with the FARC was launched by President Andrés
Pastrana (1998-2002). Pastrana made contacts with the FARC in 1998 during the presi-
dential campaign and, once in office, officially initiated the negotiation process in January
of 1999. During this period, there was a growing perception that the government conceded
too much without demanding anything. Among other things, the FARC enjoyed the de-
militarization of 42,000 square kilometers, known as Zona de Distensión (demilitarized
zone) and did not agree to a cease-fire during the negotiation period. Talks were tortuous
and proceeded in stop-start fashion with the FARC’s leader Tirofijo even snubbing Pres-
ident Pastrana by not showing up for the first day’s negotiations (the term la silla vacı́a
- the empty chair - has now become emblematic of the dysfunctionality of Colombian
politics). The government accused the FARC of using the Zona de Distensión to rearm,
prepare attacks and conduct drug trade and even the FARC’s apologists, such as Leech
(2011), argue that kidnappings fell after the collapse of the Zona de Distensión because
the FARC did not have anywhere safe to keep their prisoners! In 2001, negotiations
finally broke up a few hours after a plane was hijacked by the FARC.
    The conflict with the FARC dominated the 2002 presidential electoral campaign.
Though early polls gave little chances to Álvaro Uribe, he won the election. Traditionally
a member of the Liberal Party, Uribe ran as an independent and his ‘right-wing’ speech of
cracking down hard on rebel groups gained prominence as voters grew disillusioned with
Pastrana’s peace process. He ultimately obtained the first ever first-round presidential
election victory since the introduction of the 1991 Constitution.
    There is no doubt that Uribe was seen as the candidate with the better chance of
eradicating the guerrilla. Not only did he emphasize a hard-line against the rebels early
on in the campaign. His personal and political record also made him stand out among
other candidates. As we noted, his father was killed by the FARC, and as Governor of
Antioquia Uribe had been an important supporter of the CONVIVIR, a national program
of neighborhood watch groups established in 1994 which facilitated the expansion of

                                             17
paramilitary groups.
    As President, Uribe’s policy of so-called “Democratic Security” included an important
growth of military expenditure to fight the guerrilla. Another major program was the
dismantling of the AUC between 2003 and 2007, following a peace process with the
government (though splinter paramilitary groups including former AUC fronts are still
active in the country). The Democratic Security policy delivered a number of positive
results in the fight against the FARC. The army obtained some major victories against the
FARC, guerrilla attacks and kidnappings decreased, demobilizations of guerrilla members
increased, the overall homicide rate fell, and the general public perception of security
increased. However, the FARC remains an active group. For instance, it continues to
hold hostages and recruiting fighters (see Echandı́a Castilla, 2011).
    Another key component of Uribe’s presidency, allegedly an important determinant of
his overwhelming popularity together with his stance against the FARC, were the weekly
Consejos Comunales. The councils were held each weekend in a different municipality
and broadcasted live on national television. They showed Uribe exchanging directly with
local authorities and cabinet members, publicly hearing and discussing various concerns.
    Before 2006, the President of Colombia was elected for one four-year term with no
possibility of re-election. But by the end of his first presidential period, Uribe took
advantage of his popularity to change the Constitution and remove the one-term limit.
He was reelected on a landslide, and led the country for an additional term, from 2006-
2010.
    Despite Uribe’s popularity and achievements, his Presidency was marked by the out-
break of various scandals, many of them connected with his Democratic Security policy
and stance against the illegal armed groups. These included: the “false positives” scandal
we mentioned in the introduction; the “parapolitics” scandal, when Uribe’s congressional
supporters were found to be linked to paramilitary groups14 ; the “chuzadas” scandal, or
illegal wiretapping (by Colombia’s intelligence agency) of members of the judiciary and
of the political opposition; and the “yidispolı́tica” scandal, or bribery of Congressmen
in exchange for a vote for the political project that would have allowed Uribe’s to be
reelected again.
    Another attempt by Uribe’s supporters to change the Constitution once again and
let Uribe run for a third period failed in 2010 when the Constitutional Court ruled it
unconstitutional. Nonetheless, Uribe remained very popular, and his successor and former
Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos was elected largely on a platform that emphasized
continuity with Uribe’s Democratic Security policy, especially the commitment to beat
the rebels.
 14
      See Acemoglu, Robinson and Santos (2009) and López ed. (2010).




                                                 18
4.2     Data
We look empirically both at whether the military activities of the government falls after
major victories against the FARC and also whether it responds differentially in munici-
palities formerly visited by president Uribe during his Consejos Comunales. That is, we
focus on Proposition 4 and Corollary 1. Our main proxy for government military activity
is the sum of the number of attacks by the army and the number of combats against the
guerrillas.15 In some of the robustness checks we also use the number of guerrilla attacks
as the dependent variable.
    Our Colombian-conflict data is an original event-based dataset that covers the period
2002-2009. For each conflict event we recorded the date, location, type, perpetrator, and
victims involved in the incident. We distinguish whether the incident was an uncontested
attack, carried out by an identified armed group against a specific military or civilian
target, or a clash, which involves an exchange of fire between two or more groups. We
also record whether attacks were carried out by the guerilla, the paramilitary or the
government, and the groups involved in a clash. Finally, we coded the number of casualties
separately for combatants and civilians. Our data updates the data of Restrepo, Spagat,
and Vargas (2004), and relies on the same sources. In particular, we created our database
using events listed in the periodical Noche y Niebla published quarterly by the Colombian
NGO CINEP. The publication presents a detailed description of chronologically ordered
violent events in Colombia, including date of occurrence, geographical location, the group,
or groups, deemed responsible for causing an event, individuals killed and injured, and
the group to which the victims are thought to belong. As primary sources, Noche y
Niebla relies on press articles from more than 20 daily newspapers with both national and
regional coverage, as well as reports gathered directly by members of human rights NGOs
and other organizations on the ground such as local public ombudsmen and, particularly,
the clergy. Since the Catholic Church is present even in the most remote areas of the
country, we can be very confident of the coverage and accuracy of these data.
    In terms of our main independent variable of interest, we downloaded from the website
of the Colombian presidency information on each one of 305 Consejos Comunales held
by president Uribe during his eight-year term. Specifically, by recording the exact date
and location of each one of the visits, we were able to construct dummies pertaining
to the municipalities visited by the president up to the moment when the events under
consideration occurred.
    We also have a rich set of municipal-specific controls that include: (the log of) rural
population (from DANE, the National Statistics office), geographical and distance con-
trols (from IDEAM, the National Climate office, and IGAC, the Geographic Institute),
and the unmet basic need proxy of poverty (also from DANE) which gives the proportion
of the population of each municipality with unmet basic needs.
  15
    Our results are robust to using the number of combats only. The frequency of government unilateral
attacks (mostly bombing of enemy camps and anti-kidnapping operations) is however extremely low and
hence we cannot use the attacks variables alone.


                                                 19
    Descriptive statistics for our main dependent variables, government military activity
and guerrilla attacks at the municipality level, as well as for our main set of control
variables are presented in Table 1. In the case of government and guerrilla attacks, we
present summary statistics for the 12-month period before and after the major victories
of the government against the guerrilla since, as we detail next, this is key in our empirical
approach. One feature of potential interest is the raw data in rows 3-6. Here we first
report the average of government activity before and after major events in municipalities
where there was a Consejo Communal. One can see that this drops from 0.00421 to
0.00152, a fall of 74%. In the next two rows we reports the raw data for municipalities
where there were no Consejos. Prior to the major events the mean here is lower, 0.00187
and it again falls by a similar amount (75%) to 0.00065. Thus the raw data does not
show the main pattern of interest which is perhaps not surprising given the number of
potentially conflating factors, such as unobservable differences across municipalities.

4.3    Empirical approach
Our main empirical specification takes advantage of the most important victories of the
government over the guerrillas during Uribe’s presidency. These are: the death of Manuel
Marulanda, a.k.a Tirofijo (“Sureshot”), FARC’s founder and chief; the bombing-to-death
in Ecuador of Raúl Reyes, FARC’s deputy chief during so-called “Operation Fenix”; and
the rescue of Ingrid Betancourt and other political prisoners in the so-called “Operación
Jaque” (Operation Check Mate). There is no doubt that the three events we selected are
the most major setbacks for the FARC during Uribe’s presidency. This can be clearly
verified in Table 2, which shows the results from a newswire search of press coverage of
recent guerrilla setbacks. We counted around 13 thousand, 8 thousand, and 1.5 thou-
sand hits for the rescue of Ingrid Betancourt, the killing of Reyes, and Tirofijo’s death,
respectively. Following these events, the next most noteworthy event, the escape of politi-
cian Fernando Araujo (later Minister of Foreign Affairs) after six years’ captivity has just
around one hundred hits. Hence, these three dates arguably represent the most important
positive opportunity shocks (increases in α in our model).
    We study the pattern of government activity against the guerrillas around these key
dates and across different types of municipalities. Indeed, Corollary 1 of Proposition
4 suggests that it is more important for the president not to eradicate the guerilla the
more responsive voters are (measured by the density of the valence term in the model).
In turn, Proposition 1 states that the president will target his attention (and thus will
most likely visit) such municipalities (as in Strömberg, 2008). Hence, we use Uribe’s
Consejos Comunales to identify the municipalities where the president views voters as
most responsive. Notice that in our context the data on where the president went is
a more natural proxy of which municipalities (the president believes) have the most
responsive voters than other measures of “swing” voters commonly used in the literature.
For example, going to “swing” municipalities in the sense that they are around 50% in


                                             20
support for Uribe is irrelevant in national presidential elections where the only relevant
thing is the national number of votes (see Ansolabehere and Snyder, 2006, for discussion).
    With this in mind, we estimate the following model specification for municipality m
at time t:

 Ym,t = β1 + β2 post.eventt + β3 (CCm × post.eventt )+ β4 (Xm × post.eventt )+ δm + εm,t (8)

where Ym,t is the outcome (typically government military activity except for placebo
regressions in which we use guerrilla attacks), post.eventt is a dummy variable that equals
1 after the main event (Sureshot’s death, Operation Fenix, and Operation Check Mate),
and CCm is a dummy variable that equals 1 if Uribe hosted a Consejo Comunal in
municipality m before the event. All our specifications include a full set municipality
fixed effects δm , to absorb any time-invariant characteristics of municipalities that could
be correlated with the level of military activity (such as size, population, geographical
characteristics, level of development). Note, also, that for this reason we do not include
the direct effect of CCm in (8) as it is absorbed by the fixed effect. εm,t is the error
term. Throughout, we consider just two time periods: before and after the event. The
dependent variable, Ym,t is simply computed as the average of Y over different time-
windows before and after the event. Our benchmark regressions have a 12-month before-
after window, and we exclude the month around the event (the 15 days before and after
the event). We show below that our results are robust to different time-windows.
    The main potential threat to our strategy would be that the estimated β3 is truly
capturing differential trends between municipalities with or without consejos comunales.
Since these potential differential trends may depend on unobservable characteristics, the
threat is ultimately untestable. However, we perform a number of robustness checks
that lend credibility to the results. First, we run regression as in equation (8) in periods
preceding the major blows to the FARC in search for preexisting differential trends. We
find no significant effects for β2 and, most importantly, β3 in such regressions. Second, we
examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of differential trends, parametrized
as functions of various observable baseline characteristics. If differential trends due to
observables do not change our results, we are more confident about our identification
strategy. To verify this, the interaction term (Xm ×post.eventt ), where Xm are observable
municipality characteristics, is included in our robustness checks.
    We emphasize that CCm equals 1 only if Uribe visited the municipality in a community
council before the event, as later visits could in fact be endogenous to the event (for
instance if the army offensive measures improved security allowing Uribe to visit the
municipality).16 Also, notice that the three main blows to the FARC are relatively close
to each other, occurring within a window of 5 months in 2008: Fenix (March 1), Sureshot
(May 24), and Jaque (July 2). Thus, in an additional exercise we lump together the
events, and let post.eventt = 0 before Fenix and post.eventt = 1 after Jaque, excluding
  16
    As it turns out, results are not sensitive to coding CCm equal to 1 without making such a distinction,
yet we stick to this more reasonable coding procedure throughout.

                                                   21
the dates in between.
     This specification tests the implications of Proposition 4 and its corollary. In particu-
lar, the theory suggests that if rents from power are sufficiently high, government military
activity decreases when there is an opportunity to eradicate the guerrilla. If this is the
case we should observe a decrease in government activity after a major army hit or guer-
rilla setback (β2 < 0). Notice from Table 1 that during the 12-month period preceding
the three main adverse events for the guerrilla, there were on average 0.00211 government
actions against the guerrilla per day, and that these fell quite markedly after the three
main blows (down to 0.00074). That is, government activity fell to about a third of its
previous level. Of course, a limitation of this test is that there are alternative plausible
explanations for a potential decrease in government military activity after a major army
achievement. For example, it may take a while before a major operation can be planned
and executed, or the guerrilla may seek refuge in strategic safe havens that are harder to
reach for the army right after a major setback. Indeed, Table 1 also reveals a fall in guer-
rilla activity after the major hits took place (albeit smaller than the fall in government
activity, since guerrilla attacks fell from a daily average of 0.00075 per municipality in the
year preceding the attack to a bit over half this amount in the following year). But more
importantly, the corollary suggests an additional prediction which is harder to reconcile
with alternative hypotheses. In particular, Corollary 1 identifies conditions under which
the decrease in government activity should be more pronounced in electorally relevant
places (β3 < 0). As we will show below, the fall in government activity is concentrated
in places that President Uribe chose to visit, which according to our model are the elec-
torally salient municipalities. We next use our data to examine these predictions and
explore the robustness of the results to a variety of additional checks.

4.4    Main results and robustness
We now look at the military activity of the government after each of the main positive
victories against the guerrilla, comparing the areas visited by president Uribe with those
he did not. Table 3 is divided in four panels. There is one panel for each one of the events
considered, plus a fourth panel that lumps the three events together. In each panel we
report the coefficient associated with post.eventt and the interaction term.
    The first column of Table 3 reports the baseline difference-in-differences specification
with no controls though all specifications control for municipality fixed effects. In all the
specifications the coefficient on post.eventt , β2 , is negative and statistically significant,
as predicted by the theory for high rents from power. For example in column 1, panel A,
β2 = −0.00104 with a standard error of 0.000123 and so is highly significant. Looking at
panels B, C and D we also see that the coefficient estimate on post.eventt is very similar
for these different events.
    As we noted however, there are other plausible interpretations of β2 < 0. Hence the
estimated coefficient which may be of more interest is that pertaining to the interaction


                                              22
between CCm and post.eventt . In all panels of column 1 this is negative and significant
and this is so across all three events as well as in Panel D where all the major guer-
rilla setbacks are lumped together. This implies that the government military initiative
dropped in CCm areas relative to other municipalities after each one of the events took
place. In particular, the killing of Raúl Reyes was followed by a relative reduction in army
involvement in offensive military operations and conflicts in areas previously visited by
the president, and the same happened after the death of Sureshot and the rescue of Ingrid
Betancourt.
     In columns 2 and 3 we show that this result is robust to controlling for differential
trends parametrized as functions of a number of observable municipality-specific charac-
teristics. Column 2 includes the interaction of a number of geographical variables with
the post.eventt dummy, namely: altitude, soil quality and soil erosion, distance to de-
partmental capital, and average rainfall. Column 3 adds, in addition, the interaction
department fixed effects with this post dummy.17 The interaction coefficient of interest
survives the inclusion of all the control sets. Moreover the coefficient does not change
much in magnitude across specifications, which further points to the robustness of the
finding. This is very reassuring evidence that the results for the coefficient of interest are
unlikely to be driven by other differential trends across municipalities with and without
Consejos Comunales. We will return to this issue below and provide further evidence
along these lines, when we examine the most important correlates of Uribe’s visits.
     It is interesting that in all of the specifications in columns 2 and 3, once we add the
covariates the direct effect of the post.eventt dummy becomes statistically insignificant.
This suggests that after the big victories which the military secured against the guerilla,
the only places in which army military activity fell was in those which were electorally
important for President Uribe. To gauge the size of the effects, take the case when
considering all events together as in Panel D. The estimated coefficient with full controls
in column 3, of about −0.00159, implies that following the major drawbacks for the
guerrilla, attacks by the government fell to about a fourth of their preexisting average
in the year before the event (0.0021, recall Table 1) and that this fall occurred only in
places that Uribe visited.
     While column 3 in Table 3 already suggests that our results are not driven by other
differential trends between municipalities with and without consejos comunales, Table
4 presents an additional exercise to assuage these concerns. In particular, it repeats
our baseline regressions but moving the post.eventt dummies one year before. Hence,
this table tests for the existing of preexisting differential trends for municipalities that
President Uribe visited one year before each actual major hit to the guerrilla took place.
The results are very supportive of our strategy. Both β2 and, most importantly, the
interaction term β3 are statistically insignificant when the regression is replicated one
year prior to each one of the events and to all the events considered together (in columns
  17
    In Colombia’s political division, the about 1,000 Colombian municipalities are equivalent to US
counties and the 33 departments are equivalent to US states.


                                                23
1 to 4, respectively). Hence, we conclude that our results are not driven by preexisting
non-parallel trends or by differential trends based on municipality characteristics other
than their electoral responsiveness.
    An additional robustness check concerns the estimation window around the event.
As noted above our benchmark regressions have a 12-month before-after window, and
we exclude the month around the event (the 15 days before and after the event). In
Figure 1, we show that we would have obtained similar results for our main interaction
coefficient of interest had we considered any estimation window from 6 to 24 months.
This Figure plots the interaction coefficient and confidence bands for regressions with
estimation windows varying from 1 to 24 months. Given the low frequency of civil war
events, it is unsurprising that when few months of activity are included (windows from 1
to 5 months) we fail to find a significant effects and there is a large uncertainty around
the point estimate. But, as noted, starting with a window of about 6 months, the point
estimate becomes very stable and typically significantly different from zero. With this in
mind, we continue to present results for a 12-month estimation window in what follows.
In the next subsection we discuss further robustness checks.

4.5    Additional robustness checks
The evidence in Table 3 is very supportive of our theory. However, there are alternative
hypotheses that could be consistent with these patterns. Perhaps the most obvious
objection is that the patterns of government activity after a major blow are in fact not
so much determined by the government’s own initiative, but by reaction to the guerrilla’s
activity given the way we have measured the dependent variable. Thus, for instance, a
weakened guerrilla may reduce its activity after major blows, and this would be reflected
in the government’s operations and a reduced number of clashes between the army and
the guerillas. This could explain β2 < 0 in our estimations of equation (8). While it is
harder to think of reasons why this would also explain why β3 < 0, we can investigate
this alternative hypothesis further by estimating (8) again with guerrilla attacks, and not
government activity, as the dependent variable. The results are presented in Table 5.
Indeed, while we find that β2 < 0 as expected, β3 is not significantly different from zero
(and the estimated coefficient is very small).
    A second alternative hypothesis is that these patterns are explained by the incentives
of army members, and not by those of democratically elected officials (in this case, the
president). Indeed, it could be argued that army members derive rents from the persis-
tence of the internal conflict, and hence they will try to avoid eradicating the guerrilla
when the opportunity is ripe. While this is a reasonable hypothesis, it cannot explain
why one would observe a differential pattern depending on how electorally salient a mu-
nicipality is. For this to arise, the argument would have to be somewhat more involved.
For example, army members would need to be aware of which municipalities are more
electorally salient, and which politician is more likely to benefit from the “need for en-


                                            24
emies.” If so, they may have an incentive to reduce military actions after a big blow to
the rebels, especially in electorally salient municipalities, so as to favor the politician who
holds a comparative advantage in the fight against the rebels. Note also, that for this
story to make sense, army members should expect greater rents when such a politician
is in power (perhaps a reasonable assumption given the politician’s emphasis on fighting
the rebels).
    To test whether army members’ incentives may be driving our results, in Table 6
we compare the military activity across army brigades which are led by different army
officials. In particular, we run a specification similar to our baseline regression were the
dependent variable is government military activity, but where instead of a dummy vari-
able for electorally salient municipalities, our main independent variable of interest is a
dummy that equals 1 for municipalities in the jurisdiction of army brigades commanded
by colonels (and zero if the leader is a general). The specification includes our standard
P ost dummy, and its interaction with the colonel dummy. The motivation for this spec-
ification is that colonels and generals have different incentives to sustain conflict against
the guerrilla. More specifically, since colonels have yet to rise in the rank ladder, they
typically have stronger incentives than generals.18 However, as columns 1 to 4 in Table
6 show (for each of the three events and the events lumped together, respectively), the
interaction of the colonel dummy with the post dummy is never significant. Moreover,
the estimated coefficients are very small19 . Hence, we take these results as evidence that
our main conclusions are in fact not driven by army members’ incentives.
    As an additional exercise to assuage concerns regarding our key dates, we can run
regressions for alternative, “placebo” dates. In particular, we can choose events that
represented important army operations or offensive attempts against the guerrilla, but
did not turn out to be a major blow to the FARC. For example, if the time it takes to build
new operations (especially in some areas more than others) explain the patterns above,
then we should see an effect in these types of regressions as well. The first two columns
of Table 7 explore this. In particular, in column 1 we use the failed rescue of governor
of Antioquia Guillermo Gaviria and former Defense Ministry, Gilberto Echeverri in May
5 2003 as a “placebo event.” The FARC had kidnapped Gaviria and Echeverri a year
earlier during a peace march, and upon a failed rescue attempt by the government, these
politicians were assassinated together with 8 soldiers. Along the same spirit, in column 2
we use the failed attempt of the army, in July of 2003, to rescue Ingrid Betancourt with
support of the French government. In both cases β3 is not distinguishable from zero.
    Along these lines, as additional robustness, columns 3 to 5 consider an alternative
group of “placebo events.” Instead of major hits to the guerrilla, we run our main specifi-
  18
     Indeed, in ongoing research (Acemoglu, Fergusson, Robinson and Vargas, 2011), we have found
that army brigades led by colonels are more likely to produce the ‘false positives’ we referred to before
(killings of civilians to be presented as rebel members killed in combat in search of monetary rewards
and promotion).
  19
     Also, in non-reported specifications in which we dropped the municipality fixed effects and included
the direct effect of the colonel dummy, we did not find a direct significant effect either.


                                                   25
cation where the relevant post.eventt is defined relative to important hits by the guerrilla.
These include: the announcement by the FARC, in February of 2003, that they held
hostage three Americans (who were conducting antinarcotics operations for the US when
their plane went down over FARC-controlled territory); the kidnapping, in September
of 2003, of eight foreign tourists in “Ciudad Perdida” (Lost City), an ancient ruin on
a jungle-covered mountain (the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta); and the killing of 25
Colombian troops in an ambush by the FARC on June 2005, which constituted the worst
death toll from a single operation since Uribe was in power. These were all important
developments in the civil war, but it is hard to argue that they changed the likelihood
that the guerrilla could be eliminated. If they did, one could arguably expect a symmet-
ric, positive effect in our interaction term. However,the interaction term is negative and
not significant. This shows that it is not just important events that matter, only those
that make it more likely that the guerrilla looses.
    Finally, as emphasized before it is important to verify that our results are not driven
by other characteristics of municipalities, correlated with Uribe’s Consejos Comunales,
but not really related to the electoral response of these areas. Our tests in Table 3 for
differential trends depending on geographical characteristics and allowing for a different
trend for each of 33 departments are already indicative that this is unlikely. But to test
this possibility more fully, we now proceed in two steps. First, we run a simple OLS
regression in which we seek to establish which are the major observable determinants
of Consejos Comunales occurring in a given municipality. Table 8 presents the results.
In column 1, we run a regression for the CCm dummy relative to the killing of Reyes
(Operation Fenix). That is, CCm equals 1 if Uribe visited municipality m before the
killing of Reyes, and zero otherwise. Columns 2 and 3, on the other hand, define the
CCm dummy relative to the death of Sureshot and Operation Jaque (Betancourt’s rescue).
Finally, in column 4 the dependent variable is a dummy that equals 1 if Uribe organized a
Consejo Comunal, regardless of whether it occurred before any of the major events. In all
cases, we find some observable characteristics that more strongly correlate with Uribe’s
Consejos. These are: population, size (area of the municipality), a poverty index, and
distance to the department capital. That population correlates positively with Uribe’s
visits is quite telling, as places with many people are places with many voters, in line with
our hypothesis. Finally, the presence of paramilitary attacks, with a negative coefficient,
is also important in the regressions for Consejos Comunales before the main events.
Guerrilla attacks, however, are not significant correlates of Uribe’s visit.
    One result from Table 8 deserves special mention: the lack of significance of govern-
ment prior military attacks as a correlate of Uribe’s visits. This results tellingly suggests
that one obvious alternative hypothesis lacks support in the data. This alternative is
that Uribe visited places were he had a lot to show off in terms of the fight against the
guerrilla, and that government attacks in those places would naturally fall after his visit
since most of the work had been done before his Consejo ( a sort of mean reversion).
However, in all the regressions for determinants of Uribe’s visits, previous government

                                             26
offensive attacks in the municipality show a small an insignificant coefficient, giving little
credence to this hypothesis.
    Returning to our test on the role of other Consejos Comunales determinants, in a
second step we use the information on the most significant correlates of Consejos from
Table 8 to verify that they are not explaining our main results. In particular, in Table 9
we estimate the following version of our main regression,

                   Ym,t = β1 + β2 post.eventt + β3 (CCm × post.eventt )
                              +β4 (Detm × post.eventt ) + δm + εm,t

where all variables are defined as before and Detm is either a dummy variable that
categorizes municipalities in terms of one of the four observable significant determinants
of Consejos Comunales identified (Panels A to D), or the measure of paramilitary presence
which was also found to be important (Panel E). Thus, in Panel A Detm equals 1 if
municipality m is above the median in terms of its population, in Panel B it equals 1
if the municipality is above the median size, in Panel C if it is above median poverty,
and in Panel D if the distance to the department capital is above the median. In Panel
E, Detm we use the measure of right-wing paramilitaries in each municipality suggested
in Acemoglu, Robinson, and Santos (2009).20 Results are very similar if, instead of the
continuous measure of attacks, we take categories for above or below the median, but
since many places in Colombia have no guerrilla and (especially) no paramilitary attacks,
we prefer the specification with the continuous variable in this case.
     If these correlates, and not the electoral responsiveness of the municipalities (that
Uribe can measure better than us!), are driving the results, then their inclusion in the
regression together with the interaction with the post-event dummy should render our
main coefficient of interest (β3 ) insignificant. In general, we find that β3 is still significant
with the expected sign. All regressions include municipality fixed effects, and the results
generally hold for each of the three key events and when we lump them together as a single
major positive outcome for the government. Hence, these results are very reassuring
of our main conclusions. An exception is in regressions where we add the categories
according to population and area, where β3 is not significant anymore for Betancourt’s
rescue; but for Reyes and Sureshot, and lumping the events together, the main prediction
still holds. Moreover, it is unsurprising that these determinants which capture the scale
of the municipality, especially population, compete most with CCm as a proxy of the
responsiveness of voters. Indeed, large municipalities may in fact be responding differently
precisely because of our theory regarding their greater electoral responsiveness.
  20
    Paramilitary presence is measured as total paramilitary attacks between 1997 and 2005 in each
municipality per 1000 inhabitants, where the population measure is the average population between the
1993 and 2005 censuses. A similar measure captures guerrilla presence. Also, even though guerrilla
attacks are not significantly correlated with Consejos, we checked that results are very similar when
using guerrilla attacks as Detm .




                                                 27
5    Concluding remarks
In this paper, we argue that an incumbent politician who is good at undertaking a
particular task has an incentive not to complete it fully to maintain his strategic advantage
when facing reelection. We examine this idea in a simple model of electoral competition
in the context of civil war. In our set up the incumbent politician has a comparative
advantage in fighting a rebel group while his opponent in an upcoming election does
not. Our model generates two testable implications which we take to the data. First,
if politicians value rents from power sufficiently, then when opportunities to eradicate
the guerilla improve, it is less likely that the incumbent currently attempts to eradicate
the guerilla. Second, the incentive to eradicate the guerilla decreases more in places in
which voters are more responsive, as captured by the ideology density parameter of our
probabilistic voting model.
    Evidence from Colombia, where President Álvaro Uribe (2002-2010) was elected (and
reelected) on an explicit platform to fight against the left-wing insurgent guerilla groups
and was widely regarded as “the man for the job” lends strong support to both predic-
tions. We identify events in the Colombian civil war which correspond to a high probabil-
ity of defeating the guerilla, and municipalities where the president believed voters were
most responsive. The patterns of government military activity reveal that such activity
significantly decreases after each of the major events. Second, and more importantly,
the decrease in government activity is more pronounced in electorally relevant places.
This second result is harder to reconcile with alternative hypotheses, and is robust to
controlling for differential trends parametrized as functions of municipality-specific char-
acteristics, including those that are correlated with the electoral responsiveness of places,
suggesting that it is not driven by omitted variable bias. Moreover, we offer evidence
that it is not driven by a reaction to guerrilla activity, by time to build up new military
operations, or by army members’ incentives. Overall, we believe that our results provide
compelling evidence in favor of our suggested mechanism.




                                             28
References
Abecassis, Maurissa (2003) “I Hate you just the way you are: Exploring the Forma-
tion, Maintenance, and Need for Enemies,” Family and Child Studies, 102, 5-22.
    Acemoglu, Daron, Leopoldo Fregusson, James A. Robinson and Juan F.
Vargas (2011) “High-Powered Incentives when Institutions are Weak: The case of the
Colombian “False positives”’, work in progress.
    Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Rafael J. Santos (2009) “The
Monopoly of Violence: Evidence from Colombia,” forthcoming in the Journal of the
European Economic Association.
    Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton (1990) “Government Domestic Debt and
the Risk of Default: A Political-Economic Model of the Strategic Role of Government
Debt,” in Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Draghi eds. Public Debt Management: Theory
and History, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?,”
American Economic Review, 81, 1170-1188.
    Ansolabehere Stephen and James M. Snyder (2006) “Party Control of State
Government and the Distribution of Public Expenditures,” Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
nomics, 108(4): 547-569.
    Bailey, Frederick G. (1998) The Need for Enemies: a bestiary of political forms,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
    Barash, David P. (1994) Beloved enemies: Our need for opponents, Amherst:
Prometheus Books.
    Bardhan, Pranab K. and Dilip Mookherjee (2010) “Determinants of Redis-
tributive Politics: An Empirical Analysis of Land Reforms in West Bengal, India,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 100:4, 1572-1600.
    Baron, David P. (1994) “Electoral competition with informed and uninformed
voters,” American Political Science Review, 88, 33-47.
    Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1998) “Sources of Inefficiency in a Repre-
sentative Democracy: A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 88:1, 139-156.
    Biais Bruno and Enrico Perotti (2002) “Machiavellian Privatization,” American
Economic Review, 92:1, 240-258.
    Cukierman, Alex and Mariano Tommasi (1998) “When Does It Take a Nixon
to Go to China?,” American Economic Review, 88, 180-197.
    Drazen, Allan and Vittorio Grilli (1993) “The Benefit of Crisis for Economic
Reforms,” American Economic Review, 83, 598-607.
    Echandı́a Castilla, Camilo (2011) “Situación actual de las FARC: Un análisis de
los cambios en las estrategias y la territorialidad (1990-2011),” Fundación Ideas para La
Paz, Serie Informes No. 13.http://www.ideaspaz.org/portal/index.php
    Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik (1991) “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo
Bias in the Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 81,


                                           29
1146-1155.
    Giustozzi, Antonio, (2011) The Art of Coercion, New York: Columbia University
Press.
    Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1996) “Electoral Competition and
Special Interest Politics,” Review of Economic Studies, 63(2), 265-286.
    International Crisis Group (2005) “Nepal: Beyond Royal Rule,” Asia Briefing
  ◦
N 41, 15 September 2005.
    Kline, Harvey F. (2007) Chronicle of a Failure Foretold: The Peace Process of
Colombian President Andrés Pastrana, Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press.
    Leech, Garry (2011) The FARC: The Longest Insurgency, London: Zed Books.
    Lindbeck, Assar and Jørgen Weibull (1987) “Balanced-budget Redistribution
as the Outcome of Political Competition,” Public Choice, 52, 273-297.
    López, Claudia ed. (2010) Y Refundaron la Patria.. de cómo mafiosos y polı́ticos
reconfiguraron el Estado Colombiano, Bogotá: Corporación Nuevo Arco Iris: Intermedio.
    Meredith, Martin (2007) Mugabe: Power, Plunder, and the Struggle for Zim-
babwe’s Future, New York: Public Affairs Press.
    Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria (1995) “Do Good or Do Well? Public Debt Manage-
ment in a Two-Party Economy,” Economics & Politics, 7, 59-78.
    Murray, Shoon Kathleen and Jason Meyers (1999) “Do People Need Foreign
Enemies? American Leaders’ Beliefs after the Soviet Demise,” Journal of Conflict Reso-
lution, 43:5, 555-569.
    Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining
Economic Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
    Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat, and Juan F. Vargas (2004) “The Dynamics
of the Colombian Civil Conflict: A New Data Set,” Homo Oeconomicus, 21, 396-428.
    Robinson, James A. and Ragnar Torvik (2005) “White Elephants,” Journal of
Public Economics, 89, 197-210.
    Robinson, James A. and Ragnar Torvik (2009) “A Political Economy Theory
of The Soft Budget Constraint,” European Economic Review, 53, 786-798.
    Ross, Michael L. (2004) “What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil
War?,” Journal of Peace Research, 41, 337-356.
    Schwartz, Benjamin C. (1991) American counterinsurgency doctrine and El Sal-
vador, Santa Monica: Rand Corporation.
    Strömberg, David (2008) “How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns and
Policy: The Probability of Being Florida,” American Economic Review, 98:3, 769-807.
    Tribin, Ana Marı́a (2010) “Communal councils around Colombia: a political tool
to remain in power?” Unpublished, Department of Economics, Brown University.
    Visser, Jelle (2006) “Union membership statistics in 24 countries,” Monthly Labor
Review, 129 (1), 38–49.
    Volkan, Vamik D. (1985) “The need to have enemies and allies: A developmental
approach,” Political Psychology, 6:2, 219-247.

                                          30
    Volkan, Vamik D. (1994) The need to have enemies and allies: from clinical prac-
tice to international relationships, Northvale: J. Aronson.




                                        31
Appendix A
In this appendix we show the proof of Corollary 1. Starting with (6) and α = ᾱ, we find
that in the municipality with the most responsive voters, municipality 1, D1I > 0 when
                                 2 − ᾱq O − 12 ᾱ(q I − q O )
    h<                                              M
                                                                     !           .    (A-1)
                                             ᾱq I
                                                    X
                                    1 − sM            sm AIm + s1 +            
                                                                            s1
                                                                                  
                                                    m=2
       ᾱ(q I − q O )     I   O
                      ᾱ(q − q )P 
                                    
                                                               M
                                                                     !   +
                                                                             sM 
                                                                                  R
                                                             X
                                            s1
                                                   M − ᾱq I     AIm
                                                                               
                                           sM
                                                         m=2

The right hand side of this expression is increasing in the number of eradication attempts
in other municipalities, AIm . Thus a sufficient condition for an eradication attempt to
be made in municipality 1 is that D1I > 0 even in the (hypothetical) case where there
are no eradication attempts in other municipalities. Thus a sufficient condition for an
eradication attempt to be made in all municipalities when α = ᾱ is that h < h∗ , with h∗
defined by
                 ∗                    2 − ᾱq O − 21 ᾱ(q I − q O )
                h ≡                                         I
                                                                                .   (A-2)
                      ᾱ(q I − q O ) ᾱ(q I − q O )P 1 − ᾱqsM
                                                                 +  s1
                                                                     s
                                                                         +  s1
                                                                           sM
                                                                               R
As the numerator and denominator are both positive, it can easily be verified that h∗ > 0.
   From (7) and α = ᾱ we find that dD1I /dα < 0 when
                                                                        M
                                                                                     !
                                                       2 I I     O
                 sM                                4ᾱ  q (q − q   )P  X
                              2 − ᾱq O − ᾱq I +                         sm AIm + s1 −
                                                
  R >
         2s1 hᾱ(q I − q O )P                              2s1         m=2
                                                                 M
                                                                       !
         3sM ᾱ(q I − q O )P    ᾱ(q I − q O )P sk             X
                              −                    3M − 4ᾱq I      AIm .              (A-3)
                 2s1                   2s1                     m=2

Thus for any combination of eradication attempts in other municipalities, when the rents
of power R are sufficiently high, a larger probability of eradicating the guerilla will always
weaken the incentives to eradicate. Now let R∗ be defined as the R that solves (A-3)
with equality for the combination of eradication attempts in other municipalities that
maximizes the right hand side of (A-3). Then a sufficient condition for dD1I /dα < 0 is
that R > R∗ .
    Note however that since h∗ is a function of R, and R∗ is a function of h, we must
also prove existence, that is we must show that h < h∗ and R > R∗ can always hold
simultaneously. To prove existence we first insert for h = h∗ in (7) with α = ᾱ. A
sufficient condition for existence is then that dD1I /dα < 0 for a sufficiently high R. Using
(7) and (A-3) the condition for this reduces after some calculation to

                                        2 − ᾱq I > 0.

This condition is always fulfilled, and the corollary follows. (Finally note that we have
here proved the corollary with sufficient conditions. Thus the corollary may hold even in
cases with h > h∗ and/or R < R∗ ).

                                             32
Figure 1: Coefficient of CC x Post for the regression of all events using different before-
after window lengths
               .006
               .004
               .002
               0
               -.006 -.004 -.002




                                   0   5          10            15           20      25
                                                Window length (months)

                                           CCxPost            95% Confidence Bound




                                                       33
                                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics


                         Variable                 Mean        Std. Dev.    Min.     Max.      N. obs
      Gov. Military Activity (before major hits)  0.00211      0.00479      0      0.04167     917
      Gov. Military Activity (after major hits)   0.00074      0.00235      0       0.025      917
      Gov. Military Activity (before hits & CC=1) 0.00421      0.00656      0      0.02778      95
      Gov. Military Activity (after hits & CC=1)  0.00152      0.00382      0      0.01944      95
      Gov. Military Activity (before hits & CC=0) 0.00187      0.00448      0      0.04167     822
      Gov. Military Activity (after hits & CC=0)  0.00065      0.00211      0       0.025      822
      Guerrilla Attacks (before major hits)       0.00075      0.00246      0       0.025      917
      Guerrilla Attacks (after major hits)        0.00039      0.00164       0     0.01667     917
      Guerrilla Attacks (before hits & CC=1)       0.0019      0.00427      0       0.025       95
      Guerrilla Attacks (after hits & CC=1)       0.00114       0.0034      0      0.01667      95
      Guerrilla Attacks (before hits & CC=0)      0.00062      0.00212      0       0.025      822
      Guerrilla Attacks (after hits & CC=0)        0.0003      0.00126      0      0.01389     822
      Consejo Comunal Dummy (CC)a                  0.1036      0.30491       0         1       917
      Altitude (meters)                            1128.7      1169.34       2      25221      917
      Soil erosion index                             1.96         1.03       0         5       917
      Soil quality index                             2.66         1.22       0         8       917
      Distancia to capital (km)                   131.92        107.01      0         790      917
      Average yearly rainfall                     1984.18      1068.77     160       9200      917
      Poverty Index (Unmet Basic Needs)             46.42        22.09     7.22     104.53     917
      Log of population (2002)                       9.75         1.07       7       15.72     917
      Guerrilla presence indexb                     1.23           2.2       0      26.45      917
      Paramilitary presence indexb                  0.14           0.3       0       3.62      917
      Colonel Dummyc                                0.33          0.47      0          1       873

Notes: Government military activity and guerrilla attacks are summarized for the (plus and minus)
one-year estimation window before and after the three main events presented in Table 2. a The Consejo
Comunal Dummy equals 1 if Uribe held a Consejo prior to March 1 of 2008, the first of our set of
three main hist against the FARC. b Paramilitary and guerrilla presence are measured as in Acemoglu,
Robinson, and Santos (2009), that is, total paramilitary (and guerrilla) attacks between 1997 and 2005
in municipality m per 1000 inhabitants where the population measure is the average population between
the 1993 and 2005 censuses. c The Colonel Dummy equals 1 if the municipality is under the jurisdiction
of a Brigade led by a colonel during 2007.




          Table 2: Newswire search of press coverage of recent guerrilla setbacks


               Recent FARC blows:                            Date          No. of news hits
               Rescue of Ingrid Betancourt               July 7, 2008          13,200
               Killing of Raul Reyes                     March 1, 2008          8,140
               Death of Tirofijo                         May 25, 2008           1,570

               Escape of politician Fernando Araujo     January 5, 2007           103
               Escape of policeman John Pinchao          May 15, 2007              96
               Killing of guerrilla Negro Acacio       September 1, 2007           72
               Capture of guerrilla Rodrigo Granda     December 12, 2004           28
               Capture of guerrilla Martin Caballero    October 25, 2007          28
               Capture of guerrilla Sonia              February 10, 2004           21




                                                   34
Table 3: Benchmark results: Major guerrilla setbacks and government military reaction

      Dependent variable: Government military activity
      (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)
                                                 (1)                    (2)             (3)

      Panel A: Killing of Raul Reyes
      Post                           -0.00104***                     -0.000259       0.00107
                                      (0.000123)                    (0.000649)      (0.000814)
      CC x Post                       -0.00121**                   -0.00139***     -0.00132***
                                      (0.000474)                    (0.000472)      (0.000462)
      R-squared                          0.787                         0.790           0.809

      Panel B: Death of Sureshot
      Post                                        -0.00105***        -0.000299       0.000299
                                                   (0.000116)       (0.000426)      (0.000627)
      CC x Post                                    -0.000758*      -0.000851**      -0.000732*
                                                   (0.000420)       (0.000420)      (0.000405)
      R-squared                                       0.769            0.771           0.795

      Panel C: Rescue of Ingrid Betancourt
      Post                           -0.00100***                     -0.000102       0.000353
                                      (0.000115)                    (0.000417)      (0.000647)
      CC x Post                       -0.000735*                   -0.000862**      -0.000749*
                                      (0.000435)                    (0.000436)      (0.000421)
      R-squared                          0.755                         0.757           0.781

      Panel D: All events
      Post                                        -0.00121***        -0.000360       0.00103
                                                   (0.000131)       (0.000653)      (0.000853)
      CC x Post                                   -0.00148***      -0.00169***     -0.00159***
                                                   (0.000515)       (0.000508)      (0.000488)
      R-squared                                       0.743            0.748           0.774

      Controls for differential trends
      Geography                                                          x               x
      Department                                                                         x

      Observations                                     1,834           1,834           1,834

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include municipality fixed effects. CC is
a dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to the event of each one
of the panels. Post is a dummy that equals one for the months after each event took place. Column
2 includes the interaction of Post with the following geographical variables: altitude, soil quality and
soil erosion, distance to departmental capital, and average rainfall. Column 3 adds, in addition, the
interaction department fixed effects with this post dummy. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is
significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.


                                                  35
Table 4: Testing for Parallel trends: One year before major guerrilla setbacks and gov-
ernment military reaction


  Dependent variable: Government military activity
  (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)
                            (1)                   (2)                           (3)                       (4)
                  Killing of Raul Reyes Death of Sureshot           Rescue of Ingrid Betancourt       All events

  Post                    0.000182                 8.16e-05                    -0.000116               0.000184
                         (0.000138)              (0.000129)                   (0.000130)              (0.000138)
  CC x Post               0.000695                -0.000387                    -0.000258               0.000594
                         (0.000539)              (0.000486)                   (0.000531)              (0.000519)

  R-squared                 0.785                   0.803                        0.800                   0.784
  Observations              1,834                   1,834                        1,834                   1,834

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include municipality fixed effects. CC is
a dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to the event of each one
of the columns. Post is a dummy that equals 1 for the year before each of the events took place and 0
one year earlier (hence, two years before the event). * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at
the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




          Table 5: Alternative hypothesis 1: Guerrilla reaction to major setbacks

         Dependent variable: Guerrilla attacks
         (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)
                             Reyes        Sureshot       Betancourt                      All

         Post         -0.000372***             -0.000180***       -0.000147**      -0.000318***
                        (7.34e-05)               (6.33e-05)        (6.46e-05)        (7.42e-05)
         CC x Post      -0.000505                 -9.76e-05         -0.000174        -0.000443
                       (0.000378)               (0.000284)         (0.000249)       (0.000390)
         Observations     1,834                     1,834             1,834             1,834
         R-squared         0.662                    0.720             0.714            0.688

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include municipality fixed effects. CC
is a dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to the event of each
one of the columns. Post is a dummy that equals one for the months after each event took place. * is
significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                     36
Table 6: Alternative hypothesis 2: Reaction of colonel-led army brigades to major guer-
rilla setbacks

          Dependent variable: Government military activity
          (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)
                               Reyes       Sureshot      Betancourt                           All

          Post                 -0.00108***          -0.00114***        -0.00111***        -0.00129***
                                (0.000138)           (0.000147)         (0.000138)         (0.000152)
          Colonel x Post         -3.98e-05            -3.07e-06          -5.56e-05          -0.000156
                                (0.000256)           (0.000271)         (0.000255)         (0.000298)

          Observations              1,746              1,746              1,746              1,746
          R-squared                 0.755              0.789              0.770              0.746

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include municipality fixed effects. Colonel
is a dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities in the jurisdiction of army brigades commanded by
colonels in 2007. Post is a dummy that equals one for the months after each event took place. * is
significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




Table 7: Robustness check: Military reaction to placebo government hits and to guerrilla hits


  Dependent variable: Government military activity
  (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)

                      Failed government hits                                Guerrilla hits
                    Failed rescue                           Kidnap of                           Ambush and
                     of governor      Failed rescue         American         Kidnap of 8        killing of 25
                    and minister      of Betancourt          citizens      foreign tourists    army members

  Post               -0.000159       -0.000479*** 0.000209                 -0.000695***        -0.000669***
                    (0.000186)        (0.000176)  (0.000228)                (0.000180)          (0.000148)
  CC x Post           0.000344         0.000744     -0.00214                 -0.000508            -0.00139
                     (0.00122)         (0.00111)   (0.00150)                 (0.00106)          (0.000905)

  Observations         1,834                1,834              1,834              1,834              1,834
  R-squared            0.793                0.807              0.734              0.791              0.750

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ll regressions include municipality fixed effects. CC is
a dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to the event of each
one of the columns. Post is a dummy that equals one for the months after each event took place. * is
significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                       37
    Table 8: Determinants of Uribe visits to Consejos Comunales before each event

  Dependent variable: Dummy for municipality visited by Uribe previous to each event

                             CC pre Reyes      CC pre Sureshot     CC pre Betancourt         All CC

  Log of population              0.115***          0.116***               0.118***          0.137***
                                 (0.0124)           (0.0124)              (0.0124)           (0.0124)
  Poverty Index               -0.00208***        -0.00203***           -0.00205***        -0.00246***
                               (0.000496)         (0.000531)            (0.000539)         (0.000611)
  Surface Area                2.07e-05***        1.89e-05***           1.88e-05***         1.41e-05**
                               (6.66e-06)         (6.58e-06)            (6.59e-06)         (6.48e-06)
  Altitude                      -4.43e-06          -6.19e-06             -6.48e-06          -8.38e-06
                               (5.89e-06)         (5.96e-06)            (5.98e-06)         (6.49e-06)
  Soil erosion                    0.00199          -0.000430             -0.000653           0.00553
                                (0.00882)          (0.00896)             (0.00904)          (0.00996)
  Soil quality                   -0.00161          -0.000158               0.00123           -0.00981
                                (0.00787)          (0.00817)             (0.00831)          (0.00877)
  Dist. to capital             -0.000144*         -0.000164*            -0.000168*        -0.000205**
                               (8.72e-05)         (8.93e-05)            (8.95e-05)         (9.79e-05)
  Dist. to major market         0.000101           0.000103               9.44e-05         0.000200**
                               (8.96e-05)         (9.16e-05)            (9.19e-05)         (9.92e-05)
  Average yearly rainfall        1.37e-05           1.30e-05              1.19e-05          1.82e-05*
                               (9.21e-06)         (9.56e-06)            (9.56e-06)         (1.09e-05)
  Guer. attacks 97-05             0.00464           0.00310                0.00309           0.00819
                                (0.00320)          (0.00335)             (0.00337)          (0.00693)
  Param. attacks 97-05          -0.0378**          -0.0433**             -0.0427**            -0.0299
                                 (0.0174)           (0.0175)              (0.0181)           (0.0274)
  Prev. gov. offensive           0.000822           0.00215               0.00204            0.00169
                                (0.00186)          (0.00188)             (0.00187)          (0.00177)

  Observations                     917                917                   917                917
  R-squared                       0.237              0.241                 0.238              0.238

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable (in column headings) is a dummy
that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to each event. * is significant at
the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                   38
Table 9: Additional robustness checks: Controlling for main correlates of Uribe visits
interacted with the Post dummy

        Dependent variable: Government military activity
                                Reyes        Sureshot             Betancourt           All

        Panel A: Controlling for mun. with population above the median
        (All regressions include municipality fixed effects)
        CC x Post                 -0.000353     -0.000844*    -0.000349  -0.00103**
                                 (0.000446)      (0.000480)  (0.000431)  (0.000521)
        Population x Post      -0.000989*** -0.000965*** -0.00105***    -0.00118***
                                 (0.000216)      (0.000234)  (0.000218)  (0.000248)

        R-squared                    0.759           0.790           0.774            0.748

        Panel B: Controlling for municipalities with surface above the median
        CC x Post             -0.000484  -0.000951**    -0.000511    -0.00118**
                             (0.000428)   (0.000459)   (0.000409)    (0.000496)
        Area x Post         -0.00136*** -0.00160*** -0.00144***     -0.00180***
                             (0.000205)   (0.000219)   (0.000206)    (0.000233)

        R-squared                    0.764           0.797           0.779            0.756

        Panel C: Controlling for municipalities with poverty above                the median
        CC x Post           -0.000852*   -0.00137*** -0.000888**                  -0.00167***
                            (0.000438)    (0.000476)   (0.000423)                  (0.000518)
        Poverty x Post     -0.000839*** -0.000952*** -0.000902***                 -0.00116***
                            (0.000219)    (0.000234)   (0.000219)                  (0.000250)

        R-squared                    0.758           0.790           0.773            0.749

        Panel D: Controlling for mun. with dist. to capital above the median
        CC x Post            -0.000779* -0.00130***   -0.000801*    -0.00158***
                             (0.000437)  (0.000473)   (0.000421)     (0.000512)
        Dist. Capital x Post  -0.000302 -0.000542**    -0.000282   -0.000687***
                             (0.000223)  (0.000239)   (0.000223)     (0.000254)

        R-squared                    0.755           0.788           0.769            0.745

        Panel E: Controlling for paramilitary attacks
        CC x Post           -0.000744*    -0.00122**               -0.000764*     -0.00149***
                            (0.000435)    (0.000474)               (0.000420)      (0.000514)
        par 9705 x Post      -0.000216     -0.000228                -0.000124       -0.000368
                            (0.000281)    (0.000265)               (0.000279)      (0.000314)

        R-squared                    0.755           0.787           0.769            0.743

        Observations                 1,834           1,834           1,834            1,834

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include municipality fixed effects. CC is a
dummy that equals 1 for the municipalities that president Uribe visited prior to the event of each one of
the columns. Post is a dummy that equals one for the months after each event took place. * is significant
at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.

                                                   39
