                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ON THE COVAR lANCE STRUCTURE
                 OF EARNINGS AND HOURS CHANGES




                         John M. Abowd


                           David Card




                     Working Paper No. 1832




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 1986




We are grateful to Gary Chamberlain, Zvi Griliches, and Whitney
Newey for comments and suggestions. An earlier version of this
paper was circulated under the title "The Covariance Structure of
Earnings and Hours Changes in Three Panel Data Sets." We thank the
Department of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology for their hospitality while this paper was completed.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    ER brking Paper #1832
                                                    Fdruary 1986



      On the Covariance Stricture of Earnings and HOUrS Changes




                                  ABSTRPCT



     This paper presents an empirical analysis of changes in individual

earnings and hours ov&r time. Using longitudinal data from three panel

surveys, we catalogue the main features of the covariance structure of

changes   in   earnings and hours. We then present an interpretation of

these features in terms of both a life—cycle labor supply model and a

fixed—wage labor contract nDdel. Our major findings are:      (1) there is

a remarkable similarity in the covariance structure of earnings and

hours changes across the three surveys; and (2) apart from simple

measurement error, the major component of variance in earnings and

hours affects earnings and hours equi—proportionately.




John M. Abowd                                  David Card
Department of Economics                        Department of Economies
MIT                                            Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02139                            Princeton, NJ 08544
(617) 253—1526                                 (609) 452—4045
                                       —1—


        Recent empirical studies of longitudinal earnings and hours data

focus on the contemporaneous correlation between hours of work and

average hourly earnings.L" This focus arises naturally from the life—

cycle    labor supply model, which explains movements in hours over time in
terms of changes in the value of work and unanticipated changes in
wealth)' Nonetheless, there is widespread agreement that most of the
observed variation in hours over time is not explained by contem-
poraneous      movements in wages)'    On one hand, the cross—sectional

correlation      between percentage changes in annual hours and percentage
changes in average hourly earnings is apparently dominated by measure-
ment error.' On the other hand, state—of—the—art estimates of the
life—cycle labor supply model yield small and often statistically
insignificant elasticities between hours variation and wage movements.-"
        In   this paper, we present a more general analysis of the relation

between movements in earnings and movements in hours over time.' Using

longitudinal      data from three panel surveys, we catalogue the main
features of the covariance structure of earnings and hours. We then
present an interpretation of these features in terms of both a life—
cycle    labor supply model and a model of fixed—wage labor contracts. Our

major findings are:       (1) there is remarkable similarity in the

covariance structure of earnings and hours changes across the three data

sources and (2) apart from simple measurement error, the major component

of variance in earnings and hours affects earnings and hours equi—

proportionately.

        In   the first section of the paper, we describe the covariance
                                  —2—


matrix of changes in annual earnings and annual hours of work for male

household heads in three panel surveys:   the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID); the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men (NLS);

and the control group of the Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance

Experiment (SINE/DIME). Using method—of—moments estimation techniques,

we test for parsimonious representations of the data from all three sur-

veys. We find that changes in earnings and changes in hours are

uncorrelated at lags in excess of two years in the PSID and the NLS, and

at lags in excess of one year in the SINE/DIME. We also find evidence

of nonstationarity In the covariances of earnings and hours from all

three data sources.

     In the second section of the paper, we present a life cycle labor

supply model and derive its Implications for the data described in

Section I. We also discuss the implications of a labor contracting

model in which hours of work are varied by employers with no

corresponding change in average hourly earnings.

     In the third section of the paper, we present estimation results

for a simple two—factor model of earnings and hours generation. Th.e

model for earnings and hours consists of a systematic component

(reflecting individual productivity in the labor supply model or changes

in labor demand in the alternative model) and an unsystematic or

measurement error component. The estimation results reveal that both

cnponents are important in the data, and that the systematic component

generally influences earnings and hours equi—proportionare].y. This

leads us to conclude that most observed changes In earnings and hours
                                          —3—


that are not attributable to measurement error occur at fixed average

hrly wage rates.

I. Data Description

        The    longitudinal earnings and hours data in this paper are drawn
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the National Longitudinal
Survey of Older Men, and the nonexperimental families in the Seattle and
Denver Income Maintenance Experiment. From the PSID, we have drawn
1448 male household heads whose records indicate nonzero earnings and

hairs in each year from 1969 to 1979 (the          third   through thirteenth waves

of the survey). A brief summary         of   the characteristics of the sample is

contained      in Table 1. We have included only those male household heads
who were between 21 and 64 years of age in each of the sample years.
Average annual hours (at all jobs) are more or less constant throughout
the eleven—year period,       while average hourly earnings (adjusted for

inflation)       grow erratically. Our data set includes the Survey of
Economic Opportunity subsample of the PSID and consequently overrepre—
sents nonwhite and       relatively   low income households. The requirement of

eleven    continuous years of earnings and hours data, on the other hand,
eliminates       proportionately more low income and nonwhite households from

the    sample.
        Fran   the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men we have drawn

1318   men who where less than 65 years old in 1975 and who reported non-
zero earnings and hours in each of the survey years 1966, 1967, 1969,
1971, 1973 and l975.' Table 2 summarizes the characteristics             of the

NLS    sample. Average annual hours for this older sample of men decline
                                   —4—



throughout the nine—year sample period, particularly between 1973 and

1975. In interpreting the NLS data, it is important to keep in mind

that the later waves of the survey were administered biennally. As a

consequence, the changes in earnings and hours from 1969 to 1975 refer

to changes in annual totals over two—year intervals.

     From the Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance Experiment we have

drawn   a sample of 560 male household heads who enrolled in the control
group   of the experiment.-" These male heads were between 21 and 64 years

of age during the first four years of the experiment, and reported non-

zero earnings and hours in each of the first eight experimental half—

year periods. We excluded a small number of heads who reported more

than 2500 hours of work in any one of the six month periods. The size

of the SINE/DINE sample reflects the relatively small initial survey and

the reduction in sample size associated with the requirement of eight

periods of labor market data.

     The demographic characteristics of the SINE/DIME sample and time

series information on earnings and hours are recorded in Table 3. Labor

market information in the income experiment was collected every four

months and aggregated into six—month data by the experiment's contrac-

tors. Since enrollment dates differ by household, the experimental

periods correspond to different periods of calendar tine for different

households. The first experimentalperiod, for example, contains data

from calendar periods between early 1971 and late 1972.

    Like the other two samples the SINE/DIME control group over repre-

sents low—income and nonwhite households. Average hours of work
                                            — 5—




(recorded at an annual rate in Table 3) were essentially constant

throughout    the first six      periods   of the expe rinnnt.    Hours and real

earnings   of the SIME/DB4E      control    group fell significantly in the eighth
and ninth experimental periods. These periods contain labor market
information   from Late 1974 arid      early       1975. changes in mean earnings and

hours in   the SIME/DIME sample are therefore consistent with              changes

observed in the other two        samples.
     The complete covariance matrices oF changes in the logarithms of

annual earnings and annual hours for the three samples are recorded in

Tables 4, 5, and 6.    In order to partially control for differences in

labor force experience      in   the three samples, we have computrl LiLen

covariances using the residuals from unrestricted multivariate

regressions of changes in earnings and hours on time period indicator

variables and   potential   experience (age rnLrtus        education   minus 5). The

characteristics   of the data are not signt[icantly affected by removing

the predicted effects of experience, since the explanatory power of the

experience regressions is negligible in all these data sets. The

covariances of the changes in earnings and hours with potential

experience are recorded in the final rows of the Tables.

     To control for the fact that the SIME/DIME data are drawn from dif-

ferent calendar periods, depending on the date of assignment into the

experiment, changes in earnings and hours from the SIME/DIME were

regression adjusted using potential experience and a series of indicator

variables for month—of—assignment into the experiment.                 In none of the

sixteen regressions for the eight changes in earnings and               hours   were
                                    —6--



these   indicator variables jointly statistically significant at conven-

tional significance levels, however.

     Table 4 contains the covariances of changes in the logarithms of

annual earnings and annual hours for our sample of household heads from

the PSID. The upper left hand triangle of the table presents the

covariances of changes in earnings and their associated standard errors.

The lower right hand triangle of the table presents the covariances of

changes in annual hours. The lower left hand block contains the cross—

covariances   between changes in earnings and hours.
     The cross—sectional variation in percentage changes in annual
earnings   and hours is large: the standard deviation of the change in

the logarithm of earnings is at least 35 percent, while the standard

deviation of the change in the logarithm of annual hours is at least 25

percent. The variances and covariances of changes in annual earnings

and hours also vary over time. Cross—sectional dispersion in earnings

and hours growth   is relatively small in 1972—73 and 1973—74,   and rela-

tively large in 1975—76. In contrast to aggregate time series data,

consecutive changes in individual earnings and hours are strongly nega-

tively correlated. The first—order serial correlation coefficients of

the changes in earnings and hours range from —.25 to — .45.      The first—

order serial cross—correlations of earnings and hours are also negative,

although smaller in absolute value (between —.15 and —.25) than the

corresponding autocorrelations.

     The contemporaneous covariances of changes in earnings and hours

for household heads in the PSID are significantly positive, although too
                                    —7—


small to generate a positive correlation between changes in hours and

changes    in average hourly earnings. Since the logarithm of average
hourly    earnings is the difference in the logarithms of annual earnings
and annual hairs, the covariance between changes in annual hours and
changes in average hourly earnings is just the difference between the
covariance   of changes in earnings and hours and the variance of changes

in hours.   For all ten changes in Table 4 this difference is negative

and well determined.

    A final important feature of the covariance matrix in Table 4 is

the absence of any large or statistically significant autocovariances at

lags greater than two years. Year—to—year changes in earnings and hours

in the p510 are apparently well—represented as a nonstationary bivariate

second—order moving average process.

     Table 5 presents the covariance matrix of five experience—adjusted

changes in earnings and hours from the NLS. Overall, the data are very

similar to the corresponding data from the PSID, although there is more

evidence of nonstationarity in the NLS data. On     the   other hand, none of

the second—order autocovariances    or cross—covariances in   Table 5   are
large or statistically significant, so that the NLS data may perhaps be

adequately suinnarized as a nonstationary bivariate first—order moving

average (MA(l)) process. If changes in annual earnings and hours

between conseaitive years are represented by a second—order moving

average process (NA(2)) then changes in hours and earnings at two—year

gaps are represented by a first—order moving average.2' Thus the data

in Tables 4 and 5 are potentially consistent with the se underlying

model of earnings and hours generation.
                                   —8—


      Table 6 presents the covariances of experience—adjusted changes in

 earnings and hours between consecutive six—month intervals in the

 SINE/DIME survey. Again, these covariances are similar to the covari—

 ances of the PSID and NLS samples. There is less evidence of nonsta—

 tionarity in the SINE/DINE than in the other two surveys, although this

may reflect the fact that changes in earnings and hours in the SINE/DIME

survey are averaged over several different calendar periods. The first—

order autocorrelations of earnings and hours are similar in all three

surveys. The covariances between contemporaneous changes in earnings

and hours, on the other hand, are relatively higher in the SINE/DINE.

This implies that the simple regression coefficient of changes in the

logarithxo of annual hours on changes in the logarithm of average hourly

earnings is smaller in absolute value in the SINE/DINE (—.17) than in

the other surveys (—.31 in the PSID and —.32 in the NLS). None of the

third—order autocovariances or cross—covariances is statistically

significant in Table 6, suggesting that semi—annual changes in log

earnings and log hours in the SINE/DIME are close to a bivariate MA(2)

process. Since a bivariate MA(2) representation of semi—annual changes

in earnings and hours implies only a first—order moving average repre-

sentation of annual changes, the SINE/DIME data exhibit lower order

serial correlation than the PSID data.

     Tables 7, 8, and 9 present formal test statistics for several

restrictive models of the covariance matrices of earnings and hours from

the three samples. Details of the method—of—moments estimation frame—
                                       —9—


work that we use to obtain these test statistics are presented in

Appendix A. Table 7 presents the test results for the PSID sample. The

first rw of the Table reports the goodness—of—fit statistic for a

nonstationary bivariate MA(2) representation of the PSID data. This is

a test that the third and higher—order autocovariances and cross—

covariances    in Table 4-are   jointly equal to zero. The probability value
of   the test statistic is about six percent. Given the absence of    any
large or individually significant covariances of third order or higher,
we conclude that a second order moving average provides an adequate
representation of changes in earnings and hours in the PSID sample.
        The next three rows of Table 7 present goodness—of—fit statistics
associated   with further restrictions on the general MA(2) model. These

tests are performed on the subset of autocovariances and cross—

covariances up to second order, utilizing the sample variance matrix of

the selected covariances..!Q! The first test is for a symmetric MA(2)

model of earnings and hours. This model imposes symmetry on the block

of   cros s—covariances in the lower left—hand corner of Table 4.   The test

statistic   has   a marginal significance level of 2 percent, indicating

some evidence against the symmetry hypothesis. The next test statistic

reported in Table 7 is a test for an MA(l) representation of earnings

and hours changes in the P519. Against the MA(2) alternative, this is a

test that the second—order autocovariances and cross—covariances     in
Table   4 are jointly equal to zero. Again, the test statistic indicates

some evidence against the null hypothesis. The final row of Table 7

presents the test statistic for the hypothesis that the covariance
                                     —10—


structure of earnings and hours changes is time—stationary (i.e. ,    that
all 10 variances of earnings are equal, that all 10 variances of hours

are equal, etc.). This hypothesis is strongly rejected by the data.

       Tables 8 and 9 present an identical sequence of test statistics for

the NLS and SIME/DIME samples.      In both samples, the data are consistent

with a bivariate MA(2) representation of earnings and hours changes. In

the NLS, the second—order covariances and cross—covariances of earnings

and hours are also approximately equal to zero. Like the PSUD, the

SIME/DThIE and NLS covariances exhibit significant nonstationarity. The

SIME/DIME and NLS covariance matrices are more nearly consistent with

the symmetry restriction than the PSID covariance matrix.

       In light of the data presented in Tables 4—6, and the test results

in Tables 7—9, we conclude that changes in individual earnings and hours

are adequately summarized as a nonstationary bivariate second—order

moving average. This description holds for annual data (PSID), semi-

annual data (SIME/DIME), and annual data at two year gaps (NLS). More

restrictive models of the covariance structure of earnings and hours

changes are not generally valid.      In particular, nonstationarity is an

important feature of the covariances of earnings and hours from all

three panel surveys.

II. Alternative Models of the Covariance Structure of Earnings
     and Hours thanges

       In this section we present a simplified life—cycle labor supply

model and derive its implications for the covariance matrix of changes

in   earnings and   hours in panel data. We also present an alternative
                                             —11—


model     of earnings and hours determination that corresponds to a labor
contract with fixed average hourly earnings and employer—determined
hours of      work. We discuss the econometric identification of these

models    in the presence of survey measurement error and outline an esti—
ination   strategy that decomposes changes in earnings and hours into two

components: a systematic component, reflecting individual productivity

(in the labor supply model) or employer demand (in the contract nvdel);

and a measurement error component.

      A. A Life—Cycle Labor Supply Model.

      The starting point for our model of life—cycle labor supply is an

additively separable utility function of the form


                 T
        (1)                [log c1+. —     a.+.

tqhere T is the time horizon of individual I ,                  is a fixed discount

factor, c1+. represents the consumption of individual i in period

                     represents a preference—shift variable,        n   is   a strictly

positive parameter, and h.÷. represents the hours of work of indivi-

dual i in period t+j .               We   assume that individuals choose their labor

supply and      consumption    in each period in order to maximize the expected

value of (1), given the Information available in that period                 and subject
to   the following equation describing the evolution of their nominal

assets:


        (2)     A
                 it-I-i
                          =(pt 9   it hit —p tc.it -4-A)(l+R).
                                                     it     t
                                          —12—


 In this equation      Alt represents the nominal value of assets held by

 individual i in period t              Rt represents the nominal interest rate,

 Pt     represents the price level of consumption goods, and                      repre-
 sents the real wage rate available to individual I in period                      t


      Maximization of the expected value of (1) subject to the wealth

 constraint (2) implies the Bellman equation:


                                                                      l+ii

        (3)                      max   log c1 —                     h.11 + $E
              Vi(A.)                                  alt   i-:hi




where         denotes the expectation operator conditional on information

available to individual i In period t

      The first—order conditions for consumption and labor supply in

period t are


      (4a)       —
                     Sp(l + R) EV!1(A) 0


      (4b) it
            a th1      —
                           80    p (1 + R ) E    V'     (A               0
                                it t      t      t it+l it+1 )


In addition, the derivatives of the value function V. (A )
                                                                      it it
                                                                                follow   the

stochastic difference equation:


      (5)     Alt E V(A1) = 8(1 + R) E A11

      There is no exact solution to equations (4) and (5) in general. We

proceed by using a well—known approximation to equation (5); namely
                                                  —13—



        (6)      logA = log            S +Rt + Et      loX1 +            d.


where d1 is the error of approximation and is assumed to be time sta-

tionary.        The labor supply equation can be derived from (4b)                          using the

definition       of A1 in (5):

        (7)      log hi =      n log         +   ii log   Pt +   p log             +
                                                                                       it
where     it =    —n       log alt .     According to this equation, hours of work are
related       to the contemporaneous wage rate by the intertemporal subs titu—
tion   elasticity          n     Hours    of work also depend on the marginal utility
of   wealth            ,    and the    preference parameter
       Making use of the approximation in equation (6), equation (7) can
be differenced to yield the following description of the change in the

logarithn of hours:


        (8)     A log hi log hj — log
                                   p A log 0ir +             —
                                                                 r1)
                               +   n(log   Alt —   Ei log A.) +               A
                                                                                  it

where p         is the discount rate defined by 5 E 11(1                          +p) and r is the
real Interest rate defined by r                           — A                     Since labor earn-
                                                              log Pt

ings are the product of the wage rate 8it and hours of work hit

the labor supply model implies a similar specification for the change in

the logarithm of earnings (g):


                A log gif E        A   log hj +    A
        (9)                                            log O
                               =   (l+p)A   log          +
                                                             fl(P-r1)
                               +   ii (log X1 —        Etl log Ai)        +
                                                                                  Ai
                                                —14—



Changes in earnings and hours share common components associated with
the    revision of the marginal utility of incane; the change in tastes for

leisure; and the difference between the discount rate and real

interest      rate. In addition, an individual—specific wage component
enters the equations for earnings and hours changes with relative factor
loadings of (1-i-n) and n , respectively.
       To complete this model of earnings and hours, we need to specify a

stochastic process for the wage rate. We assume that individual wages

contain a permanent component, an aggregate component, an experience—

related component, and an idiosyncratic component. Specifically, we

a Ssume:


       (10)    log   e1 = a1 +            + 11x1   +
                                                       2        +


where a1 is an individual—specific permanent wage effect,    is an
economy—wide time effect, x is the number of years the individual
has been   in the labor force, and                     is an idiosyncratic wage shock.

This   specification explicitly rules out both                 individual—specific respon-

ses to the aggregate shock and individual—specific experience effects.

We defer a detailed discussion of these assumptions to Appendix B.

       Using equation (10), the change in the wage rate in period t may

be expressed as:


                             =    +         +
       (11) A log
                                      yx0       Az
                     —
where c                  6t—l +              ÷ 2y2t ,
                                      —
                                                           y        ,   and     is labor

force experience at calendar date t = 0.
                                                 —15—


     Substituting equation (11) into equations (8) and (9) and appending

a pair of measurement errors to log g and log hj yields a

theoretical model for the bivariate stochastic process governing

observed changes in individual earnings and hours


     (l2a) A log              =
                                  (l-1-n)c +n(—r1)
                              +
                                  (l+n)yx10
                                                +   (l+)   Az           +
                                                                            Ai ÷ Mit,
     (l2b) A log hj =             flK +
                              + rryx0 + nAzi         +161
                                                             +        + Av,

where 6it E log               —
                                  Etl log Alt
         uli E measurement error in observing log gft , and


             E       measurement error in observing log hit


     The implications             of equations (12) for          the covariance structure of

earnings    and hours depend on the serial correlation properties of the
productivity shock z1 ,               the     taste shock           , the measurement errors
     and     vi •, and         the unexpected change in the marginal utility of
income           •     We   assume that tastes for leisure contain a permanent
component, a hoimgeneous quadratic age effect, and an individual—and—
period—specific component. These assumptions imply that the error com-

ponent Mit associated with the change in tastes for leisure can be

written as


     (13)               =     + 2x0       +
                                              Avi

                                                                                               4
                                            —16—



 where Uft        represents   an individual— and period—specific taste shock.

 We assume that             is serially uncorrelated with a constant variance.

 The change in tastes for leisure is therefore a first—order moving

 average with a serial correlation coefficient of —.50.

        The measurement errors u and v'              have a special structure.

 They are intended to represent systematic and random deviations of the

 survey measures of earnings and hours from their theoretical analogues.

 To capture these ideas, we assume that




        (14)    rut1           tii    +   [cut
                [v7tJ          '2iJ       Lc2it
where       and •2i represent individual— and survey—specific per-
manent response biases, and         and 21 represent transitory
measurement errors.        We assume that c1       and       are serially
uncorrelated with an arbitrary time—stationary covariance matrix. Since
the changes in the measurement errors of earnings and hours reflect only
the changes in the transitory components of these errors, and since the
transitory     measurinent errors are serially uncorrelated, Au* and v*

are first—order moving averages with serial correlation coefficients

equal to —     .50.   Notice that we are unable to separately identify the

variance contribution of the random shock to preferences and the

variance contribution of the transitory measurement errors, since we

have assumed that they have the same serial correlation properties, and

we have not     restricted the correlation between the measurement errors.
                                       —17—


We therefore combine these components into an unsystematic component of

the changes in earnings and hours:



                  1 rAU
              r.it11  it            i r
                                 +it11
     (15))                                      lit     it


              L itJ Ltt v.J L"21t ÷ Avit
                                 +



which is a stationary bivariate MA(l) process with an arbitrary

contemporaneous covariance and with first—order autocorrelations equal

to —.50.

     On the basis of the evidence that changes in earnings and hours are

adequately represented as a bivariate MA(2) process, we assume that

changes in individual productivity shocks in all three surveys follow a

nonstationary second order moving average. The parameters of this pro-

cess include the variance of the change in individual productivity

shocks in period t (var Az.) , the covariance of changes in individual

productivity shocks in periods t and t—l (cov(Az. ,
                                                             Azj)),   and

the covariance of changes in individual productivity shocks in periods

t and t—2 (cov(Az,
                      it   Az    )).

     The final corrrponent of variance in equations (12a) and (12b) is

          the unexpected change in the logarithm of the marginal utility of

wealth.      In general,        is a function of the unanticipated component

of the individual productivity shock Az11 and the unanticipated corn—
                                         —18--



ponent of the aggregate productivity shock. Consider the linear projec-
tion (across individuals at a point in time t):


       (16)               +
                              bjAz — Eti   Azj)     +


Since   the forecast error of AZft is serially uncorrelated, the serial

correlation propertiesmf c1 depend only on the serial correlation

properties of the projection error e This error depends on both

individual and     aggregate    productivity shocks, since individuals can vary

in their response to an idiosyncratic shock and in their response to an

aggregate shock. For simplicity, we assume that the projection errors

are serially uncorrelated (in the sense that plim                                0   )
                                                                     ei e11 =
This   assumption is satisfied if                depends only on individual produc-

tivity shocks, or equivalently, if unanticipated aggregate shocks

generate a homogeneous shift in the marginal utility of income that is

incorporated into the cons tant term               in (16)

       We are now in a position to catalogue the implicationsof equations

(l2a) and (l2b) for the covariance structure of earnings and hours in

panel data. We note that in the absence of prior information these

equations place no restrictions on the mean changes in earnings and

hours observed in a cross—section)-! Depending on the specification of

life—cycle preferences for leisure, however, equations (12) may restrict

the   regression   coefficients of changes in earnings and hours on poten-

tial experience. Equation (iZa) implies that the regression coefficient

of the change in earnings on potential experience is

              (l-e-)y +
                                        —19—


while (l2b) implies that the regression coefficient of the change in

hours on potential experience is

                +

If   life—cycle preferences exhibit no systematic curvature, then            =    0,
and all the curvature in life—cycle hours is due to curvature in wages.

In that case, an estimate of     ii   is   available frcm the ratio of the

covariance of the change in earnings with experience to the covariance

of the change in hours with experience. This is precisely the instru-

mental variables estimate of i        fran     the labor supply equation (l2b),

using potential experience as an instrument for wages.--'

      Table   10 presents the average covariances of changes in earnings
and hours with potential experience from the three data sets.           ft is
important to keep   in   mind that the timing intervals of the changes       in


earnings   and hours are different in the three surveys. If the
underlying parameters were the same in all three samples, then one would
expect   to observe covarlances in the SINE/DIME roughly one—half as large
as those in the PSID, and     covariances in the NLS roughly twice as large

as those in th PSID.!±" The first row of the Table presents the

average covariances of the change in earnings with potential experience.

In all three data sets this covariance is negative, although in the NLS

the average covariance is relatively small. The second row of the Table

presents the average covariances of changes in hours with experience.

In the PSID and SINE/DIME samples the covariance of hours changes with

experience is smaller in     absolute   value than the covariance of earnings

changes with experience. In the NLS sample, however, the covariance of
                                           —20—



 hours       changes with experience is larger in absolute value than the

 covariance of earnings changes with experience. Under the assumption

 that labor supply preferences exhibit no systematic curvature, the

 instrumental variables estimate of n             is                  where      and
                                                       ChI(Cg_Ch)
 Cg represent the average covariances of experience with hours and ear-

 nings changes, respectively. The instrumental variables estimates of i

 for    the PSID and SIME/DIME are therefore positive, while the estimate of

 n     for   the NLS is negative and significantly different from zero.!i

        The fourth r of Table 10 contains the goodness—of—fit statistics

 associated with the restriction that the covariances of earnings and

hours with potential experience are stable over time.                The hypothesis of

stationarity is marginally accepted in the PSID and SIME/DIME samples,

and strongly rejected in the NLS sample. In view of this finding, for

the  remainder of our empirical analysis we leave the regression coef-
ficients of the changes in earnings and hours on potential experience
unrestricted, and concentrate on the covariance structure of the
experience—adjusted changes.
        Denote the residuals of individual changes in earnings and hours
from a multivariate regression on potential experience and time—specific
means by A log       and A log     , respectively. Equations (12a) and
(12b) imply

        (17a) A log it = (lfn)Azi      +           —      ÷
                                                               Au.
and

       (17b) A log hit =           +         —
                                                       + Av1

Experience      adjusted changes in earnings and hours consist of three
components: a productivity component (Azit) that enters earnings and
                                       —21—



hours with coefficients (l+) and n , respectively;             a serially

uncorrelated component associated with the unanticipated change in the

marginal utility of income; and a restricted bivariate MA(l) component

reflecting survey measurement error and random shocks to preferences.

        Table 11 summarizes the implications of equations (l7a) and (17b)

for the covariance structure of experience—adjusted changes in earnings

and   hours.     Measurement error components contribute negative first—order

autocovariances in direct proportion to their variance contribution.

Unanticipated changes in the marginal utility of income contribute a

time—specific component to the variances and      covariance   of earnings and

hwrs, but do not contribute to the autocovariances. Individual—

specific productivity shocks contribute a time—varying variance and

covariance component, and represent the only source of second—order

autocovariance. As indicated in the table, the labor supply model im-

poses    symmetry on the cross—covariances of earnings and hours——a
restriction that is satisfied in the NLS and STtW/DThIE samples but
marginally rejected in the PSID sample. The labor supply model also
restricts      the four second—order autocovariances in each year to have the

same sign. Inspection of Tables 4, 5 and 6 suggests that this restric-

tion is typically satisfied, althcxigh the second—order covariances are

estimated with relative imprecision.

      It is clear from Table 11 that the labor supply elasticity       ii   is
generally overidentified. First, ratios of the second—order autoco—

variances provide estinates of l+/ , the relative factor loading of

productivity     shocks in earnings as compared to hours. Second, if the
                                           —22--



first—order covariances vary over time, then the non—stationary com-

ponents of the first—order autocovariance matrix are restricted by the

ratio l+n/n .         Let      c'(t) denote the estimate of the first—order

autocovariance matrix of earnings and hours in petiod t.              Equations
(17a) and (17b) imply

                                                                           (1+1)2 n(l+n)
                   C'(s)   =                       —
(18) c'(t) —                   {cov(Azi,Azii)          cov(AzjAzi
                                                                       [             p
                                                                                         2



Provided that the first—order autocovariances of the productivity shock
are not equal, equation (18) Identifies the relative contribution of

individual    productivity shocks in earnings as          compared to hours, and

thus    provides   an estimate of the labor supply elasticity i

       In   the stochastic model of labor supply represented by equations

(17a)   and (l7b),    the zero—order covariances of earnings and hours (the

variances    of earnings and      hours   and the contemporaneous covariance) are
unrestricted. This is a consequence of the fact that there are three
free paraneters (var (Azit)            var it' and         coy (A z., €ft2) asso-
ciated with the three zero—order covariances in each time period. In a

perfect foresight model in which the marginal utility of income is

constant, on the other hand, c is zero in every period and the labor

supply model restricts the zero—order covariances in the same manner as

the   first—order autocovariances.
       Even in a perfect foresight model, however, the covariances of the
measurement error component of earnings and hours are not separately

identifiable fran the variances and first—order autocovariances of the
                                     —23—




productivity    shodc)-" It is therefore impossible to provide a unique

variance    deccmposition of the changes in earnings and hours into systema-
tic and unsystematic components. One solution is to impose a prior
estimate of the correlation coefficient between the measurement errors
in earnings and hours. The estimate of (l-t-)/ is invariant to the
choice of correlation coefficients. In this paper we do not compute
variance    decompositions of the earnings and hours data.

      B. A Fixed Wage Contract Model.

      The institutional structure of many      employment situations is not
easily reconciled with a model of the labor market in which employees
unilaterally determine their hours of work subject to their current
wage rate. In contrast, a wide variety of contractual models emphasize
fixity in the labor market and resulting discrepancies between observed
average hourly earnings and the marginal rate of substitution of consurnp—
tion for leisure)2_" A prototypical model is one outlined by Abowd and
Ashenfelter (1981). In their model, employers offer        job packages con-

sisting of a fixed average hourly wage rate and a probability distribu-

tion over hours. Equilibrium in the labor market is obtained by equating

expected    utilities of job packages.     In any particular realization of

the   random demand shodc driving employers' demands for hours, however,
employees may prefer to work more    or less than required in their

contract.     The implied correlation    between changes in average hourly

earnings and    changes in labor supply is zero: earnings move in direct
proportion to employer—determined hours with no corresponding change in
wage rates.
                                        —24—



      To derive the implications of this model for the covariances of

earnings and hours in panel data, assume that the wage rate received by

individual i in period t contains only a permanent component, a

deterministic experience component, and a period—specific component:


      (19) log 9it =      a. +     + y1xft   +

where, as before, x1 indicates the potential experience of i in
period t .       Assume that hours of work of individual i in period t

consist   of a permanent component '         ,a    deterministic experience com-

ponent, a period—specific effect Pt              and a stochastic component

reflecting employer demand for hours:                          -




      (20)                    +    +
               log hi =                      +
                                                 -Yx + yit
Adding measurement errors u and vj to observed earnings and

hours, respectively, this fixed—wage contract model implies that the

residuals     of individual changes in earnings and hours from a regression
on potential experience are given by:

      (2la)      log g    =
                              AYit +
and
      (21b) A   log   hit = Ayft   +


      As it   happens,   this simple fixed wage contract model is indistin-
guishable fran    a labor supply model in which the ratio (l+)/ is

unity, or equivalently, in which the elasticity of labor supply is

arbitrarily large. To see this, let
                                                  —25—




                   p =   (l+n)/n    ,            = nAzi   c=            — e)

and rewrite (l7a) and (17b) as

       (22a)       A log       =             ÷        +
                                   i.i Az'
and

       (22b) A log hj =            Az +           ÷



If    p = 1    ,     (22a) and (22b) are identical to (2la) and (Zlb) with
                                   ÷ var(ct) + 2 coy (Azt, e) and
var(Ay1) =         var(Azr)
coy (Ay, Ay) = coy (Azr. Az) for                          •   It   is therefore

impossible to reject the labor supply model in favor of the fixed

wage contract model. If estimates of p in equation (22a) are

close to unity, however, our interpretation of the data is not that

small changes in wage rates are necessarily driving large changes

in hours, but rather that hours and earnings are moving proportionately

at constant average hourly wage rates.--'


III. Estimates of a Two—Factor Model of Earnings and Hours.

       In this section we present estimates of the two—factor model of

earnings and hours generation derived fran the theoretical models in the

previous section. We report estimation results for two versions of

the labor supply model: a perfect foresight version that ignores

changes in the marginal utility of income; and a stochastic version that

allas for unanticipated changes in the marginal utility of income. For

each version of the model, and each of the three panel surveys, we pre—
                                              —26—



sent   sumnnry   statistics     for the goodness—of—fit of the model, as well as

estimates of the relative contribution of productivity shocks in

earnings as compared to hours (the parameter p in equation (22a)), and

the implied elasticity of intertemporal substitution.

       The estimates are obtained by method—of—moments techniquS, using

as data the covariances of experience—adjusted changes in earnings and

hairs. On the basis of the preliminary data analysis in Section I, we

fit the model to the contemporaneous covariances of earnings and hours

and their first—       and second—order       autocovariances, ignoring the higher—

order autocovariances.

       Two   alternative   method—of--moments estimates are presented. The

first, whidi we call the equally weighted minimum distance (EW?e) esti-

mator, minimizes the quadratic form

               [m —   f(b)J'   [m —   f(b)]
where m represents the vector of adjusted covariances to be fit by the

model, b represents the vector of parameters of the model, and f(b)

represents the vector of predicted values of the fitted moments, con-

ditional on the parameter vector b •                 The second, which we call the.

optimal minimum distance (Oft)) estimator, minimizes the quadratic form

              [m -    f(b)J' V[m - f(b)]
where V denotes the sample variance matrix of the data vector                  in.



Chamberlain (1984) shows that the latter estimator minimizes the asymp-

totic covariance matrix of the estimated parameters among the class of

minimum distance estimators.

       Table 12 sunmarizes the structural estimation results for the PSID.
                                     —27—



 Columns (1) and (2) report equally weighted minimum distance and
                                                                  optimal
 minimum distance estimates, respectively, for the perfect foresight

 model, while columns (3) and (4) report EWFID and 01W   estimates of the
 uncertainty model. The individual productivity process
                                                             (Az1) is
 estimated as an arbitrary nonstationary MA(2) process. In the PSID,

 this introduces 27 parameters: 10 variances, 9 first—order covariances,

and 8 second—order covariances. The measurement error/preference shock

component of variance introduces 3 additional parameters (the variance

of the measurement error component in earnings, the variance of the

measurement error component in hours, and the correlation of the two

measurement errors). The final structural parameter is the relative

contrihitlon of the productivity component to earnings     (1').    In the

uncertainty specification of the model there are 20 additional para-

meters corresponding to the additional unrestricted zero—order covar—

lances. Since the measurement error components and the productivity

components are not separately identifiable, for purposes of estimation

we have arbitrarily fixed the correlation of the measurement errors in

earnings    and hours. The goodness—of—fit of the models and the estimates
of u      are invariant to the choice of normalizing assumptions.

     Thefirst r of Table 12 shows the goodness—of—fit of the struc-
tural models relative to an unrestricted model (98 unrestricted
moments). The test statistics in the first two columns of the table
suggest   that the perfect foresight model is not supported by the data.

The test statistics in the last two columns of the Table, on the other

hand, indicate that the uncertainty model is consistent with the data at
                                             —28—


conventional significance levels. The second row of the table reports

the estimated values of the productivity contribution parameter i.t .                 All
of these estimates are within sampling error of one for the PSID. Even

though the perfect foresight model does not fit well, the estimates of

p from this model are essentially the same as the estimates of                 i.t
                                                                                     from

the uncertainty model. As row 3 of Table 12 shows the implied estimates

of the labor supply elasticity n              are   extremely variable and impre—
                       19/
cisely estimated.—

        The finding that productivity shocks influence earnings and hours

proportionately    suggests that systematic changes in individual hours
occur at fixed hourly wage rates. There are a variety of possible
interpretations of this finding. One possibility is that changes in
hcnrs    are determined by employer preferences, and are uncorrelated with

changes in average hourly earnings. A second possibility is that the

estimate of p      is biased downward by changes in the marginal utility of

income            that enter earnings and hours proportionately. If we

incorrectly fit a perfect foresight model, assuming eft = 0               ,   then the

estimate of p. ,       in    equation (l7a) is biased toward one.      If cross—

sectional variability in e is the source of downward bias in the

perfect foresight estimate of p , however, then we would expect the

estimate of p      to increase between the perfect foresight and uncer-

tainty specifications of the labor supply model                Since the perfect

foresight and uncertainty versions of the labor supply model yield very

similar    estimates of        ji   , we conclude that changes in the marginal

utility,   of income    are not a likely source of bias in the estimates of
                                     —29--



p   .   Year—to—year changes in earnings and hours are consistent with

either a large substitution elasticity, or alternatively with employer

determined hours at fixed average hourly wage rates.

        The results in Table 12 nonetheless reveal a problem for the fixed—

wage interpretation of the estimates of p .      Under a stochastic labor

supply model, the contemporaneous covariances of earnings and hours are

not necessarily consistent with a two—factor model. Under the simple

contract model outlined in Section 118, on the other hand, the zero—

order covariances of earnings and hours are consistent with the same

underlying     two—factor model as the higher—order autocovariances. The
goodness—of--fit statistics for the two—factor model when the contem-
poraneous     covariances are restricted (in columns (I) and (2)) and

unrestricted     (in columns (3) and (4)) suggest that this is not the case.
         Whether the contanporaneous covariances of earnings and hours are
restricted by the model or not, the estimate of p and the
corresponding goodness—of—fit statistics are very similar between the
OMD and EWMD estimation methods. Differences between the OMD and EWMD
parameter estimates have the interpretation of a specification test
(Hausman (1978)). Under the hypothesis that the model is correctly spe-
cified, both the EWHD and OMD estimates are consistent, and the OND
estimates are efficient. It is straightforward to show that the
covariance     matrix of the vector of differences between the EWMD and 01W

parameter     estimates is equal to the difference between the OMD   parameter
covariance matrix and the EWMO parameter covariance matrix.--' The test

statistics associated with the difference between the 01W and EWMD esti—
                                     —30—


 mates of p are reported in the fourth row       of   the Table. For both the

 perfect foresight and uncertainty versions of the labor supply model,

 the OMD and EWMD estimates of j    are   not significantly different.

      Table 13 summarizes the estimation results for the NLS. In fitting

 the labor supply model to the NLS, the covariances of the underlying

 productivity shock (Az.) contribute 12 free parameters (five varian-

 ces, four first—order autocovariances, and three second—order

autocovariances). Columns (1) and (2) of the table present estimation

results for the perfect foresight version of the labor supply model.

Columns (3) and (4) contain the results for the stochastic labor supply

model, which adds 10 extra parameters corresponding to the additional

unrestricted zero—order covariances.

     The equally weighted minimum distance estimates in columns (1) and

(3) suggest that the parameter i       is   greater than unity, but not

significantly so. The associated estimates of         ii   are large and Impre-
cise. The goodness—of—fit of the perfect foresight model is poor: the

chi—squared test statistic is 124.1 with 28 degrees of freedom. The fit

of the stochastic labor supply model, on the other hand, is considerably

better. The optimal minimum distance estimates in columns (2) and (4)

of Table 13 provide about the same goodness—of—fit as the corresponding

EWMD estimates, but yield very different estimates of the labor

supply elasticity. The (ThD estimates of the perfect foresight model, in

particular,   indicate a remarkably stronger productivity component in
earnings   as compared to hours, and a relatively small estimate of i
The OMD estimates of the stochastic labor supply model
                                                       are closer to the
                                     —31—


corresponding equally weighted minimum distance estimates, but yield a

negative point estimate of     ii.



        Our interpretation of the difference in the estimates in columns (1)

and (2) of Table 12 is that the perfect foresight labor supply model pro-

vides a poor fit to the data, and as a consequence the parameter esti-

mates are sensitive to the relative weight assigned to the deviations of

particular moments from their predicted values. The fourth row of Table

4 presents specification tests based on the difference between the EWND

estimates of p and the corresponding OND estimates. For the perfect

foresight model the statistic cannot be computed because the estimated

standard error under OMD is larger than under EWMD.?' In any case, the

goodness—of—fit statistics providefairly strong evidence against the

perfect foresight labor supply model. For the uncertainty model, on the

other hand, the difference in the EWMD and OMP estimates of p is .71,

with a standard error of .51. This result and the goodness—of—fit sta-

tistics in the third and fourth columns of the Table suggest that the

stochastic labor supply model provides a reasonable description of the

data.

        Table 14 contains goodness—of—fit statistics and parameter esti-

mates obtained from the SIME/DIME sample. The conclusions from this

sample are essentially the same as the conclusions from the other data

sets. The perfect foresight labor supply model fits relatively poorly.

The alternative model that frees up the zero—order covariances of the

data is only marginally rejected. The estimates of p are within

sampling error of unity in all cases. In the SIME/DII{E data, as in the

PSID data, the specification tests based on the difference between the
                                     —32—


 EWMD and aMP   estimates of p are not significant at conventional signi-
 ficance levels.


 IV. Conclusions

       We have presented evidence on the autocovariance structure of ear-

nings and hours changes in three panel data sets: the PSID, which

measures hours and earnings annually; the NLS Survey of Older Men, which

measures annual hours and earnings at two year intervals; and the

SIME/DIME, which measures semi—annual earnings and hours. In spite of

these timing differences, and some differences across the surveys in the

questionnaire used to measure hours and earnings, the autocovariance

structure of all three data sets is remarkably similar. Individual

changes in earnings and hours have strong negative first order auto—

correlation, weak second order autocorrelation, and negligible higher

order autocorrelations. Contemporaneous changes in earnings and hours

are positively correlated in all three data sets. This cross—covariance

is too small, however, to generate a position covariance between changes

in hours and changes in average hourly earnings in any of the data sets.

       The sparse autocovariance structure of earnings and hours changes

makes it difficult to identify models that include general specifica-

tions of measurement error, tastes, and     economic components. We develop
two   models of hours and earnings that distinguish between an unsystema-

tic component (attributable to measurement error and/or taste changes),

and a systematic component. In the first model, the systematic com-

ponent is interpreted as an underlying shock to individual productivity
                                     —33—



that   influences wages directly and hours indirectly through an intertem—

poral substitution effect. In the second model, the systematic com-

ponent is interpreted as a shock to employer demand for hours that

influences   earnings and hours equi—proportionately. Our empirical
results   suggest   that the systematic component of variance effects ear-

nings and hours equi—pifoportionately in all three panel data sets.

       Apart from the zero—order covariances of earnings and hours (the

variances of earnings and hours and their contemporaneous covariance), a

simple two—factor model provides an adequate description of the

covariance structure of earnings and hours changes in all three data

sets. A two—factor model is apparently too restrictive as a model of

the complete covariance matrix of earnings and hours changes. In the

context of a labor supply model, this finding is interpreted as evidence

against perfect—foresight. In the context of a fixed—wage contract

model the interpretation of this finding is unclear. More work is

required to distinguish between the two models, and to develop alter-

native models of the covariance structure of earnings and hours.
                                      —34—



                                   Footnotes


       See for     example Ashenfelter and Ham (1977), MaCurdy (1981),

 Altonji (1984), and the surveys by Killingsworth (1983) and Pencavel

 (1985).


       VThe life—cycle labor supply model is described in Ghez and Becker

 (1975) and Heckman (1976).      Browning, Deaton and Irish (1985) provide a

useful summary of the theory of consumer behavior over time.


       1"Pencavej (1985, p. 151) concludes that    .   . . the   focus of most

economists' research [on labor supply] has been on a behavioral response

that   for men appears to be of a relatively small order of magnitude.

       'Altonji    (1984) compares the correlation between changes in hours

and changes in average hourly earnings (about — .35 in his sample and in

the PSID and NLS data sets used in this paper) with the correlation bet-

ween changes in hours and changes in reported wage rates of hourly rated

workers (about .01 in Altonji's sample). Altonji interpretes this dif-

ference as evidence that masurement error in hours induces a strong

negative correlation between changes    in hours and changes in average
hourly earnings.

       'HaCurdy   (1981) and Altonji (1984) both arrive at estimates of the

intertemporal substitution elasticity in the neighborhood of .10 — .40.


    -"Our   empirical   analysis is closely related to work by Hause (1980)

and MaCurdy (1982). Hause and MaCurdy both model the serial correlation
                                        —35—


structure of earnings in longitudinal data. We extend the analysis to

the bivariate process of earnings and hours.


     1The NLS surveys     were administered in July through October of the

survey     years, and asked questions on earnings and hours in the previous
twelve months. Unlike the PSID survey, the NLS collects no auxilliary
information    on overtime hours or hours of work on secondary jobs. For

this and perhaps other reasons, a large fraction (30 percent) of NLS

respondents report exactly 2,000 hours per year.


     !"our SINE/DIME data is drawn from the so—called Work Impact File

assembled by SRI from the underlying survey data. The SIME/Dfl1E survey

contains detailed questions on overtime and secondary jobs, and is

conceptually more similar to the PSID survey than the NLS survey.


     .2!    Denote the change in earnings between period t—l and period t

by   Ax .       If   Ax is MA(2), then Ax      = s   +
                                                         b11 ÷ b2e      2
                                                                            for


example, where          is serially uncorrelated. The change in        earnings
between     period t—2 and period t is x —           x2   =
                                                              Ax   +

Therefore, x —       x2 =      +
                        (l+bi)e 1 + (b1 + b2)e2 +
Notice that x — x2 is correlated with x2 —       , but not with
x4 —       x6 (or Ax4).
     !Q!There are at least two alternative ways to test restrictions on
subsets of the covariances in Tables 4, 5, and 6, depending on whether we
incorporate the restrictions that the third— and higher—order covariances
are jointly equal to zero when     we   test the properties of the lower—order
                                              —36—



 covariances. Our procedure is to ignore the higher—order covariances in
 estimating and testing restrictions on the lower—order covariances.

    i2/The error      e
                          it
                               may   be serially correlated, for example, if
 aggregate   shocks have a systematically larger effect on some

 individuals' marginal utility of income than others'. In this case,

however, we would expect to observe nonvanishing covariances between

changes in earnings and hours from years with large aggregate shocks,

irrespective of the gap between these years. There is no evidence of

this phenomenon in Tables 4—6.


    il/There are two time—varying components of the mean changes in

earnings and hours in each year: the shift in the aggregate productivity

shock          ;   and the average revision in the marginal utility of

income



    !'MaCurdy (1981) and Altonji (forthcoming) present instrumental

variables estimators of the intertemporal labor supply
                                                                elasticity, using
polynomials of age and experience as instruments.


    ---"Write equation (l2a) as

             Alog gft =         +
                                     io   ÷

where        represents the regression coefficient of the change in ear-

nings on experience,             is a period—specific constant, and

includes the stochastic components of earnings changes.            If time is

measured in years, then the change in annual earnings over the two year

interval from t—l to t+l is Alog g.1 ÷ Alog                    =          +   +
                                                                   1t+l
                                     —37—



28x1 +         + 6.   .   Thus the covariances of changes in earnings and

hours with potential experience should be roughly twice as large in the

NLS as the PSID. The comparison between changes at six month intervals

and changes at annual intervals is similar.


            instrumental variables estimate of n         for   the PSID is

substantially larger than the estimates reported by MaCurdy (1981) or

Altonji (forthcoming). Both authors use overidentified estimators that

make use of several instrumental variables for wage changes. Since our

primary interest is not in the instrumental variables estimates them-

selves, we have not explored the estimates of       ii   when other exogenous

variables are used as instruments for changes in wages.


            is straightforward to show that each of the variances of the

productivity shock can be increased by a fixed factor, the measurement

error   variances can be decreased, and the first—order autocovariances of
the productivity shock can be increased in such a way as to hold
constant   the predicted covariance matrix of earnings and hours.


    !ZiHart (1983) and Rosen (1985) survey most of the theoretical

literature on labor contracts.


    !JIn other work (Abowd and Card (1984)) we have considered the

implications of labor contracts that smooth individual earnings.

Suppose, for example, that observed earnings in period t represent a

geometric average of earnings in the absence of contracts (g°) and

desired consumption in t (c) , which we assume is constant. Then

log g = (1—y) log g° + y log c , where       'y'   represents the extent of
                                            —38—


 earnings stabilization. Taking first differences and using the notation

 of equation (22a), log            =
                                        ILAz*.
                                                 +   E*i +        , where
p = (1—y) (l+n)/n and Az*. and C*1                        are suitably defined. In the

presence of earnings smoothing contracts, the parameter                       i'     may fall

below unity.

       12!The labor supply elasticity n              is   obtained from the estimate of

U by the formula        ii   = (p—l)1   .   Standard errors for          Ti        in   Tables 12,

13, and 14 are calculated by the delta—method.


             derive the covariance matrix of the difference between the OMD

estimate b° and the EWND estimate be                 ,   note that under the hypothesis
that the model is correct,

                        a          —1 —l  —1
       /N (b —    b*)        /r(F'V F) FTV (m_f(b*))

       /nbe - b*) -          /F(F'F)1    F!(m_f(b*))


where V is the covariance matrix of the vector of moments                               in   , f(b)
is the predicted vector of moments given the true value b*                          ,        N   is the

sample size, and F represents the Jacobian matrix of f                         ,    evaluated         at

b* •   These equations follow from the first order conditions for

and be ,    respectively,     and a series of regularity assumptions. Using

the fact that V is the variance matrix of (m_f(b*))                  ,        it    is straight-

forward to derive the asymptotic variance matrix of the difference

(ho_be).


   li/The    variance of the OND parameter estimate is necessarily smaller
only when   both variances are estimated at the same parameter values.
                                         —39—


                                      References




Abowd, John H. and Orley Ashenfelter. "Anticipated Unenployment,

     Temporary Layoffs and Compensating Wage Differentials." Studies

     in Labor Markets,      ed.   Sheiwin Rosen. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago

     Press, 1981.

Abowd, John N. and David Card.         "Interteniporal Labor Supply in the

     Presence     of Long—Term Contracts." Unpublished manuscript,
     Princeton University, June 1984.
Alt onji,   Joseph A. "Intertenporal Substitution in Labor Supply:

     Evidence fran Micro Data." The Journal of Political Economy,

     forthcoming. (Draft paper dated February            1984.)
Ashenfelter,    Orley and John C. Ham. "Education, Unenployment, and
     Earnings," JcErnal of Political Economy, 87 (october 1979):
     S9 9—S116.

Braining, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish. "A Profitable
     Approach     to Labor Supply and Commodity Demand Over the Life—Cycle."
     Econonetrica, 53      (May   1985): 503—543.
Chanberlain, Gary. "Panel Data." Chapter 22 in The Haudbook of
     Ecmanetrics,     Vol. 2, ed. by Zvi Griliches and Michael Intrilligator.

     New York:    North   Holland, 1984.

Ghez, Gilbert     and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over

     the Life Cycle. New      York: Columbia        Univ. Press (for the National

     Bureai   of Economic Research), 1975.
                                         —40—



Hart,    Oliver D. "Optimal Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric Information:

        An Introduction."      Review of Economic Studies, 50 (January 1983):

        3—35.

Hause, J.C. "The Fine Structure of Earnings and the On—the—Job Training

        Hypothesis."     Econometrica   (May   1980):   1013—1030.

Hausnan, J.A. "Specification Tests in Econometrics." Econometrica, 46

        (September 1978): 1251—1272.

Heckman, James J. "A Life—Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning and

        Consumption."     Journal of Political Economy, 84 (August 1976):
        811—544.

Killingsworth,       Mark. Labor Supply.       New York:    Cambridge Univ. Press,

        1983.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle

        Setting." Journal of Political Economy, 89 (December 1981):

        1059—1085.

__________________        "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error

     Structure       of Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis." Journal of
        Econometrics,    18 (Special Issue 1982): 83—114.

Newey, Whitney IC.       "Generalized Method of Moments Specification Tests."

     Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University, 1985.

Pencavel, John. "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey." In The Handbook of

     Labor      Economics, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.
     Forthcoming, 1985.
Rosen, Sherwin, "Implicit Contracts". Journal of Economic Literature,
     23 (September 1985): 1144—1176.
                                              —41—




                                            Appendix A


     -       In this appendix we summarize the estimation and -inference proce-
dures used throughcxit the paper. The basic unit of data for each indi-
vidual in a particular data set is the vector of experience—adjusted
changes in earnings and hours. If we denote these by A log                           and
A log hj , then the data vector is

                            A log

                   V
                   Ji a     A log
                            A   log ll


                            A 1g "iT

which has dimension 2T , where T is the number of changes observed in
the data set.             Let "   =
                                      4f    represent      the mean vector of changes and

let C=-t —                            '—'    represent the covariance matrix of

these changes.. Estimates of C               are presented for the three data sets

in Tables 4, 5, and 6.

             The   models we estimate are models for C.          Let m represent a

vector whose elements are the distinct elements of C •                    Since C is

symntric, there are only 2T(2T-i-l)/2 elements in in •                    In   the PSID,

this corresponds to 210 elements; in the NLS, 55 elements, and itt                   the
SIME/DD4E, 136. Conformably with in,                 let     m represent the distinct

elements of the individual cross—products matrix                          (—)' . Then
         =   E
in
                 in
                                                   —42—


        The variance matrix V of the vector of covariance elements is

estimated by computing the cross—sectional variance of m1 in the usual

manner:

           v=- (m —in) (m             —in)'


A typical elanent of V is V                        cov(m    ,    m)     If

in      cov(A      log ,     A   log hj.) and                   = cov(A
                                                                        log g1       ,   A log

then

               =
                   j [(A   log it —      A   log XA log                 — A
                                                                            log              —
                                                                                                 m]   x


                        (A log      — A      log ')(A      log is—k — A log                  —


where      A log j1      represents   the sample average change in the logariti-in

of earnings in period t •             Let      Q    represent     the matrix of fourth

moments of

           Q=ji mimi'
Q    and   V       are related by V = Q — in in'

       Under fairly general conditions, independence of the
                                                            y1 implies
that the sample mean of           m has an asymptotic normal distribution:


               hF Cm — ii)       N(O ,   V*)
where p        is the population value of m (i.e. , the true covariance

matrix of earnings and hours changes) and V* is the population value

of V.

       Consider a model for the vector of covariance elements that depends

on a lcwyer—djmensional parameter vector b                   ,   say   m =   f(b).       Several
                                                        —43—



 estimators     are available for b: among these are the optimal minimum

 distance (OIID) estimator b° , which minimizes (m—f(b)) V1 (m—f(b)),

 and   the   equally weighted minimum distance (EWMD) (or least squares)

 estimator     be , which minimizes (m—f(b) ) '(m—f(b)).                      Optlinality of the

 former     estimator is discussed in Chamberlain (1984).
       For the OMU estimator, inference is based on the fact that under the
hypothesis of a correct                  specification, the minimized         quadratic form


              N •       (in   —
                                  f(b°fl'     V1 (m —     f(b°))

has an asymptotic chi—squared distribution with                          degrees of freedom equal
to    the difference between the dimension of m and the rank of the

Jacobian     matrix F(b)                               evaluated at b* ,     the   true value of b.
(See Chamberlain (1984)).
       If the model for in                  has   the special form

                    =                   = f(b)    =



                         H                            L°i
in which     only the last k elements of                       in   are restricted to zero, it is

straightforward           to show that the minimized quadratic form reduces to
                                    —l
               N•       in2       V22    m2


where V22 is the block of V                           corresponding   to the elements in    in

that are restricted to zero. This is the chi—squared test for
       =0
in2
                                                       —44--



        For an estimator bA that minimizes an arbitrary quadratic form

                     (m —       f(bfl'   ACm —   f(b))
where A is a positive definite matrix, Newey (1985) shows that the

quadratic form

                     (in   - f(b R (mS- f(bA))
has an asymptotic chi—squared distribution. Here, C is a generalized

inverse of the matrix R = pVp'                     ,   where   p =       — F(F'F)1      F'A , and    F

represents the Jacobian matrix of f evaluated at hA. Newey (1985)

suggests a generalized inverse of R of the form S(S'RS)1 S , where

S is a selection matrix of rank equal to the difference between the

dimension of               in    (the number of movements fit) and the rank of F. In

general, for a nonlinear model, the value of the quadratic form depends

on    the exact generalized inverse selected for R. In case of a linear
model, however,                 the value of the quadratic form is invariant, and in the

simple case of testing the restrictions in2                          0    ,   with   no additional

restrictions on m1 ,                 the   value of the quadratic form can be shown to

equal N           in2' V221 in2. Tests of zero restrictions are invariant to

the choice of OMD or any arbitrary minimum distance estimator.

        Our procedure is to first test for zero restrictions and then to

work with the nonzero covariances of earnings and hours. In the nota-

tion of the previous discussion, once we have accepted the hypothesis
     = 0    ,   we estimate ndels for              m1 and use        the covariances matrix
V11     for inference. This procedure is not fully efficient, since

better estimates of the unrestricted elements of m can be formed by

taking into          account the fact that certain other elements of at (i.e.
those      in in2)         are zero.
                                                —45—


                                          Appendix B

        In this appendix, we comnnt on the assumption underlying equation

(10) of the text that aggregate shocks and experience effects enter

homogeneously into individual             productivity. More     generally, consider
the alternative specification:

        (ba) log            a1 + r16       +           +2x +       z

Here, we have permitted the aggregate productivity shock                       to affect

individual        productivity through an individual—specific response coef-
ficient      r1
                      Cross—section   dispersion in r          reflects   the possibility
that    individuals have permanent cyclical attributes: individuals with

higher values of r1 are more responsive to aggregate shocks. We have

also permitted the linear experience coefficient                       to have an indi-

vidual component of variance.

       Equation (l0a) implies that the first difference of wages can be

written as:

        (ha) A log          =   K+          + Y2x0     +
                                                           (r —r) Aót + Az1
where                  —
         K   = rA6          + 2y2t    ,   and    r is the average value of

Individual heterogeniety in the experience slope and the response to

aggregate shocks introduces two additional components of variance into

the first differences of earnings and hours. Both of these components

contribute to covariances between lagged changes in earnings and hours.

First consider the component of variance associated with (r — r)                       If

this component is large, then changes in earnings and hours in years

with a negative product [vity shock should be more highly                 correlated with
                                   —46—


changes in other years with negative shocks, and less correlated with

changes in years with aggregate productivity improvements. By most

measures aggregate productivity fell with business cycle recessions in

1969—70, 1973—74, and 1980—81. In the PSID data, however, covariances

of earnings and hours changes between these years are very similar to

covariances   between arbitrary pairs of years at the same gap. We there-
fore conclude that the component of variance due to individual—specific
responses to aggregate shocks is small.
     Next, consider the component of variance in (ha) associated with
cross—section dispersion in earnings growth rates. This component

contrihites   a fixed positive element to earnings and hjrs autocovar—
iances and cross—covariances of all orders. In   the data, autocovariances

of third order and higher are all negligible. Again, we conclude that

cross—section   dispersion in experience growth rates contrihites a
relatively small component of variance to wage growth.
                                  Table 1

         Characteristics of the PSID Sample of Male Household Heads



                                           at         Average     Average
                                       Year—           Hourly     Annual
                                                      Earnings     Hours

1. Annual Hours and Average            1969             3.62       2308
       Hourly Earnings                 1970             3.71       2276
       (1967 dollars)                  1971             3.85       2266
                                       1972             4.00       2302
                                       1973             4.13       2324
                                       1974             4.10       2246
                                       1975             4.02       2220
                                       1976            4.19        2231
                                       1977            4.26        2236
                                       1978            4.26        2244
                                       1979            4.25        2186


                                                      Change       Change
                                      Change     in
                                                  .

                                                       Earnings   in Hours

2.   Changes in Log Real Annual      1969—70            2.5       —0.8
      Earnings and Log Annual        1970—71            3.0       -0.3
      Hours (x 100)                  19 71—72           6.9         2.0
                                     1972—73            4.7         1.9
                   .                 1973—74           —5.5       —4.1
                                     1974—75           —4.2       —2.4
                                     1975—76            4.1        0.6
                                     1976—77            2.5        0.3
                                     1977—78            0.2        0.5
                                     1978—79           —5.5       —4.2


3. Demographic Characteristics
      Average Age in 1969                              35.8
      Percent Nonwhite                                 27.3
      Average Potential Experience in 1969             18.9

4. Sample Size                                         1448-"

NOTES: a/Data are for the calendar years listed.

         .1Eight outliers with reported average hourly earnings greater
           than $100/hour (1967 dollars) were excluded.
                                 Table 2

             Characteristics of the NLS Sample of Older Men


                                                Average       Average
                                       Year      Hourly       Annual
                                                Earnings       Hours


1. Annual Hours and Average            1966         3.50       2209
     Hourly Earnings                   1967         3.46       2190
     (1967 dollars)                    1969         3.55       2190
                                       1971         3.66       2161
                                       1973         3.63       2160
                                       1975         3.50       2003


 .                                                Change       Change
                                      Change
                                                in Earnings   in Hours

2. Changes in Log Real Annual        1966—67        4.5          0.0
     Earnings and Log Annual         1967-69        4.0          0.0
     Hours (x 100)                   1969—71        3.1         —0.1
                                     1971—73      —0.2          —1.5
                                     1973—75     —16.8         —11.6



3. Demographic Characteristics

     Average Age in 1969                          49.2

     Percent Nonwhite                              29.8

     Average P.otential Experience in 1969         34.4


4. Sample Size                                     1318


NOTE: Data are for twelve—month periods preceeding the interview date.
       Changes in earnings and hours over the two year intervals are not
       at annual rates.
                                    Table 3

                 Characteristics of the SINE/DIME Sample

                 of   Male—Reacts of Dual—Headed Households


                                     Experimental    Average      Average
                                        Period        Hourly      Annual
                                                     Earnings      Hours

1. Mm..] Hours and Average                i             3.47        2093
     Hourly Earnings                      2             3.53        2098
     (1971 dollars)                       3             3.63        2087
                                          4             3.73        2117
                                          5             3.83        2135
                                          6             3.88       2104
                                          7             3.88       2131
                                          8             3.85       2074
                                          9             3.88       2059


                                                      Change      Change
                                        Change      in Earninjs     Hours
2. Changes in Log Real Semi—Annual       1—2            1.2        3.9
     Earnings and Log Semi—Annual       2-3           —1 .3
     Hours (z 100)                      3—4            2.8         5.8
                                        4—5             1.6        4.0
                                        5—6           —1.3
                                        6—7            0.7         0.6
                                        7—8           —3.5
                                        8—9           —3.0        —2.7


3. Demographic Characteristics
     Average Age at start of experiment               34.7
     Percent Nonwhite                                 48.8
    Average Potential Experience at start             18.2
        of experiemnt

4. Sample Size                                         560

NOTE: Data are for six—month periods following assignment into the
      income experiment. The changes in earnings and hours between
      consecutive six—month intervals are not at annual rates.
                                                                                                                                        Y.bla    4

                                                                                                                                                  " 165
                                                                                                                      rot £010     N81fl 1969—1970           to                 Il
                                                                                                                       (Itanitard   error.     ii, p.rev,the.ea).a'

                                                                                                                                      C.art.nt.        of:
                         II)         (2)       (3)         (4)        0)           (6)           (7)           (9)        (9)        0)0)         (II)             (12)              (II)        (14)         (I))           (16)     (II)     (08)     (I!)     (20)
                       6t   g    aloe!       660!.      ilo g       Ito)9     AThg g        âIog             AIg        *009 a      Abs          Slog 6           &I       Ii        61086      hog h        61086          6Io 6    loa I,   Mo 6     t08 It   6lflII
                        69—70       70.71     71—71       72—72      73—76     76—75            75—76         76—77      7779        79.79        69—70            70-71             71—11       71—71        73—16          767)     73—76    76—77    7779     79—79


     1. Aba             .161
         69—10         (.011)
     1. how            —.116        .959
          70—It        (III)     (.019)
     3. 6)0(6          —.097     —.066        .170
         70—7)         (.007)    (.093)     (.0:9)

 6.hlogg                .000     —.002      —.041         .136
         72—73         (.0060    (.009)     (.0")       (.014)

 L       Alog          .003         .000    —.007       —.036        .129                   -
         73—06        (.006)     (.005)     (.005)      (.007)      (.016)
 6. Alog               .003         .00)    —.010       —.711       —.050      .111
         76—75        (.00))    (.005)      (.0076      (.006)      (.015)    ((II)
 ).h!o.e              —.007     —.007         .010       .000       —.001     —.088             .224
         75—76        (.006)    (.005)      (.008)      (.00!)      (.006)    (.01))        (.032)
 9.460I               —.002         .000      .009        .011      —.OIO     —OIl          —.087             .996
         76—77        (.005)    (.0070      (.009)      (.009)      (.006)    (.007)        (.019)           (.034)
 9.ilogg              -00]          .006    —.003         .006      —.00!       .006         .0l3            —.064          .191
         77—79        (-007)    (.007)      (.009)      (.007)      (.006)    (.007)        (.009)           (-0)9)     (.0?))
In.      A L.a a       .000     —                                                                                       —
                                  .003       .001        .000        .000       .000         .00'             .003        .046       .17'
         76—79        (.006)    (.00))      (.005)      (.00))      (-(06)    (.006)        (.006)           (.060)     (.013)      (.0)0)

II. 60056              .067     —.9)1       —.001        .001      —.001      —.001             .006         —.004      —.001       —.007         .1)8
         69—70        (.016)    (.010)      (.007)      (.004)      (.001)    (.005)        (.006)           (.005)     (.004)      (.004)       (.013)

II.      Lloj    Ii   —.022       .07)      —.026       —.00)        .002      .00)         -.009             .001       .005       —.001        —.060             .115
         70—71        (.011)    (.01)5      (.011)      (.007)      (.0(1)    (.0052        (.006)           (.005)     (.004)      (4906)       (.0(0)           (.015)
I3A0o)t               —.001     -.031        .079       —4922      —.00)      —.009             -009         —.003      —.00!        .001        —.002            —.068              .119
         79—02        (-007)    (.0(0)      (.015)      (.010)      (.004)    (.006)        (.006)           (.003)     (-005)      (.00))       (.007)           (.010)         (.015)

II   -   Alo   6       .006       .00)      —.021        .039        .00)     —.003         —.001             .007      —.00'        .00)         .000            -M05           —.016           .090
         73—li        (.004)    (.006)      (4911)      (.010)      (.003)    (.004)        (.003)           (4905)     (.005)      (.004)       (.00))           (.00))         (.090)         (.0(9)

65.      6l           —-001     —.00)       —.0)!        .006        .036     —.008         —.008            —.0)0       .001        .001         .006            —.006          —.090          —.016          .073
         73-34        (.006)    (-00))      (.006)      (.003)     (.007)     (.079)        (.007)           (.003)     (.004)      (.906)       (.006)           (.004)         (.003)         (.001)       (.001)

 6.61096               .006       .003       .000       —.009      —.016       .071         —.0)1             .002      —.011        4906        —.006              .006         —.005          —.00'        —.010           .110
         76—75        (.006)    (.004)      (.00))      (.006)     (.007)     (.093)        (.013)           (.009)     (.009)      (.006)       (.006)           (.006)         (.003)         (.003)       (.005)         (.013)
17.81n9k              —-009     —.006         .001      —.002      —.001      —.068             .106         —.067       -00]       —.007        —.002             .000              .00)       —.006        —.006          —.058     .167
         75—76        (.004)    (.006)      (.005)      (490))     (.004)     (OIl)         (.021)           (.010)     (.010)      (.0063       (.003)           (.006)         (.003)         (.003)       (.006)         (.01])   (On)
 1.61096               .004      .004       —.001       —.00)       .000      —.006         —.046             4967       .017         .009        .005            —.002          —.001           .008        —.001          —.010    —06A      483
         76—77        (.006)    (.906)      (.00))      (.006)     (.00))     (.006)        (.021)           (.027)     (.014)      (.009)       (.00))           (.004)         (.006)         (.005)       0.00,0         (.006)   (.0)8)   (.026)
ILAljh                —.002      4900        .00)         .005     —.007       490?         —.091              033       .088       —.006        —.001              000              .002       —.006        —.001          —-003    —.006    —493)     .1)4
  77—79               (.004)    (.975)      (.00))      (.005)     (.004)     (.003)        (.005)           (.013)     (.020)      (-060)       (.005)           (.006)         (.006)         (-006)       (-004)         (.003)   (.006)   (.015)   (.020)
l0.Abo(h               .001      .000       -.00]        -003      —490?      —.002         —.006            —.004       .003        .075        —.00!             .00)          —-006         —.001          430!           002     -.003    —.00)    —.02!     .016
         79-79        (.00))    (.003)      (.003)      (.003)     (.001)     (.006)        (.006)           (.00))     (4906)      (.016)       (.005)           (-006)         (.006)         (-001)       (.00))         (.006)   (.005)   (.00))   (.008)   (.019)

2).                   —.506      .!10        323        —450        4906      I92           —.01!            —.1)0       .209        .217        —.311            —.123          —.953           .076        —.05)          —-III     .070    I9'      —.151    —.29!
         )0006        (.939)    (dl?)       (.1 (7)     0_Ott)     (.099)     (-III)        (.119)           (.117)     (.964)      (.11])       (.118)           (.096)         (.096)         (.091)       (.07))         (402)    CIII)    (.60)1   (.121)   (.129)




                                               NOTflt    -The data ste change. to log annual e.rnlng. (A log g I, roes .nol cclii.,. (1)—flu)) end                                                    log   scsi.) 'curs
                                                           (A log I. to row! .nd cclii.,,. (tl)—(20)) 4) Iferenced between the year. indlc.ted. Ca                                                               re calculated
                                                                                                coodi   t   tonal     an given potential eocpertence and year                         of    ohaerva   tb,.    See Table I for
                                                            sfter.dJoetbOg (or to..
                                                            a    900r7 of    the      an.

                                                         i/standard error.         are ba.ed on the            onple fourth         oeot     .atrtx.
                                                         .Vcovartance of potential labor force exper(ence with the change (9 log earnings (column. (1)—fib))                                                          and    the
                                                           ch.nge (9 log annual hours (column. (0l)—(20)h
                                                                    Table 5
                                         Covariances of Experience—Adjusted Changes in
                                                Earniis and Hours:      NLS   Data l966—75'
                                                       (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                                      Covariance of:
                        (1)       (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)             (6)       (7)
                      8log g    blog g        Alog g       Alog g
                                                                                                            (8)       (9)         (10)
                                                                     Alog g           Alog h    Alog h    8log h    Alog h
 vitb:                 66—67     67—69         69—71                                                                             A1.og h
                                                            71—73     7375             66—67     67—69     69—71     71—73        7375
  1. Alog g            .109
        66—67         (.016)              .                                      .
  2.    tb8 g        —.032       .133
        67—69        (.010)     (.039)
  3. Alog       g    —.000     —.068           .132
       69—71         (.004)    (.038)         (.040)
  4. tlog g          —.005       .000         —.040         .178
     71—73           (.004)     (.004)        (.008)       (.024)
  5. Alog g           .004       .007         —.011        —.073      .330
     73—75           (.006)    (.011))        (.010)       (.018)    (.036)
 6. Alog h            .038      .002           .002       —.003       .005            .114
    66—67            (.012)    (.005)         (.003)      (.004)     (.006)          (.023)
 7. Alog       h     —.007      .016          —.004        .001     —.017            —.036      .081
       67—69         (.004)    (.004)         (.004)      (.005)     (.007)          (.012)    (.015)
 8. Alog h            .002     —.007           .015                                                                          ,
                                                           .002       .013           —.002     —.038      .066
    69—71            (.003)    (.004)         (.004)      (.006)     (.005)          (.003)    (.008)    (.011)
 9. Alog h           .001      —.001      -.007            .060     —.026            —.001      .007     —.028
    11—13                                                                                                           .091
                    (.003)     (.004)     (.005)          (.014)    (.009)           (.003)    (.005)    (.007)    (.014)
10. Alog h           .002       .009      —.006           —.034      .198             .005     —.013      .011
       73—75        (.007)                                                                                         —.050      .235
                               (.009)     (.009)          (.010)    (.027)           (.005)    (.006)    (.005)    (.010)    (.028)
11.   Experience1    .062       .078       .016           —.160     —.225            —.018      .000      .052     —.158     —.291
                    (.051)     (.063)     (.057)          (.056)    (.086)           (.049)    (.048)    (.036)    (.04!)    (.078)
NOTES     -11The data represent
                                changes in log earnings and     hours over
                                                            log            the intervals indicated, adjusted for the
             conditional mean given potential experience and year of observation.
                                                                                   See Table 2 for means.
          21Covariance of potential labor market experience with the
                                                                      change in log earnings (colunns (l)—(5)) and the
            change in log hours (columns (6)—(10)).
                                                                                                                       Table 6
                                                                                                 Covariances of Experience—Adjusted            Change
                                                                                                                                                         /
                                                                                      in   F.arninga and Hours         Semi—Annual Data (roe. SINE/DIME1
                                                                                                           (standard errors   in parentheses)
                                                                                                                         cnarinc. of
                             (1)              (2)         (3)       (4)             (5)         (6)           (7)       (8)      (9)              (10)        (11)          (12)       (13)        (14)      (IS)     (16)
with:                      Slog g           Slog g   Slog g       Slog g       Slog g         Slog g         Slog g   Slog g   Slog I'           Slog h      Alog h        Slog h     Slog ii     Slogh     Slog      Slog h
                           Period      1   PerIod 2 Period 3     Period    4   PerIod5 Period          6    Period 7 PerIod 8  Period I           Period 2   PerIod    3   Period 4   Period S                       Period
 1. Slog g                   .155
    Period I                (.030)
 2. Slog g                  —.046            .153
    Period          2       (.022)          (.028)
 3. Slog g                  —.007           —.050        .145
      PerIod        3       (.013)          (.018)      (.024)
 4. Slog       g            —.016           —.022       —.052       .130
      Period        4       (.014)          (.014)      (.018)    (.027)
 5. Slog g                    .002          —.003        .006     —.050          .119
      Period 5              (.013)          (.008)      (.010)    (.020)       (.025)
 6. Slog g   —.005                          —.001       —.01]       .009       —.038           .130
    Period 6 (.008)                         (.007)      (.009)    (.008)       (.012)         (.026)
 7.                          .010            .004       —.006     —.013         .010          —.076            .171
      Slog g
      Period 7              (.010)          (.013)      (.010)    (.010)       (.012)         (.023)          (.032)
 8. Slog g                  —.006            .000        .015      .005         .000           .019          —.086        .217
    Period 8                (.008)          (.010)      (.015)    (.013)       (.012)         (.017)         (.024)      (.038)
 9. Slog h                   .133           —.036       —.007     —.013         .000           .008            .006      —.006         .140
      Period           I    (.026)          (.018)      (.012)    (.012)       (.012)         (.007)          (.008)     (.007)       (.025)
ID. Slog Ii                 —.045            .130       —.036     —.022        —.001           .001            .005       .002        —.038         .134
    Period             2    (.021)          (.026)      (.017)    (.013)       (.008)         (.007)          (.014)     (.010)       (.017)      (.026)
II.   Slog h                 .001           —.046        .119     —.049          .011         —.DLl          —.002        .009        —.005       —.042        .120
      Period           3    (.014)          (.011)      (.022)    (.017)       (.009)         (.008)          (.010)     (.013)       (.013)      (.017)      (.022)
12. Slog Ii                 —.014           —.017       —.055       .116       —.041           .005          —.009        .005        —.011       —.020      —.052           .119
      PerIod 4              (.013)          (.013)      (.017)    (.024)       (.015)         (.009)          (.010)     (.013)       (.011)      (.01])      (.017)       (.023)
13. Slog h                  —.002           —.006        .010     —.042          .100         —.031            .003       .001        —.003       —.003        .010        —.040        .100
      Period           S    (.010)          (.007)      (.009)    (.015)       (.019)         (.012)          (.010)     (.012)       (.009)      (.007)      (.009)       (.013)      (.016)
14. Slog K                   .004            .001       —.011       .007       —.040           .113          —.071        .020         .006         .000      —.010          .004     —.036        .111
      Period           6    (.008)          (.006)      (.008)    (.008)       (.012)         (.024)          (.021)     (.0'S)       (.008)      (.006)      (.008)       (.008)      (.0L2)     (.023)
15. Slog h                      .006         .008       —.004     —.010          .008         —.077            .155      —.077         .002          .008     —.003         —.009       .000       —.069     .157
      Period           7    (.009)          (.013)      (.010)    (.010)       (.011)         (.024)          (.031)     (.022)       (.00!)       (.014)     (.010)        (.009)     (.011)      (.022)   (.031)
                                                                                                                          .198         .004         .000       .009          .002       .002        .017     .065     .208
16. Slog h                  —.005           —.00!        .016       .00!            .002       .014           —.087                                                                                         (.022)   (.03!)
                                                                                              (.017)          (.023)     (.018)       (.006)       (.010)     (.013)        (.013)     (.011)      (.015)
      Period           8    (.007)          (.010)      (.016)    (.013)       (.012)
                                                                                                                                                   —.056        .174        —.040       —.168       .139     .061    —.346
                                                                  —  235        —   100       .010             .039      —.244        —.126
17    Ex e         —        —
                                156         — 127         007
                                                                                (:169)        (.151)          (.16])     (.211)        (.185)      (.234)     (.187)        i.lel)       (.160)    (.138)   (.214)   (.214)
                             (.195)         (:230)      (:195)     (:165)
             NOTES:             i/The data have been adjusted for conditional means given potential  experience and period—specific shocks by regreeeing changes in log earnings and
                                   log hours on potential experience and dummy variablea for the date of entry into the experimental group. The data are aligned in experimental tine:
                                   Period 1 refers to the first sixth—month nerind after enrollment into the control group. See Table I for means.
                                Vpartial      covariancem   of  potential labor market experience with thearechange in log earnings (columns (l)—(8)) nnd the change in log hours (columns
                                                                                                                                                                control group.
                                    (9)—(16)).       Experience and the change in log e.nrnlnp.e and hours     adjusted for date of entry into the experimental
                                   Table 7

          Summary   of Estimated Bivariate MA(2) Representation

         of Experience—Adjusted Changes in Earnings and Hours:

                       Annual   Data   from the PSID


1. Goodness—of—fit statistic — MA(2)                              137.19
    (probability value — 112 degrees of freedom)                  (.062).

2. Test statistic for symmetric MA(2)'                             31.02
    (probability value — 17 degrees of freedom)                   (.020)

3. Test statistic for MA(l)--"                                     50.39.
    (probability value — 32 degrees of freedom)                   (.020)

4. Test statistic for stationary MA(2)1'                          143.69
    (probability value — 87 degrees of freedom)                   (.000)


     NOTE: "Against the alternative hypothesis of a nonstationary
               bivariate MA(2).
                               Table 8

         Summary of Estimated Bivariate MA(2) Representation

        of Experience—Adjusted Changes in Earnings and Hours:

                        Annual Data from NLS



1. Goodness—of—fit statistic — MA(2)                             12.89
    (probability value — 12 degrees of freedom)                 (.377)

2. Test statistic for symmetric MA(2)uI'                        14.47
    (probability value — 7 degrees of freedom)                  (.047)

3. Test statistic for MA(l)"                                    14.64
    (probability value — 12 degrees of freedom)                 (.263)

4. Test statistic for stationary MA(2)11                         68.14
    (probability value — 21 degrees of freedom)                 (.000)


       NOTE: !iAgainst the alternative hypothesis of a nonstationary
               bivariate MA(2).
                                Table 9

          Summary of Estimated Bivariate MA(2) Representation

         of Experience—Adjusted Changes in Earnings and Hours:

                   Semi—Annual Data from SIME/DIME



1. Goodness—of—fit statistic — MA(2)                             74.98
    (probability value — 60 degrees of freedom)                 (.092)

2. Test statistic for symmetric tfA(2)L"                          5.90
    (probability value — 2 degrees of freedon)                   (.434)

3. Test statistic for MA(1)-                                     39.95
    (probability value — 24 degrees of freedom)                 (.022)

4. Test statistic for stationary MA(2)"                         100.70
    (probability value — 65 degrees of freedom)                 (.000)


  NOTE: VAgainst the alternative hypothesis of a nonstationary
          bivariate MA(2).
                                          Table 10

              Covariances of Changes in Log Earnings and Changes in Log Hours

                   with Potential Experience:    PSID,   NLS, and SIME/DIME

                              (standard errors in parentheses)



                                         PSID              NLE4"            SIME/DIME
                                  (annual changes)    (annual changes   (six—month changes)
                                                     over two—year gap)


1.   Average Covariance of Change       —.21                  —.03            —.13
       in Earnings with                 (.03)                 (.02)           (.04)
       Experience
                  (Cg)
2.   Average Covariance of              —.13                 —.09             —.05
       Change in Hours                  (.02)                 (.02)           (.04)
       with Experience
                       (C1)

3.   Implied Estimate of                1.52                —1.62              .56
       Substitution                     (.44)                 (.61)           (.47)
       Elasticity (ii)

4.   Goodness—of—fit Statistic          25.80                 40.96           20.78
     (probability value)                (.104)                (.000)          (.107)
     [degrees of freedom]                [18]                   [8]             [14]



NOTE:   1"Changes in earnings and hours between 1966 and 1967 are expressed at two—year
          rates for comparability with later changes.
                                          Table 11

               Implied Covariances of Experience —         Adjusted   Changes in
                      Earnings and Hours: Labor Supply Model



1. var (A log gft)                              (1+1)2 var (Azj) +            var
                                               +     2n(l+n) coy (Azj, jt + 202

2. var (A log hit)                                   var (Azi) +        var   (cit)
                                               + 21,2 coy                      202
                                                              (Azi, e) +

3. coy (A log         A log                     n(1+n) var (Azi) +            var    (cit
                                               +     n(l+2n) coy (Azj. 12       +     2paa
                  -              —
                      A                                2                               2
4.   coy (A log               log 11)           (l+ri) coy (Azj, Azii) —



5.   coy (A log       A log 1itl                     coy (Azj, Azit_1) —



6.   coy (A log           A
                              log hii),        n(l+n) coy (Azi, Azi1) —
                                                                                      uv0u0v
     coy (A log it' A log j1)

7. coy (A log         A log gj_)                (1+1)2 coy (Azt, Azi_2)



8. coy (A log hi A log h2)                           coy (Azj, Az.2)


9. coy (A log         A
                              log hi2),        n(l+n) coy (Azi, Az12)
     coy (A log hi A log


Notation: A log g and A log h refer to the residuals of the changes in
the logarithm of earnings and hours from regressions on potential experience.
     represents the variance of the measurement error of earnings, 2 repre-
sents the variance of the measurenent error of hours, and uy represents their
correlation.
                                                             Table 12

                                   Summary   of   Estimated Two—Factor Model of Changes in

                                         Earnings and Hours:     Annual Data from

                                   -          Perfect
                                       (Zero—Order
                                                     Foresight Model
                                                   Covariances Restricted)
                                                                                             uncertainty Model
                                                                                    (Zero—Order Covariances Unrestricted)

                                       Equally Weighted           Optimal           Equally Weighted          Optimal
                                       Minimum Distance      Minimum Distance       Minimum Distance     Minimum Distance
                                   -

                                             261.15              261.12                   62.26               61.38
1.   Goodness—of—Fit Statistic
                                             (.000)              (.000)                   (.026)              (.027)
     (probability value)
     [degrees of freedoml                      [681                   [68]                 [48]                 [48]

2. Relative Contribution of
     MA(2) Productivity      2/                1.14                   1.11                 1.09                 0.95
     Component to Earnings(p)—
                                              (0.09)                 (0.03)               (0.11)               (0.08)
     (standard error)

3. Implied Intertemporal
     Substitution Elasticity                   7.27                   8,83                11.30              —19.11
     (standard error)                         (4.81)                 (2.63)              (14.59)             (28.45)

4. Specification test of EWMT)
             estimate of                                              0.29                                      1.68
     vs.   ON!)              i
                                                                     (0.772)                                   (0.093)
     (probability value)


NOTES:     A"Model   is   fit to autocovariances of changes in earnings and hours up to second order.

                                                                 a    unit contribution to hours.
            VProductivity component is normalized to have
                   "C




                                                                Table 13

                                    Sumtnary   of   Estimated Two—Factor Model of Changes in

                                        Earnings       and Hours: Annual Data front NLSU


                                             Perfect Foresight Model
                                                                                            Uncertainty Model
                                       (Zero—Order Covariances Restricted)         (Zero—Order Covariances Unrestricted)
                                      Equally Weighted             Optimal         Equally Weighted         Optimal
                                      Minimum_Distance         Minimum Distance    Minimum Distance     Minimum Distance
1.   Goodness—of—Fit Statistic             124.13                   94.49               31.38                 31.21
     (probability value)                   (0.000)                 (0.000)             (0.026)               (0.027)
     [degrees of freedom]                       [281                 [28]                   [161               116]
2.   Relative Contribution of
     MA(2) Productivity
                              2/
     Component to Earnings(p)—-                 1.17                 7.71                   1.56               0.85
     (standard error)                          (0.12)               (2.79)                 (0.59)             (0.29)
3.   Implied Intertemporal
     Substitution Elasticity                    5.86                 0.15                   1.61              —6.80
     (standard error)                          (4.11)               (0.06)                 (1.53)            (13.45)
4.   Specification test of EWMD
     vs.   OMI)   estimate   of p              ———                         3/
                                                                    n/a—                   ———
                                                                                                               1.38
     (probability value)
                                                                                                              (0.167)

NOTES:     'Model is fit to autocovariances of changes in earnings and hours up to second           order.
           VProductivity component is normalized to have a unit contribution to hours.

           --Test statistic cannot he computed.
                                                            Table 14

                                            of   Estimated Two—Factor Model    of   Changes in
                                  Summary

                                 Earnings and Hours:      Semi—Annual Data from SIME/DINEII'


                                           Perfect Foresight Model                            Uncertainty Model
                                     (Zero—order Covariances Restricted)             (Zero—Order Covariances Unrestricted)

                                     Equally Weighted           Optimal               Equally Weighted        Optimal
                                     Minimum Distance       Minimum Distance         Minimum Distance     Minimum Distance

1.                                          229.36              227.19                     56.98              58.86
     Goodness—of—Fit Statistic
     (probability value)                    (0.000)             (0.000)                   (0.014)            (0.009)
                                              [52]                [52]                      1361               1361
     [degrees of freedom]

2. Relative Contribution of
     MA(2) Productivity      2/                                                             1.01               1.01
     Component to Earnings(p)—                0.98                1.06
     (standard error)                        (0.06)              (0.03)                    (0.07)             (0.03)

                                                                   .
3.   Implied Intertemporal
     Substitution Elasticity             —55.55                  16.67                    125.00             123.00
                                        (178.98)                 (7.23)                 (1140.63)           (438.74)
     (standard error)

4.   Specification test of EWMD
                                              ———                                           ———                0.002
     vs. OMD estimate of p                                        1.54
     (probability value)                                         (0.124)                                      (0.998)


NOTES:    !"Model   is   fit to autocovariances of changes in earnings and hours up to secondorder.

          FProductiviry component is normalized to have a unit contribution to hours.
