                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RACE AND THE POLITICS OF CLOSE ELECTIONS

                                                Tom Vogl

                                         Working Paper 18320
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18320


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




For their guidance throughout this project, I am grateful to David Cutler, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence
Katz. I also benefitted from helpful comments by Ruchir Agarwal, Alberto Alesina, Dan Fetter, Stefano
Giglio, Anh-Thu Ngo, Thomas Roemer, Heidi Williams, and seminar participants at Harvard, the Northeastern
Political Science Association Conference, and the NBER Summer Institute meetings on the Development
of the American Economy. I thank Joseph Gyourko and Fernando Ferreira for kindly sharing their
mayoral elections survey data and acknowledge funding from the Multidisciplinary Program on Inequality
and Social Policy and the Center for American Political Studies at Harvard University. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Race and the Politics of Close Elections
Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 18320
August 2012
JEL No. C18,D72,J00

                                                ABSTRACT

Elections between black and white candidates tend to involve close margins and high turnout. Using
a novel dataset of municipal vote returns during the rise of black mayors in U.S. cities, this paper establishes
new facts about turnout and competition in close interracial elections. In the South, but not the North,
close black victories were more likely than close black losses, involved higher turnout than close black
losses, and were more likely than close black losses to be followed by subsequent black victories.
These results are consistent with a model in which the historical exclusion of Southern blacks from
politics made them disproportionately sensitive to mobilization efforts by political elites, leading to
a black candidate advantage in close elections. The results contribute to a growing body of evidence
that the outcomes of reasonably close elections are not always random, which suggests that detailed
knowledge of the electoral context is a precondition to regression discontinuity analyses based on
vote shares.


Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1      Introduction

Economists and political scientists increasingly look to narrowly-decided elections for insights

into electoral competition and the causal effects of election outcomes. Some see close elections

and the incentives they create for elected officials as vital to representative democracy (McDon-

ald and Samples 2006). Others see them as valuable regression discontinuity designs that offer

plausibly exogenous variation in election outcomes (Lee, Moretti and Butler 2004; Lee 2008;

Ferreira and Gyourko 2009; Gerber and Hopkins 2011). Either point of view rests on the as-

sumption that no candidate can systematically swing close elections.

     However, a growing body of evidence on U.S. congressional elections suggests that can-

didates in positions of power can, in fact, manipulate the outcomes of relatively close elections.

Compared to losers of close congressional elections, winners tend to be affiliated with the in-

cumbent’s party, to be affiliated with the party in control of several state offices (governor,

secretary of state, and state legislature), and to be better financed (Snyder 2005; Caughey and

Sekhon 2010; Grimmer et al. 2011). These findings are consistent with theories in which politi-

cally or economically advantaged candidates have disproportionate control over the outcomes

of close elections, through either legal or illegal means. One set of theories emphasizes the

ability of advantaged candidates to out-campaign their opponents or to intimidate their oppo-

nents’ supporters in the lead-up to the election. Other theories involve ex post manipulation of

election outcomes by advantaged candidates, either through litigation and demands for re-

counts or through outright fraud. Only in the second set of theories do advantaged candidates

have precise control over elections decided by a handful of votes. But both ex ante and ex post

actions can lead to non-randomness in the outcomes of elections with victory margins of only a

few percent. This non-randomness may be of direct interest as a political phenomenon, but it

also challenges regression discontinuity designs based on vote shares, at least those using feasi-

ble bandwitdths. Such analyses identify the effects of election outcomes (e.g., the election of a

Democrat) by assuming that victory is randomly assigned in close elections (Lee 2008).

     This paper studies non-randomness and its implications in close elections between black

and white mayoral candidates in the United States. The election of African-Americans to top

                                                1
municipal posts in the final three decades of the twentieth century represented a transformation

of urban race relations in the U.S. Figure 1 exhibits the rise of black mayoral leadership over

time in cities with 1960 populations greater than 50,000. As of 1960, no U.S. city had ever expe-

rienced a black mayor, but of the 100 most populous cities in that year, 38 would elect African-

Americans by the year 2000. Interracial elections during this transition were heated, typically

involving high turnout and close margins. As such, the properties of close interracial contests

can shed light on the electoral politics facilitating the rise of black mayors. Unlike typical con-

gressional elections, however, candidates with connections to conventional sources of power

were not necessarily advantaged in close elections. Although white mayoral candidates enjoyed

greater financial resources and power, black candidates had their own asset: a large unregis-

tered, unincorporated electorate.

      Nowhere was this truer than in the South, where African-Americans had been excluded

from political life for much of the previous century.1 Until the mid-twentieth century, poll taxes,

literacy tests, and white supremacist organizations kept African-Americans from the ballot box.

Following the extension of the franchise during the Civil Rights Era, efforts to increase black

voter registration and turnout were crucial to black electoral success in the South (Campbell and

Feagin 1984, Rosenstone and Hansen 1993). Many whites were already accustomed to voting,

whereas the South had a large, untapped pool of potential black voters. Voter mobilization also

took place in the North, but black turnout did not depend as heavily on it. The low cost of

raising black turnout in the South had much potential to systematically swing the outcomes of

close elections. Because white voters voted for white candidates and black voters voted for

black candidates, a citizen’s (observable) turnout decision strongly predicted her (unobservable)

ballot choice inside the voting booth. This observability made voting verifiable and thus made

“manipulation” of the black vote share through strategic mobilization efforts more feasible.

      Thus, the close-election advantage was ambiguous during the rise of the nation’s black

mayors. On the one hand, white candidates had more financial resources and more ties to

traditional sources of power, especially in the South. On the other, black candidates may have


1Throughout the paper, I use the terms “Non-South” and “North” interchangeably. I use the U.S. Census
Bureau’s definition of the South. The main results of the paper also hold for alternative regional definitions.
                                                      2
faced lower mobilization costs, again especially in the South. In this paper, I study non-

randomness in the outcomes of competitive interracial elections using a new dataset consisting

of the name, race, party affiliation, and vote return of each of the top-two candidates in over

1,000 U.S. mayoral elections. No existing data source contains this information for the sample

frame of interest, which includes all elections during 1965-2000 in cities with a 1960 population

of at least 50,000 and a 1960 black population share of at least 4 percent. I draw on a variety of

historical sources to compile the dataset.

      I use these data to document several facts about interracial elections. As motivation, it be-

gins by showing that high turnout and closeness are important features of racial politics; in a

specification with city and year fixed effects, a black candidate raises the number of votes cast

and reduces the vote margin of victory.2 After establishing these facts, the paper continues with

the main empirical exercise, which estimates discontinuities in the density of the black vote

margin of victory as well as several other outcomes. The results indicate that in the South, black

candidates were disproportionately likely to win close elections. These close black victories

involved higher voter turnout than the closest observed black losses, and they were over 70

percentage points more likely to be followed by black victory in subsequent elections. Non-

Southern cities exhibited none of these patterns.3 The North-South differences do not appear to

be driven by regional differences in party politics. Data from neither region show evidence of

sorting in close mayoral elections between a white Democrat and a white Republican. Further-

more, a large political party incumbency advantage existed in white-vs.-white contests in the

North but not in the South.

      The results on interracial elections in the South present a challenge to RD designs based on

vote shares, but they by no means invalidate them as a rule. Rather, they send a basic message

that detailed knowledge of the electoral context is an essential ingredient to careful analyses of

election RD designs. Tests for discontinuities in the density of the running variable and other

baseline covariates shed some light on the validity of the RD design, but the details of electoral


2 As discussed below, the turnout response to black candidates has been documented by Washington (2006) for
U.S. congressional elections and by Lublin and Tate (1995) for a smaller sample of mayoral elections.
3 The estimates are large and statistically significant for the South; they are small and statistically insignificant

for the North. However, the North-South differences in the estimates are not always statistically significant.
                                                         3
competition provide a basis for theory, which motivates these tests and allows the researcher to

judge whether their results make sense.

      At face value, the results present a puzzle because the historical record reveals little evi-

dence of fraud or post-election lawsuits that systematically favored black candidates. But in the

discussion of the results, I outline a simple game of electoral competition that is consistent with

the results. In the game, citizens always prefer their own-race candidate but vary in their pro-

pensities to vote. Both white and black political campaigns can mobilize voters to increase

turnout, but they have access to different voter mobilization technologies. If black campaigns

have a larger capacity to mobilize voters, then black candidates will win a disproportionate

share of close elections, and—under the most likely class of distributional assumptions—close

black victories will involve higher turnout than the closest black losses. This game also suggests

several mechanisms through which mobilization asymmetries may increase the persistence of

black victories, whereby a single victory precedes an era of black representation. Not all of these

mechanisms involve the effects of incumbency; some persistence arises simply because candi-

dates who push past a voter mobilization threshold to win have superior time-invariant

characteristics. Thus, the mechanisms can explain why regression discontinuity estimates of the

racial incumbency advantage are largest in elections that exhibit the strongest evidence of

sorting around the victory threshold. Importantly, the game depends not on the level of electoral

participation by a racial group but rather on its sensitivity to the actions of elites.

      The paper adds to the literature on how threshold rules can induce endogenous sorting

among agents.4 As a consequence, the results serve as a caveat to the many RD analyses of

elections that use reasonably large bandwidths or rough global polynomial approximations of

the conditional expectation function (e.g., Lee 2008; Ferreira and Gyourko 2009; Gerber and

Hopkins 2010). Most relevant in this respect is Hopkins and McCabe’s (2011) recent analysis of

the effects of black mayors on city outcomes. Applying RD methods to a smaller, more recent

dataset than my own, Hopkins and McCabe find modest evidence that black mayors increase

the black share of the police force and no evidence of other effects. But in the presence of


4For non-political applications, see Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2007), Bubb and Kaufman (2009), and
Urquiola and Verhoogen (2009).
                                                   4
endogeous campaign intensity near the victory threshold, one should be cautious in

interpreting their estimates. In fact, consistent the results of this paper, Hopkins and McCabe

estimate in an appendix that close black victories are more likely to take place in the South than

are close black losses (p = 0.06).

      Relative to the existing literature on non-randomness in close congressional elections

(Snyder 2005; Caughey and Sekhon 2010; Grimmer et al. 2011), this paper has both weaknesses

and contributions. The paper is limited by the relative scarcity of interracial elections, which

necessitates the use of bandwidths larger than those used in the literature on congressional

elections. But many existing election RD analyses use large bandwidths (or all of the data),

making themselves susceptible to sorting of the type uncovered here. On a more constructive

note, the paper differs from the literature on congressional elections in demostrating that a close

election advantage does not always befall the candidate with greater political clout or economic

resources. Black candidates in the South were disadvantaged in many respects, yet they won a

disproportionate share of close elections, perhaps because the legacy of black political exclusion

gave rise to an electorate highly responsive to mobilization efforts. In electoral contexts with

well-defined groups of citizens who share preferences over candidates, voter mobilization may

be a key margin for political competition. In this sense, this analysis of close elections contrib-

utes to a growing literature that draws attention to the electoral strategy of increasing turnout

among supporters, rather than converting members of the opposition. 5 Non-randomness in

competitive elections may threaten the validity of RD designs based on vote shares, but it is of

considerable social scientific interest in its own right.


2       Interracial Elections Dataset

To study elections between black and white mayoral candidates, I collected data on the name,

race, party affiliation, and vote return of each of the top-two candidates in urban mayoral elec-

tions between 1965 and 2000.6 The sample universe includes all elections during this period in


5 On electoral competition among groups with common preferences, see Uhlaner (1989); Morton (1991);
Shachar and Nalebuff (1999); Cox (2009); and Gans-Morse, Mazzuca, and Nichter (2009).
6 The top-two candidates need not be a Democrat and a Republican. Many municipal elections are non-partisan.


                                                     5
cities with 1960 populations that were at least 50,000 and 4 percent black. A considerable por-

tion of the data on candidate names, party affiliations, and votes (but not race) comes from

Ferreira and Gyourko (2009), who mailed a survey to the election office of every U.S. city with a

population greater than 25,000 that directly elects its mayor. However, their survey had some

notable non-respondents, including Chicago, Cleveland, New Orleans, and Washington, DC, all

of which have had prominent interracial mayoral elections. Apart from the non-respondents,

many other cities returned incomplete election histories in their survey responses. In

consequence, I supplement Ferreira and Gyourko’s survey data with additional election returns

from a wide array of sources, including newspaper archives, elections bureaus, and websites.7

The Data Appendix lists the sources.

      After collecting the basic election returns, I sought to identify each candidate’s race.

Because this research concerns itself with voting patterns, I focus on the reporting of candidates’

races by the newsmedia and advocacy organizations. The candidate race data come from a

variety of sources, primarily the National Roster of Black Elected Officials, newspaper archives,

and government and political websites. In many cases, photographs of the candidates were

available, but photographs were rarely the sole information source on race.

      This data collection effort resulted in a dataset of 1030 elections with racial identification

of both candidates.8 The elections include 318 black candidates and 1742 non-black candidates.

Because some of the 318 black candidates were either unopposed or some faced other black

candidates, just 221 of the elections were interracial. Of these 221, 100 election returns derive

from the Ferreira and Gyourko dataset, with the remaining 121 from my own data collection.

The coding of candidate race is in all cases original.

      Table 1 presents summary statistics for the 77 cities with elections in the interracial elec-

tions sample (column [4]) and compares them with summary statistics for several larger

samples. Column (1) includes all cities with 1960 population greater than 50,000; column (2)



7 The main online source was OurCampaigns.com, which allows users to post election results for a many
jurisdictions. Most posts provide detailed newspaper or election bureau citations. I verified a random subset of
the citations by checking the sources cited and never encountered an error. I only use election returns that are
properly cited.
8 In 33 elections, one candidate’s race could not be determined.


                                                       6
restricts to cities above the minimum black population share for inclusion in the elections sam-

ple; column (3) considers all cities with vote count and candidate race data (including cities

without interracial elections). Cities in the elections samples tend to have larger populations

than those in the sample frame, a result that is likely linked to the greater online availability of

elections information for larger cities. Additionally, compared to the sample frame, both the

overall elections sample and the interracial elections sample have greater mean black popula-

tion shares and larger fractions with mayor-council government. 9 Cities in the interracial

elections sample averaged three interracial elections and four black candidates during 1965-

2000. 70 percent experienced a black mayor by the year 2000. Appendix Figure 1 exhibits the

geographic distribution of cities with interracial elections. The cities are concentrated in the

mid-Atlantic, the South, and the Rust Belt.


3       Turnout and Closeness in Interracial Elections

To motivate the main empirical exercise, which focuses on close interracial elections, this section

aims to set out basic facts about how the presence of opposite race candidates affects turnout

and closeness in mayoral elections. An existing literature in economics and political science

suggests that turnout soars during interracial elections. Washington (2006) estimates that both

white and black turnout increase by 2-3 percentage points in Congressional elections with black

candidates; Lublin and Tate (1995) find similar evidence in a small sample of mayoral elections.

The rise in turnout may result from an increase in voter interest when candidates differ in race,

and this increased interest may in turn make elections more competetive.

      Table 2 uses a difference-in-difference specification to examine how voter turnout and the

margin of victory change during black-vs.-white matchups:


                                      1                   2                                                (1)




9Data on city demographic and economic characteristics are from the City Data Books (U.S. Census Bureau).
Data on municipal institutions and county voting in the 1960 presidential election (not reported in Table 1 but
used as a covariate in later tables) are from the Governmental Units Analysis Dataset (Aiken and Alford 1998).
                                                      7
where             is either the turnout rate or the margin of victory,                 is an indicator for

an interracial election, and            is an indicator for a black-vs.-black election. In the specifica-

tion, c indexes city, and t indexes year, so that             and     are year and city fixed effects,

respectively. The turnout rate is defined as the sum of the top-two candidates’ vote receipts

divided by the city’s population (linearly interpolated between census years). The margin of

victory is defined as the absolute value of the difference of the top-two candidates vote receipts,

divided by their sum. The table only reports the coefficients on                     ; the coefficients on

         are too imprecisely estimated to be informative.

      Turnout and closeness increase in interracial elections. As column (1) reveals, in both the

North and the South, black-vs.-white matchups raise turnout by roughly 3.5 percentage points.

Because turnout rates are on average lower in the South than elsewhere in the country, this

effect is proportionally larger in the South, where it is 16 percent of mean turnout. An examina-

tion of voter turnout by race would be interesting, but data by race are not available.10 Column

(2) shows that the margin of victory tends to decrease during black-vs.-white matchups. The

coefficients for both the North and the South are negative, but only for the North and the

pooled sample are they statistically significant. This difference may reflect the endogenous

response of potential black candidates to (non-black) political machines in Northern cities. The

supply of black candidates may have risen only when political machines were weak and ex-

pected vote margins were small. Regardless of this (imprecisely estimated) regional difference,

at a broad level, the results suggest that interracial elections draw more voters and lead to closer

margins than one would predict without information on the racial identities of the candidates.


4       Discontinuities in Interracial Elections

Interracial elections tend to be close, high-turnout affairs, but the relative performance of black

and white candidates in these contests remains unstudied. This section assesses the extent of

non-randomness in the outcomes of close interracial elections by analyzing how several varia-

bles change discontinuously at the vote threshold for black victory. I first focus on

10In congressional elections, Washington (2006) finds that black candidates raise black and white turnout by
similar proportions, which advantages the white candidate because of whites have a larger population share.
                                                     8
discontinuities in contemporaneous election outcomes, which violate standard assumptions for

RD designs based on vote shares. I then estimate discontinuities in future outcomes, as is com-

monplace in RD analyses, and consider the relation of these ex post discontinuities to the ex ante

discontinuities in the first part of the section.

4.1     Methods

I use two regression discontinuity techniques, both based on local linear estimation. Through-

out, the running variable is the relative margin of victory between the top-two candidates when

one candidate is black and the other non-black. I define the black vote margin as the black

candidate’s votes minus the white candidate’s votes, divided by their sum. For analyses of

contemporaneous turnout and future election outcomes, I use a standard local linear regression

discontinuity estimator. To estimate discontinuities in the density of the running variable, I use

the method developed by McCrary (2008), which involves estimating a finely-gridded histo-

gram and then using local linear regression to smooth the histogram, allowing for a

discontinuity at the victory threshold.11 McCrary’s original estimand is the discontinuity in the

logarithm of the density function, but to allow for consistent estimation when the density ap-

proaches zero near the victory threshold, I estimate the discontinuity in the level of the density.

      Both estimation techniques can be summarized using the following specification, for city c

in election year t:


                                            1                                                          (2)


where      is the black vote margin and f       is a flexible function of the black vote margin (appro-

ximated using local linear regression). The variable          is either an outcome (current turnout,

future turnout, the probability of future black victory) or the density of the running variable. The

The coefficient represents the discontinuous change in the conditional expectation of          when the

black vote margin crosses zero.

      A primary issue in implementing local linear methods is the appropriate choice of band-

width. For my main results, I use a bandwidth of 0.2, which is slightly smaller than the

 McCrary’s (2008) local linear density estimator for RD settings is an application of methods developed by
11

Cheng, Fan, and Marron (1997).
                                                    9
bandwidths chosen by McCrary’s (2008) bandwidth selection procedure for density discontinui-

ty estimation and Imbens and Kalyanaraman’s (2009) bandwidth selection procedure for

regression discontinuity estimation.12 Section 4.5 assesses the robustness of the results to alter-

native bandwidths.

      For the local linear regression analyses, standard errors are clustered at the city-decade

level.13 The density discontinuity standard errors are not clustered because analytic formulas for

clustered standard errors do not exist; unreported bootstrap results suggest that the standard

errors are not biased downward.14 To mitigate small-sample bias in inference, I test hypotheses

using critical values from a t-distribution with degrees of freedom set to the number of clusters

minus two (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008).15 I present specifications with and without pre-

election covariates, including the lagged dependent variable. In graphical analyses, I use the

Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 0.1 to enhance visual smoothness while allowing for

flexibility in the regression function estimator.

4.2     Discontinuities in the Vote Margin Density

Figure 2 displays nonparametric density estimates of the black vote margin, allowing for a

discontinuity at zero. The Southern data exhibit a stark drop in the density just below zero,

suggesting precise manipulation of the running variable. The Northern data, while still showing

a moderate increase in the density at zero, are nowhere near as stark.



12 I use the triangle and uniform kernels, respectively, for the local linear density smoother and the local linear
regression smoother. McCrary (2009) derives asymptotics for the density estimator with the triangle kernel,
which is optimal for boundary estimation. However, Lee and Lemieux (2010) recommend the uniform kernel
for the local linear estimator due to its transparency. The optimal bandwidth calculations are for the correct
kernels.
13 In similar settings, Lee (2008) and Ferreira and Gyourko (2009) also cluster standard errors at the jurisdiction-

decade level. One could argue that jurisdiction-level clustering is more attractive, but the standard errors for
the models in this paper are extremely similar under the two clustering schemes. The jurisdiction-decade
clustered standard errors have the advantage of using fewer degrees of freedom.
14 To get a sense of whether serial correlation within cities biases the unclustered analytic standard errors, I

block-bootstrapped the density discontinuity estimator and found that the resulting standard errors were
smaller than the analytic standard errors. However, I have not verified the small-sample properties of the
bootstrapped density discontinuity estimator, so I do not report the results here.
15 The standard errors in the local linear regression results are similar when adjusted by bias-reduced lineariza-

tion (BRL) to improve small sample performance (Bell and McCaffrey 2002). But in some specifications, the
BRL procedure is not possible because a key matrix is not full rank, a well-known problem with this method.
                                                        10
      Formal tests in Table 3 confirm this difference. At 1.83 (SE = 0.87), the discontinuity in the

level of the density function of the South is larger and far more statistically significant than that

of the Non-South, where the discontinuity is 0.85 and is smaller than its standard error. Narrow

black losses were extremely rare in the South. Only one Southern election resulted in a black

loss by a margin of less than 5 percent; each neighboring 5 percent bin has seven elections.

While this dip may be due to sampling error, the probability it occurred randomly is roughly

3.5 percent (the p-value from a two-tailed test).16

      A discontinuity in the black vote margin of victory is surprising in a democratic setting

with a secret ballot. The fact that it favors African-Americans in the South makes the discontinu-

ity even more unexpected, given the historical disempowerment of Southern blacks. In light of

the moderately large bandwidth, the observed sorting around the black victory threshold in the

South could be the result of either ex ante or ex post manipulation of the black vote share.

4.3     Discontinuities in Turnout

Patterns in voter turnout can shed some light on whether ex ante or ex post actions lead to the

sorting of black and white candidates in close elections. If the density discontinuity is due to

recounts or lawsuits, then the voter turnout rate should not differ substantially between close

black victories and close black losses; these ex post actions primarily manipulate the distribution

of a given number of votes. On the other hand, if ex ante black voter mobilization efforts play a

role in the density discontinuity, then voter turnout will likely be higher in close black victories

than in close black losses. Specific forms of electoral fraud—for example, ballot stuffing and

caging (voter suppression)—may also lead to a discontinuity in turnout. But given the South’s

history of institutionalized discrimination against African-Americans, one would expect these

tactics to favor white candidates rather than black. In that case, white candidates would win a

disproportionate share of close elections, and close black losses would involve higher turnout

than close black victories.

      Table 4 reports discontinuities in voter turnout. In light of the regional differences in the

vote margin density, the table reports results separately for the South and Non-South. Addi-

16Note, however, that while the Southern discontinuity is statistically significant, its difference from the North-
ern discontinuity is not.
                                                        11
tionally, to give a sense of the dynamics of voter turnout before, during and after a close elec-

tion, the table reports discontinuities in past, current, and future turnout. Under standard RD

assumptions, past and current voter turnout should be continuous at the black victory thresh-

old. For comparability, the table focuses on a balanced panel (i.e., observations with turnout

data for the previous, current, and next elections), but the results are similar for alternative

samples. For each region, the top line reports discontinuities estimated exactly as in equation

(1). For current and future turnout, the second line controls for the lagged turnout rate, and the

third line adds a vector of pre-election control variables (listed in the notes to the table).

     The results from the South show strong evidence of a discontinuity in contemporaneous

turnout (column [2]), such that turnout is higher in close black victories than in close black

losses. Without controlling for any covariates, the discontinuity is 18 percentage points, but

because of a smaller, statistically insignificant discontinuity in lagged turnout (column [1]), the

point estimate shrinks to 10-12 percentage points in the specifications with covariates. The

covariate-adjusted estimates remain significant at the 5 percent level, however, suggesting that

the discontinuity in contemporaneous turnout is not attributable to fixed differences in turnout

across cities. Furthermore, turnout remains discontinuously higher in next election; following a

close black victory, turnout is 17-24 percentage points higher than following a close black loss (p

< 0.01). In the South, close black victories are associated with persistent surges in turnout. In the

Northern data, no discontinuities are evident for past, current, or future voter turnout.

     Figure 3 shows the discontinuity in contemporaneous turnout graphically. The figure

shows locally smoothed regressions as well as local means for vote margin bins of width 0.1.

The local means are plotted as circles, with the size of the circle proportional to the number of

observations in the bin. Because the voter turnout data are noisy, and because turnout rates are

persistent (with a serial correlation of 0.7), the figure uses residuals from a regression of current

turnout on lagged turnout. Consistent with the results in Table 4, the figure shows a positive

discontinuity in the South but not the North. These patterns are also apparent in analogous

graphs of the unadjusted turnout data, shown in Appendix Figure 2, Panel A. Meanwhile,

Appendix Figure 2, Panel B, demonstrates that lagged turnout is continuous at the victory

threshold in both regions. One other noteworthy pattern in Figure 3 is the correlation between

                                                  12
(ex post) closeness and turnout, both inside and outside the South. A body of research in eco-

nomics and political science (e.g., Cox and Munger 1989; Shachar and Nalebuff 1999) has

documented this relationship in a wide range of electoral settings.

4.4    Discontinuities in the Probability of Black Victory

The persistence of the turnout discontinuity in the South suggests that black prospects in future

elections may rise following a pivotal victory. This result would have key implications for

estimation of the incumbency advantage using RD methods. Lee (2008) and Ferreira and

Gyourko (2009), among others, use an RD design based on vote shares to estimate the political

party incumbency advantage in the U.S. house and in U.S. cities, respectively. In principle, one

could use a similar approach to estimate the racial incumbency advantage in the current da-

taset, but the sorting of black and white candidates around the victory threshold threatens a

causal interpretation. A discontinuity in the probability of a future black victory would indicate

that close black victories are persistent, but not necessarily that they cause a black advantage in

future elections.

      Figure 4 graphs the probability of a black victory in the next election against the black vote

margin in the current election. Panel A indicates that black electoral success is strongly persis-

tent in Southern cities. After a black loss by a margin of 10 percent or less, a city has zero

probability of electing a black mayor in the next election; after a black victory by a margin of 10

percent or less, the probability of electing a black mayor in the next election rises to well over 60

percent. This is not true outside the South (Panel B), where the data show only a minor discon-

tinuity in the future prospects of black candidates.

      Table 5 estimates the magnitudes of these patterns. The setup follows that of Table 4, with

estimates for lagged black victory in column (1) and for future black victory in column (2). (The

discontinuity in the probability of current black victory is 1 by construction.) Whether or not the

regression controls for lagged black victory and other pre-election covariates, the Southern

discontinuity in the probability of future black victory is statistically significant and large, over

three-quarters. At the same time, the discontinuity in the probability of lagged black victory in

the South is insignificantly negative. This result suggests a substantial change in a city’s politics


                                                 13
around the time of a close black victory. The extent to which this represents the causal effect of

an African-American ascending to the mayor’s office is unclear.

      Interestingly, data from outside the South reveal no large discontinuities in the probability

of past or future black victory. As in previous tables, Column (1) shows zero sorting on pre-

election outcomes. In column (2), the estimated discontinuities in the likelihood of future black

victory are positive but small: less than 0.2 and smaller than their standard errors.

4.5    Bandwidth Sensitivity

Due to the small number of mayoral elections between black and white candidates, the preced-

ing results are all based on fairly large bandwidths of 0.2. Figure 5 assess the sensitivity of the

results for the vote margin density, current turnout, future turnout, and future black victory to

changes in bandwidth. For the South and Non-South separately, the figure presents graphs of

the discontinuities and associated t-statistics for bandwidths from 0.10 to 0.25. The plots for

turnout and future black victory show estimates that do and do not control for the lagged de-

pendent variable.

      In both regions, the results are remarkably robust to bandwidth perturbations. The esti-

mated discontinuities and associated t-statistics in the Non-South are consistently small, while

those in the South are much larger. In the South, the t-statistics rarely fall below 2, and the point

estimates are fairly constant across bandwidths, at least for the specifications that control for the

lagged dependent variable. Figure 5 does have one unappealing feature: estimated discontinui-

ties in the probability of future black victory that (counterfactually) exceed 1, often

substantially. These estimates are due to the use of local linear regression, which admits pre-

dicted probabilities outside [0,1], on sparse data. However, these magnitudes are largely a

feature of the unadjusted estimates, and the estimates are quite consistent for all bandwidths

greater than 0.15. Certainly, all bandwidths lead to strongly significant discontinuities.

4.6    Are the Discontinuities Driven by Race or Party?

The preceding results suggest regional differences in racial politics, but they also allow another

explanation. More than three-quarters of black candidates were Democrats, so perhaps the

results reflect regional differences in party politics. To assess this alternative explanation, Table

                                                 14
6 examines elections between white Democrats and white Republicans, now using the Demo-

cratic vote margin of victory as the running variable. The analysis sample includes all such

elections in the overall elections dataset (column [3] in Table 1).

      If party politics account for the main results, then one would expect to find large disconti-

nuities in the vote margin density, turnout, and the probability of future democratic victory in

the South but not the North. In Table 6, the data reveal no such pattern. Neither region exhibits

a discontinuity in the two contemporaneous election outcomes the table considers: the vote

margin density and the turnout rate. Moreover, the data indicate a large, statistically significant

political party incumbency advantage in the North but not the South. The North-South differ-

ence in the political party incumbency advantage is exactly opposite the regional difference in

black electoral persistence.

      Apart from the possibility of confounding party and race, another ambiguity arises in the

results over whether region is a proxy for demographic composition. Southern cities in the

sample have larger black population shares than Non-Southern cities. As a result, the North-

South differences may be driven by political differences between cities with large and small

black populations, rather than by a regional effect per se. Due to sample size constraints, sub-

sample analyses of cities with large black population shares yield extremely imprecise results,

so I do not report them here. However, results for cities with black population shares of at least

40 percent in the last population census are qualitatively similar to the main paper’s findings,

with large, positive discontinuities in the vote margin density, turnout, and black election

prospects in the South but not the North.17


5       Discussion

The analyses in Section 4 lay out several stark facts. In the South, close black victories were

more likely than close black losses, involved higher turnout than close black losses, and were




17An examination of majority black cities was not possible because sample sizes became too small. In the
subsamples with greater than 40 percent black population shares, Northern and Southern cities had similar
average black population shares: 52 and 54 percent, respectively.
                                                   15
more likely than close black losses to be followed by high-turnout elections and black victories.

Data from cities outside the South display none of these patterns.

      Because black candidates won a disproportionate number of close elections in the South,

black political mobilization is likely to feature prominently in any relevant model. If

coordinated political action by whites were important, then white candidates would win most

close elections. In this regard, two features of the electoral environment are key: the fixed nature

of voters’ preferences over candidates and the observability of the turnout decision. These

features made voter organization by political elites more feasible. Elites could verify citizens’

turnout decisions and could predict their voting decisions once inside the voting booth. In

conceptualizing the strategies of electoral competition, Cox (2009) calls attention to persuasion,

which seeks to influence voters’ preferences over candidates; mobilization, which seeks to affect

whether citizens vote; and coordination, which sets the number and identities of candidates.

Persuasion has received the most attention in models of electoral competition, but it was not the

most important strategy in black mayoral campaigns.

      Rather, historians and political scientists contend that voter mobilization by black political

elites played an important role in black mayoral victories, as in other realms of racial politics.

Voter registration and canvassing efforts were an integral part of successful black campaigns. So

too were calls to a collective black consciousness. In a well-known book, Verba, Nie, and Kim

(1978) argue: “It does not require any explicit group-based process of mobilization for upper-

status citizens to take a disproportionate role in political life.... Lower-status groups, in contrast,

need a group-based process of political mobilization if they are to catch up to upper-status

groups in terms of political activity” (p. 14). Supporting this point of view, Verba and Nie (1972)

Murray and Vedlitz (1977), Rosenstone and Hansen (1993), and Leighly (2001) describe the

remarkable black political mobilization that took place in the United States during and after the

Civil Rights Movement.18 In a potential challenge to the role of black mobilization in explaining

my results, Rosenstone and Hansen note that black mobilization and turnout began to dissipate

in presidential elections starting in the 1970s, after the Civil Rights Movement. However, they


18Also see Nelson and Meranto’s (1977) case studies of political mobilization by black mayoral candidates in
three Midwestern cities.
                                                    16
argue that this decline was in part due to the shifting focus of black political elites to local elec-

tions and primaries with black candidates. Their historical analysis is entirely consistent with

black voter mobilization in mayoral elections.19

      Although these efforts took place to some degree in Northern cities, they were especially

important and intense in the South. The two decades following 1950 saw a revolution in voting

rights. Figure 6, highlights the magnitude of this extension of the franchise. In the top panel,

which presents data on Southern black registration from the Voter Education Project, the num-

ber of registered African-Americans in the former Confederate states rose from roughly 150,000

(3 percent of the voting-age population) in 1940 to nearly six million (64 percent) by 1990. Abet-

ted by voter registration drives and a series of progressive Supreme Court decisions, the black

voter registration rate rose gradually to one quarter by 1960. It then more than doubled over the

next decade, as the Voting Rights Act of 1965 took hold, and registrars redoubled their efforts

(Timpone 1995). These efforts have continued, punctuated by registration drives accompanying

major political campaigns. For instance, the surge in registration associated with African-

American Jesse Jackson’s 1984 run for president is readily apparent in Figure 6, Panel A. As in

Jackson’s case, the prospects of black mayoral candidates in the South hinged upon mobilizing

this large group of new eligible voters. Official registration data by race are not available for

comparison in the North, but the bottom panel of Figure 6 uses data from the American Nation-

al Elections Study to plot the ratio of the black voter registration rate to the white voter

registration rate, inside and outside the South.20 In the twenty years starting in 1952, the black

reported registration rate in the South rose from one quarter of the white registration rate to

parity. Blacks in the Non-South also saw a slight relative increase in reported voter registration,

but this was nowhere near the magnitude of the racial convergence in the South.

      Based on this regional difference in the importance of voter mobilization, Section 5.1

demonstrates how a simple game of electoral competition with voter mobilization can explain



19 In fact, although whites are substantially more likely than blacks to participate in presidential elections, the
same proportions of whites and blacks reported “always” participating in local elections (Leighley 2001, using
data from the 1996 Current Population Survey).
20 Panels A and B of Figure 6 are not directly comparable because the ANES definition of the U.S. South in-

cludes more than the former Confederate states.
                                                        17
the paper’s main findings. Section 5.2 then summarizes alternative explanations for the sorting

of Southern candidates in close interracial elections, arguing that none of these alternatives fit

the data as succesfully as the mobilization game.

5.1           A Voter Mobilization Game

In the game, the environment consists of two competing groups, i                {b,w}, each of which fields

one candidate. Citizens always prefer their own-group candidate but vary in their propensities

to vote. Each candidate is endowed with a quality             , drawn from a continuous (group-specific)

distribution.          is the fraction of group i citizens that turn out to vote for the candidate in the

absence of mobilization efforts. The baseline margin of support for black candidates is therefore

                   , where    is the population share of group i. Candidates have access to a group-

specific mobilization technology            , which increases the group i turnout rate by              at cost

             . In the lead-up to the election, candidates alternate in (irreversibly) increasing     in multi-

ples of , the smallest unit of money, until neither wishes to make further changes.21 At that

point, the election takes place, and the winner receives benefit           from a term in office. Note that

no candidate will invest more than            in voter mobilization; higher investment always results in

negative payoffs. Group i’s mobilization capacity is therefore                     ), where        is the larg-

est integer that is weakly smaller than .

         The subgame perfect equilibrium to this game depends on the difference between                   and

      . If               , then black candidates hold an absolute mobilization advantage. This condi-
tion is consistent with the idea that the historical exclusion of African-Americans from the

political process makes them considerably more sensitive to mobilization efforts than whites

(Verba and Nie 1972; Nelson and Meranto 1977; Verba, Nie, and Kim 1978). The equilibrium

under this condition is determined by the baseline black margin of support,                            . If this

margin is less than                        , neither candidate invests in mobilization, and the white

candidate wins. The white candidate holds the baseline advantage and can always outmobilize

the black candidate while still receiving positive payoffs. At every stage of bidding, the white


21This sequential bidding process is similar to the vote buying model of Dekel, Jackson, and Wolinsky (2008).
The sequential formulation serves mainly to guarantee that players use pure strategies. With simultaneous
play, equilibrium outcomes in the unique pure-strategy Nash equilibrium would be identical.
                                                        18
candidate’s strategy is to mobilize just enough voters than is necessary to win, and so the black

candidate finds it optimal not to invest in mobilization at all. The equilibrium strategies are

analogous when the baseline margin of support for the black candidate is greater than zero; the

black candidate holds the baseline advantage and can always outmobilize the white candidate

while still receiving positive payoffs. When the baseline margin is between                                 and

zero, the white candidate holds the baseline turnout advantage but cannot outmobilize her

opponent. The black candidate invests to raise her group’s turnout by just enough to win, and

no further bidding occurs.
      The subgame perfect equilibria for                     are straightforward extensions of this base-

line case. A white absolute mobilization advantage (                      ) has the exact opposite predic-
tions of a black advantage. If the baseline margin of black support is greater than                             ,

the black candidate wins; otherwise, the white candidate wins.

      When the two competing groups can mobilize equal numbers of voters to the polls

(                ), the game simplifies. Whenever a candidate holds the baseline turnout ad-

vantage, she can always outmobilize her opponent while still expecting positive net payoffs. By

backwards induction, neither side will mount a costly mobilization campaign. Note that this

framework focuses on specific costly mobilization activities such as registration campaigns, so

the equilibrium behavior does not rule out campaigning altogether.

      This simple static game has two main predictions if black candidates hold an absolute

mobilization advantage. First, as —the smallest amount of money—goes to zero, the density of

the ex post black vote margin exhibits a positive discontinuity at zero. Second, the closest black

victories involve mobilized electorates, whereas the closest black losses do not. If baseline turn-

out is positively correlated with the baseline closeness of an election, as is widely thought to be

true (Cox and Munger 1989; Shachar and Nalebuff 1999), mobilization leads to a discrete in-

crease in voter turnout when the black vote margin crosses zero. 22 The game’s lack of

uncertainty is vital to these predictions. In the presence of bounded uncertainty over the base-

line margin of black support, the discontinuity predictions would no longer be as sharp, but the

22Turnout increases discretely between the closest observed loss and victory if
                                                                    . This condition holds if baseline turnout is
positively correlated with baseline closeness or if black turnout varies against fixed white turnout.
                                                       19
partitioning of the state space would be similar, as would the overall implications for relatively

close black victories and losses. Given the necessarily large bandwidths in the empirical work,

the assumption of certainty provides a useful, parsimonious approximation with testable impli-

cations. In simulations of a similar game of party competition, Grimmer et al. (2010)

demonstrate that RD analyses with vote margin bandwidths of less than 5 percent show sorting.

         The one-period setup precludes analysis of dynamic phenomena, but the data suggest that

sorting may contribute to the persistence of close black victories. To gain insights into dynam-

ics, one could easily include multiple elections, with candidates maximizing the discounted sum

of expected benefits. In such a model, each election pits the incumbent mayor against a new

opponent from the other group. The winner then goes on to experience a random popularity

shock while in office, and the sequence repeats. This alternative setup leads to similar equilibri-

um behavior but also sheds light on the dynamic effects of mobilization asymmetries.

         Three potential mechanisms are especially natural for describing black mayoral persis-

tence in this setting. The first arises mechanically because candidate types sort around the

victory threshold. Because black candidates with baseline margins of support over a range of

negative values still win, black incumbents who barely won in the last election will be shielded

from small to moderate negative popularity shocks. 23 A second reason is the persistence of

increases in voter registration (a stock). A third, due to Bobo and Gilliam (1990), is that a black

leader’s victory raises African-Americans’ sense of political efficacy, leading to greater black

political participation. Thus emerges a self-reinforcing, virtuous cycle, with victory leading to

greater participation, which in turn enhances the chance of future victory. Given the unfamiliar-

ity of Southern blacks to the process of voting, this hypothesis is especially well suited for

describing racial politics in the South. The historical exclusion of African-Americans from the

voting process in the South lies at the heart of all three theories. The persistence of close black

victories may also result from white learning about the quality of black executives (Hajnal 2001,

2006) or white flight (Glaeser and Shleifer 2002), although these explanations are less related to

the mobilization of black voters.



23   This is akin to a theory of machine politics, in which black victory establishes a black political machine.
                                                           20
5.2        Alterative Explanations

Compared to other potential mechanisms, the mobilization game provides a compelling expla-

nation for the results. The fact that candidates from a disadvantaged group held an advantage in

close elections is evidence against alternative explanations.

         This fact implies, for example, that electoral fraud is unlikely to account for the results;

most theories of electoral fraud predict cheating by those who hold power. The history of the

pre-Civil Rights South is rife with examples of electoral fraud at the expense of African-

Americans, rather than in their favor (Kousser 1974). A careful inspection of the data, news

archives, and historical literature reveals no evidence of ballot manipulation in the post-1960

South, but even if such fraud did occur, it would have likely continued to benefit whites.24 Most

close elections in the South preceded local black political ascendance, so white political elites

still controlled electoral institutions; of Southern elections decided by margins of less than 5

percent, three-quarters occurred before the city had experienced a black mayor. But in spite of

this barrier, black candidates still won a disproportionate share of close elections, and their close

victories involved high turnout. If ballot stuffing took place, then white candidates would have

probably won most close elections, and their victories would have been associated with an

increase in votes. These patterns would have also arisen if ex ante strategic actions by white

candidates were behind the sorting of candidates in close elections.

         The main remaining alternative explanation is that the results reflect ex post legal actions,

rather than ex ante mobilization. But the historical record does not suggest that black candidates

were more likely than white candidates to request recounts (or mount lawsuits). Nor does it

suggest that recounts (or lawsuits) systematically reversed election outcomes in favor of black

candidates. Ex ante strategic behavior is therefore much more likely to be responsible for the

observed non-randomness in close election outcomes.


6          Conclusions

Close interracial elections played a key role in the emergence of a black elite in municipal poli-


24   See, e.g., Biles (1992), Browning, Marshall, and Tabb (1990), Colburn and Adler (2001), and Hajnal (2006).
                                                          21
tics. This paper documents several unexpected properties of these contests, which have implica-

tions both for our understanding of racial politics and for the reliability of regression

discontinuity designs based on vote shares. In the South, where African-Americans were new to

political participation, close black victories were substantially more likely than close black

losses, they involved higher turnout than close black losses, and they were more likely to be

followed by subsequent black victories. None of these patterns were evident outside the South,

where African-Americans, though historically persecuted, had access to the ballot and partici-

pated in political life at moderate levels. The Southern results are broadly consistent with a

model of mobilization politics in which white candidates and black candidates have differing

capacities to mobilize voters.

     These findings provide insights into electoral politics and RD designs. On the one hand,

they suggest an important role for turnout manipulation—here called “mobilization”— when

the observable characteristics of voters strongly predict their choices once inside the voting

booth. They also point to a distinct politics that arises when a group previously excluded from

public life gains new rights; this distinct politics reverses the close election advantage that

usually befalls candidates with greater economic resources and strong connections with politi-

cal institutions (Snyder 2005; Caughey and Sekhon 2010; Grimmer et al. 2011). On the other

hand, the findings call attention to the possibility of endogenous sorting around the victory

threshold in elections, especially if sample size limitations necessitate the use of large band-

widths for nonparametric RD estimation or the use of global polynomial approximations of the

conditional expectation function. The results of standard validity tests here indicate threats to

the assumptions of the RD design, but interpretation of these results requires an understanding

of electoral competition. As a consequence, in assessing the validity of an RD design based on

vote shares, a researcher would benefit from in-depth knowledge of the politics specific to the

electoral context under study. This implication is not novel, but the results here serve as a useful

reminder on the combined value of validity tests and institutional knowledge in the analysis of

natural experiments.




                                                22
References
Aiken, Michael and Robert Alford 1998. “Governmental Units Analysis Data [Computer file].”
   Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. 2007. “A Unified Framework for
   Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods.” Journal of Political Economy 115(4):
   588-638.
Bell, Robert M. and Daniel F. McCaffrey. 2002. “Bias Reduction in Standard Errors for Linear
    Regression with Multistage Samples.” Survey Methodology 28(2): 169-179.
Biles, Roger. 1992. “Black Mayors: A Historical Assessment.” Journal of Negro History 77(3): 109-
    125.
Bobo, Lawrence and Franklin D. Gilliam. 1990. “Race, Sociopolitical Participation, and Black
    mpowerment.” American Political Science Review 84(2): 377-393.
Browning, Rufus P., Dale R. Marshall, and David H. Tabb, eds. 1990. Racial Politics in American
   Cities. New York: Longman.
Bubb, Ryan and Alex Kaufman. 2009. “Securitization and Moral Hazard:            vidence from a
   Lender Cutoff Rule.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Cameron, A. C., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
  for Inference with Clustered rrors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414–427.
Campbell, David and Joe R. Feagin. 1984. “Black lectoral Victories in the South.” Phylon 45(4):
  331-345.
Caughey, Devin M., and Jasjeet S. Sekhon. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs and Popular
   Elections: Implications of Pro-Incumbent Bias in Close U.S. House Races.” Mimeo, UC
   Berkeley.
Cheng, Ming-Yen, Jianqing Fan, and James S. Marron. 1997. “On Automatic Boundary
   Corrections.” Annals of Statistics 25(4): 1691-1708.
Colburn, David R. 2001. “Running for Office: African-American Mayors from 1967 to 1996.” In
   African American Mayors: Race, Politics, and the American City, edited by David R. Colburn
   and Jeffrey S. Adler. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, pp. 23-56.
Cox, Gary W. 2009. “Swing Voters, Core Voters, and Distributive Politics.” In Political
   Representation, edited by Ian Shapiro, Susan C. Stokes, Elisabeth Jean Wood, and and
   Alexander S. Kirshner. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 342-355.
Cox, Gary W. and Michael C. Munger. 1989. “Closeness, xpenditures, and Turnout in the 1982
   U.S. House lections.” American Political Science Review 83(1): 217-231.
Dekel, ddie, Matthew O. Jackson, and Asher Wolinski. 2008. “Vote Buying: General lections.”
   Journal of Political Economy 116(2): 351-380.



                                               23
Fan, Jianqing, Mark Farmen, and Irene Gijbels. 1998. “Local Maximum Likelihood stimation
   and Inference.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) 60(3):
   591-608.
Ferreira, Fernando and Joseph Gyourko. 2009. “Do Political Parties Matter? vidence from U.S.
    Cities.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 399-422.
Gans-Morse, Jordan, Sebastian Mazzuca, and Simeon Nichter. 2009. “Who Gets Bought? Vote
   Buying, Turnout Buying, and Other Strategies.” Weatherhead Center Working Paper 2009-0006.
Gerber, Elisabeth R., and Daniel J. Hopkins. 2011. “When Mayors Matter: Estimating the Impact
   of Mayoral Partisanship on City Policy.” American Journal of Political Science 55(2)” 326-339.
Glaeser, dward L. and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “The Curley ffect: The conomics of Shaping the
     lectorate.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 21(1): 1-19.
Grimmer, Justin, Eitan Hersh, Brian D. Feinstein, and Daniel Carpenter. 2011. “Are Close
   Elections Random?” Mimeo, Stanford University.
Hajnal, Zoltan L. 2001. “White Residents, Black Incumbents, and a Declining Racial Divide.”
   American Political Science Review 95(3): 603-617.
Hajnal, Zoltan L. 2006. Changing White Attitudes toward Black Political Leadership. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Hopkins, Daniel J., and Katherine T. McCabe. 2011. “After It's Too Late: Estimating the Policy
  Impacts of Black Mayors Using Regression Discontinuity Design.” Mimeo, Georgetown
  University.
Imbens, Guido W. and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2009. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
   Regression Discontinuity stimator.” NBER Working Paper 14726.
Jaynes, Gerald D. and Robin M. Williams, eds. 1989. A Common Destiny: Blacks and American
   Society. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies. Various years. National Roster of Black Elected
    Officials. Washington, DC: Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies Press.
Kousser, J. M. 1974. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the
   One-Party South, 1880-1910. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Leighly, Jan E. 2001. Strength in Numbers? The Political Mobilization of Racial and Ethnic Minorities.
   Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lee, David S. 2008. “Randomized xperiments From Non-Random Selection in U.S.House
     lections.” Journal of Econometrics 142: 675-697.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.”
   Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2): 281-355.
Lee, David S., Enrico Moretti, and Matthew J. Butler. 2004. “Do Voters Affect Or Elect Policies?
     vidence from the U. S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 807-859.


                                                  24
Lublin, David and Katherine Tate. 1995. “Racial Group Competition in Urban lections.” In
   Classifying by Race, edited by Paul E. Peterson. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp.
   245-261.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
  Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 698-714.
McDonald, Michael P., and John Samples. 2006. “The Marketplace of Democracy: Normative
  and Empirical Issues.” In John Samples and Michael P. McDonald, eds., The Marketplace of
  Democracy: Electoral Competition and American Politics. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
  Press and Cato Institute.
Mundstock, David. 1985. “A History of Progressive              lectoral Politics.” Retrieved 2009
  (http://berkeleyinthe70s.homestead.com).
Murray, Richard, and Arnold Vedlitz. 1977. “Race, Socioeconomic Status, and Voting
  Participation in Large Southern Cities. ” Journal of Politics 39(4): 1064-1072.
Nelson, William E. and Philip J. Meranto. 1977. Electing Black Mayors: Political Action in the Black
   Community. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.
Rosenstone, Steven J., and Hansen, John M. 1993. Mobilization, Participation, and Democracy in
   America. New York: Macmillan.
Shachar, Ron and Barry Nalebuff. 1999. “Follow the Leader: Theory and Evidence on Political
   Participation.” American Economic Review 89: 525-547.
Snyder, Jason. 2005. “Detecting Manipulation in U.S. House lections.” Mimeo, Haas School of
   Business, UC Berkeley.
Timpone, Richard J. 1995. “Mass Mobilization or Government Intervention? The Growth of
   Black Registration in the South.” Journal of Politics 57(2): 425-442.
U.S. Census Bureau. Various years. “County and City Data Book [United States].” Ann Arbor,
   MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Uhlaner, Carole J. 1989. “Rational Turnout: The Neglected Role of Groups.” American Journal of
   Political Science 33: 390-422.
Urquiola, Miguel and ric A. Verhoogen. 2009. “Class Size and Sorting in Market quilibrium:
   Theory and vidence.” American Economic Review 99(1): 179-215.
Verba, Sidney and Norman H. Nie. 1972. Participation in America: Political Democracy and Social
   Equality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Verba, Sidney, Norman H. Nie, and Jae-on Kim. 1978. Participation and Political Equality: A Seven-
   Nation Comparison. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Washington, bonya. 2006. “How Black Candidates Increase Voter Turnout.” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121(3): 973-998.




                                                25
Data Appendix

The elections data come from a variety of sources: (1) Ferreira and Gyourko’s (2009) survey of

cities; (2) newspapers, official election returns, and other primary sources; and (3) the website

OurCampaigns.com, which itself cites primary sources. To be included in the dataset, the elec-

tion results from OurCampaigns.com had to be properly cited. I verified a random subset of the

citations and found no misreporting. The lists below first report the primary sources for the

elections dataset and then report any additional sources referenced on OurCampaigns.com.



                                           Primary Sources

Alleghany County, PA, Division of Elections (printed in the Tribune-Review)
Allentown Morning Call
Associated Press
Atlanta Daily World
Atlanta Journal Constitution
Augusta Chronicle
Baltimore Afro-American
Baltimore Sun
Bryan Times
Call and Post
Charlotte Observer
Chicago Defender
Chicago Tribune
City of Berkeley Website: http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/
City of Hartford Website: http://www.hartford.gov/voters/ElectionResults/
Cuyahoga County, OH, Board of Elections Website: http://boe.cuyahogacounty.us/
Durham County, NC, Website: http://www.co.durham.nc.us/
Encyclopedia of Chicago History: http://encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/
Flint Journal
FOCUS
Free-Lance Star
Guilford County, NC, Board of Elections Website: http://www.co.guilford.nc.us/
Hartford Courant
Houston Chronicle
JET
Los Angeles Sentinel
Los Angeles Times
Louisiana Secretary of State Website: http://www.sos.louisiana.gov/
Monroe County, NY, Board of Elections: http://www.monroecounty.gov/
Montgomery County, OH, Board of Elections Website: http://www.mcboe.org/
Mundstock (1985)
Nelson and Meranto (1977)
New York Times

                                                  26
Ocala Star Banner
Philladelphia Daily News
Philladelphia Inquirer
Post and Courier
Rome News-Tribune
San Antonio City Clerk Website: http://www.sanantonio.gov/clerk/
Savannah Morning News
Sheboygan Journal
South Florida Sun Sentinel
The Deseret News
Toledo Blade
United States Court of Appeals Court Records, Gable v. Dadonna
Urban News, American Political Science Association
USA Today
Wake County, NC, Board of Elections Website: http://www.wakegov.com/elections/
Wall Street Journal
Washington Post
Wilmington Morning Star
Wright (2000)



                           Additional Sources Cited on OurCampaigns.com

Biographical Dictionary of American Mayors            Montgomery Advertiser
Boston Globe                                          Mount Vernon Daily Argus
Bridgeport Post                                       Multnomah County Website
City of Camden Board of Elections                     Onondaga County website
City of Las Vegas Website                             Palm Beach Post
City of San Francisco Website                         Press of Atlantic City
City of St. Louis Website                             Puerto Rico Herald
City of Tuscaloosa Elections Board                    Rock Island Argus
CNN.com                                               Sacramento Bee
Columbus Dispatch                                     San Francisco Chronicle
Delaware Board of Elections                           San Jose Mercury News
Detroit Free Press                                    Sheboygan Journal
Erie Times-News                                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch
Franklin County, OH, Board of Elections               St. Louis Public Library Website
Hudson County, NJ, Clerk                              Sun-Sentinel
Jefferson City Daily Capital News                     The Record
Jersery City Online                                   The State
Kansas City Star                                      Times Union
Kansas City Votes                                     UPI
Miami Herald                                          Westchester County, NY, Board of Elections
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel




                                                 27
                                         Figure 1: The Rise of Black Mayors, 1965-2000

                            0.3
                                     Non-South: Current Black Mayor
                                     Non-South: Ever Black Mayor
                                     South: Current Black Mayor
                                     South: Ever Black Mayor


                            0.2
       Fraction of Cities




                            0.1




                             0
                              1965   1970        1975          1980        1985   1990   1995    2000

Notes: Data on black mayors were compiled from the National Roster of Black Elected Officials (JCPES various
years). The sample includes all cities in the continental United States with 1960 population greater than 50,000.




                                                                      28
                         Figure 2: Discontinuities in the Black Vote Margin Density

                                              Panel A: South


                     2
               1.5
     Density




                     1
               .5
                     0




                         -1           -.5              0                .5                1
                                               Black Vote Margin


                                            Panel B: Non-South
                     3
                     2
     Density




                     1
                     0




                         -1           -.5             0                .5                1
                                               Black Vote Margin


Notes: The sample includes all interracial elections during 1965-2000 in cities with 1960 populations that were
at least 50,000 and 4% black. The smooth curves are local linear density estimators based on McCrary (2008),
with a bandwidth of 0.1; open circles represent a histogram with a bin width of 0.05. The black vote margin is
difference between the black candidate’s and the white candidate’s votes, divided by their sum.




                                                      29
                                                        Figure 3: Discontinuities in Current Turnout

                                                                          Panel A: South


                                         .2
                                         .1
Turnout Residual




                                              0
                                        -.1
                                        -.2




                                                   -1          -.5                0                 .5                 1
                                                                          Black Vote Margin


                                                                       Panel B: Non-South
                                             .1
                                       .05
      Turnout Residual




                                               0
                                      -.05
                                         -.1
                                      -.15




                                                   -1           -.5               0                 .5                1
                                                                          Black Vote Margin


                         Notes: The sample includes all interracial elections with turnout data for the last, current, and next elections; it
                         omits Augusta’s 1998 election, which came after new borders dramatically increased the size of the city’s
                         population. The dependent variable is the residual from a regression of current turnout on lagged turnout. The
                         smooth curves are local linear regressions with a bandwidth of 0.1. Open circles are local averages over 0.1-
                         wide bins, with the size of the circle scaled to reflect the number of observations.


                                                                                 30
                         Figure 4: Discontinuities in Black Mayoral Prospects

                                                Panel A: South


                1
               .8
               .6
               .4
               .2
                0




                    -1                -.5               0                 .5                 1
                                                Black Vote Margin


                                             Panel B: Non-South
                1
               .8
               .6
               .4
               .2
                0




                    -1                -.5               0                 .5                1
                                                Black Vote Margin


Notes: The sample includes all interracial elections during 1965-2000 in cities with 1960 populations that were
at least 50,000 and 4% black. In each panel, the smooth curve is a local linear regression with a bandwidth of
0.1. The open circles are local averages over 0.1-wide bins, with the size of the circle scaled to reflect the num-
ber of observations.



                                                        31
                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 5: Bandwidth Sensitivity Checks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Panel A: South
                                                 Vote Margin Density                                                                                  Current Turnout                                                                                 Future Turnout                                                                                  Pr(Future Black Victory)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.2 1.5 1.8
                                                                                                                                       .2
                                        2




                                                                                                                          .04 .08 .12 .16
                      1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                Discontinuity




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Discontinuity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Discontinuity
Discontinuity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                                                                                                                                            0
                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                          -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.05
                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                      6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                      5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                  T-statistic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T-statistic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T-statistic
                                                                                                                                                                                        T-statistic
                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                            .1        .15                    .2                                 .25                             .1             .15                .2                                     .25                   .1             .15                .2                                  .25                         .1                .15                .2                  .25
                                                            Bandwidth                                                                                                Bandwidth                                                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                            Bandwidth

                                                             No covariates                                                                           No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome                                             No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome                                                   No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome




                                                                                                                                                                   Panel B: Non-South
                                                 Vote Margin Density                                                                                  Current Turnout               Future Turnout                                                                                                                                                    Pr(Future Black Victory)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.2 1.5 1.8
                                                                                                                                       .2
                                        2
                      1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8




                                                                                                                          .04 .08 .12 .16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
     Discontinuity




                                                                                                Discontinuity




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Discontinuity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Discontinuity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                                        1




                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                          -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.05
                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                      6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                      5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                  T-statistic




                                                                                                                                                                                        T-statistic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T-statistic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T-statistic
                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                            .1        .15                    .2                                 .25                             .1             .15                .2                                     .25                   .1             .15                .2                                  .25                         .1                .15                .2                  .25
                                                            Bandwidth                                                                                                Bandwidth                                                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                            Bandwidth

                                                             No covariates                                                                           No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome                                             No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome                                                   No covariates          Controls for lagged outcome




                     Notes: Each graph plots the discontinuity estimates and associated t-statistics from a series of local linear regressions with bandwidths varying from 0.10
                     to 0.25. All regressions use the uniform kernel. The samples for the analyses of the vote margin density and the probability of future black victory include
                     all interracial elections. For comparability, the samples for the turnout analyses only include elections with turnout data for the last, current, and future
                     elections. Results are similar without this sample restriction.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               32
                                                           Figure 6: The Rise of Black Voter Registration, 1940-1988

        Panel A: Black Voter Registration Rates in the South, Voter Education Project Data

                                                  70                                                                          6


                                                  60
                                                                                                                              5
                                                                           Registration Rate

                                                  50




                                                                                                                                  # Registered (Millions)
                                                                                                                              4
                              % Registered




                                                  40
                                                                                                                              3
                                                  30                                             # Registered

                                                                                                                              2
                                                  20

                                                                                                                              1
                                                  10


                                                   0                                                                          0
                                                    1940    1945   1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975     1980   1985

 Panel B: Black-White Voter Registration Ratios by Region, American National Elections Study

                                                 1.2


                                                                       Non-South
          Ratio of Black to White Registration




                                                  1


                                                 0.8


                                                 0.6


                                                 0.4
                                                                                        South

                                                 0.2


                                                  0
                                                       1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985

Notes: Panel A plots black registration rates in the former Confederate states, from Jaynes and Williams (1989)
based on actual registration data from the Voter Education Project. Panel B plots the ratio of black registration
to white registration, based on self-reported registration in the American National Elections Study.

                                                                                        33
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics, Various Samples
                                                                                                       Interracial
                                                                 1960              Elections
                                           All Cities                                                   Elections
                                                              % Black ≥ 4           Sample
                                                                                                         Sample
                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
City Characteristics in 1960
% Black                                        11.5                17.7               19.2                 22.7
Population (‘000)                             203.4               271.7               379.9               467.8
Median Family Income (‘000)                     6.1                 5.8                5.8                  5.8
Mayor-Council Gov't                            0.42                0.40               0.47                 0.51
Council-Manager Gov't                          0.47                0.47               0.41                 0.35
South                                          0.28                0.42               0.41                 0.40

Election Variables, 1965-2000
# Interracial Elections                                                                2.00               3.01
# Black Candidates                                                                     2.74               4.13
Ever Had Black Winner                                                                  0.46               0.69
Ever Had Black Runner-Up                                                               0.56               0.84

Number of Cities                               310                 194                 116                  77
Notes: Each entry is the mean of the specified variable. The baseline sample includes all cities in the continental
U.S. with populations greater than 50,000 in 1960. The elections sample includes cities with populations greater
than 50,000 and black population shares of at least 4 percent in 1960, for which elections data were available.
The interracial elections sample restricts further to cities with data available on at least one interracial election.
Median family income refers to income in 1959.




                                                         34
          Table 2: The Effect of Black-vs.-White Matchups on Turnout and Closeness
                                               Turnout              Vote Margin of Victory
                                                  (1)                         (2)
Full Sample                                      0.034                      -0.057
                                               [0.009]**                   [0.026]*
# of Elections                                    902                         902
# of Cities                                       116                         116
Mean of Dependent Variable                       0.281                       0.293

South                                                   0.036                                -0.042
                                                       [0.014]*                              [0.041]
# of Elections                                           373                                   373
# of Cities                                               48                                    48
Mean of Dependent Variable                              0.224                                 0.322

Non-South                                                0.035                               -0.077
                                                       [0.011]**                            [0.034]*
# of Elections                                            529                                  529
# of Cities                                                68                                   68
Mean of Dependent Variable                               0.322                                0.272
Notes: OLS estimates. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered at the city level. Each cell reports the
coefficient on the interracial election indicator from a separate regression. The dependent variable in column
(1) is the total votes received by the top-two candidates divided by the voting-age city population (interpolated
between census years). The dependent variable in column (2) is the difference in votes between the top-two
candidates divided by their sum. The sample omits Augusta’s 1998 election, which came just after the city’s
consolidation with surrounding suburbs dramatically altered the size of the city’s population. All specifications
also include an indicator for black-vs.-black elections. † p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       35
           Table 3: Discontinuities in the Density of the Black Vote Margin of Victory

South                                                                                        1.83
                                                                                            [0.87]*
# of Elections within Bandwidth                                                               38
# of Cities within Bandwidth                                                                  18

Non-South                                                                                    0.85
                                                                                            [1.13]
# of Elections within Bandwidth                                                               65
# of Cities within Bandwidth                                                                  37
Notes: Estimates of the discontinuity in the level of the density function, based on McCrary’s (2008) local linear
density estimation procedure, which uses a triangular kernel. The bandwidth is 0.2. See Figure 5 for bandwidth
sensitivity checks. Parentheses contain robust standard errors. † p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                       36
                    Table 4: Discontinuities in Past, Current, and Future Turnout
                                         Turnout, t - 1          Turnout, t       Turnout, t + 1
                                               (1)                  (2)               (3)
South
No covariates                                      0.083                    0.184                     0.240
                                                  [0.065]                  [0.079]*                 [0.072]**
Controls for turnout, t – 1                         —                       0.123                     0.174
                                                                           [0.043]*                 [0.048]**
Controls for all covariates                          —                      0.105                     0.178
                                                                           [0.044]*                 [0.046]**
# of Elections within Bandwidth                      24                       24                        24
# of Cities within Bandwidth                         13                       13                        13

Non-South
No covariates                                      0.011                     0.022                   -0.013
                                                  [0.053]                   [0.053]                  [0.059]
Controls for turnout, t – 1                         —                        0.016                   -0.018
                                                                            [0.041]                  [0.048]
Controls for all covariates                          —                       0.026                    0.001
                                                                            [0.043]                  [0.047]
# of Elections within Bandwidth                      45                       45                       45
# of Cities within Bandwidth                         27                       27                       27
Notes: Results represent the discontinuous change in the dependent variable when the black vote margin of
victory crosses zero. Each entry corresponds to a separate local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a
bandwidth of 0.2. See Figure 5 for bandwidth sensitivity checks. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered
at the city-decade level. The dependent variable is the turnout rate, or the total votes received by the top-two
candidates divided by the voting-age city population (interpolated between census years). Time t – 1 refers to
the last election, time t to the current election, and time t + 1 to the next election. The sample includes all
interracial elections with turnout data for the last, current, and next elections; it omits Augusta’s 1998 election,
which came new borders dramatically increased the size of the city’s population. The covariates include log
population, percent black, percent under age 18, percent age 65 or older, and log median family income in the
last census; the share of the county vote going to Kennedy in 1960; and indicators for the decade of the election.
Significance tests are based on a t-distribution with degrees of freedom set to the number of clusters minus
two: † p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          37
           Table 5: Discontinuities in the Probability of Past and Future Black Victory
                                                  Black Victory, t - 1       Black Victory, t + 1
                                                           (1)                       (2)
South
No covariates                                                      -0.326                           0.780
                                                                   [0.301]                         [0.213]*
Controls for black victory, t – 1                                    —                              0.874
                                                                                                  [0.225]**
Controls for all covariates                                          —                              0.947
                                                                                                  [0.272]**
# of Elections within Bandwidth                                      38                               38
# of Cities within Bandwidth                                         18                               18

Non-South
No covariates                                                       0.021                           0.178
                                                                   [0.200]                         [0.208]
Controls for black victory, t – 1                                    —                              0.186
                                                                                                   [0.194]
Controls for all covariates                                          —                              0.123
                                                                                                   [0.177]
# of Elections within Bandwidth                                      65                              65
# of Cities within Bandwidth                                         37                              37
Notes: Results represent the discontinuous change in the dependent variable when the black vote margin of
victory crosses zero. Each entry corresponds to a separate local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a
bandwidth of 0.2. See Figure 5 for bandwidth sensitivity checks. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered
at the city-decade level. Time t – 1 refers to the last election, and time t + 1 to the next election. The covariates
include log population, percent black, percent under age 18, percent age 65 or older, and log median family
income in the last census; the share of the county vote going to Kennedy in 1960; and indicators for the decade
of the election. Significance tests are based on a t-distribution with degrees of freedom set to the number of
clusters minus two: † p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         38
               Table 6: Political Party Discontinuities in White-vs.-White Elections
                                                                                                Democratic
                                                    Density, t             Turnout, t
                                                                                                Victory, t + 1
                                                        (1)                    (2)                   (3)
South                                                  0.247                  0.080                -0.103
                                                      [0.579]                [0.051]               [0.264]
# of Elections within Bandwidth                         49                     49                    49
# of Cities within Bandwidth                            23                     23                    23

Non-South                                              0.094                  0.026                 0.308
                                                      [0.646]                [0.029]               [0.151]*
# of Elections within Bandwidth                         115                    115                   115
# of Cities within Bandwidth                             41                     41                    41
Notes: Results represent the discontinuous change in the dependent variable when the Democratic vote margin
of victory crosses zero. Each entry corresponds to a separate local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a
bandwidth of 0.2. See Figure 5 for bandwidth sensitivity checks. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered
at the city-decade level. Time t refers to the current election, and time t + 1 to the next election. The sample
includes all elections between a white Democrat and a white Republican in the overall elections dataset.
Significance tests are based on a t-distribution with degrees of freedom set to the number of clusters minus
two: † p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       39
                               Appendix Figure 1: Black Electoral Victories and Losses, 1965-2000




Black Electoral Victory Only
Black Electoral Victory and Loss
Black Electoral Loss
Black Mayor, not in Elections Sample




                                                              40
                                                                                                           Appendix Figure 2: Discontinuities in Unadjusted Turnout Rates
                                                                                                                              Panel A: Current Turnout

                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                                                      Turnout Rate, Current Election
Turnout Rate, Current Election




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .35
                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                          .1




                                                                               -1          -.5                0                  .5                                                                    1                          -1   -.5                0                  .5   1
                                                                                              Black Vote Margin, Current Election                                                                                                         Black Vote Margin, Current Election

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Panel B: Lagged Turnout
                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .35
                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                       Turnout Rate, Last Election
                                 Turnout Rate, Last Election




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .25
                                                                         .3
                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2



                                                                               -1         -.5                0                  .5                                                                     1                          -1   -.5                0                  .5   1
                                                                                             Black Vote Margin, Current Election                                                                                                          Black Vote Margin, Current Election

                                                               Notes: The turnout rate is the total votes received by the top-two candidates divided by the voting-age city population. The sample includes all interracial
                                                               elections with turnout data for the last and current elections; it omits Augusta’s 1998 election, which came just after a dramatic increase in the size of the
                                                               city’s population. The smooth curves are local linear regressions with a bandwidth of 0.1; open circles are local averages over 0.1-wide bins, with the size
                                                               of the circle scaled to reflect the number of observations in the bin.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               41
