                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EFFECT OF INCOME AND IMMIGRATION POLICIES ON INTERNATIONAL
                               MIGRATION

                                           Francesc Ortega
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                        Working Paper 18322
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18322


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We are thankful to Greg Wright and Tommaso Colussi for their research assistance. Simone Bertoli
and Jesus Fernandez-Huertas provided very helpful comments on an early draft of the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Francesc Ortega and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Effect of Income and Immigration Policies on International Migration
Francesc Ortega and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 18322
August 2012
JEL No. E25,F22,J61

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper makes two contributions to the literature on the determinants of international migration
flows. First, we compile a new dataset on annual bilateral migration flows covering 15 OECD destination
countries and 120 sending countries for the period 1980-2006. We also collect data on time-varying
immigration policies that regulate the entry of immigrants in our destination countries over this period.
Second, we extend the empirical model of migration choice across multiple destinations developed
by Grogger and Hanson (2011) by allowing for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants
and non-migrants. Our estimates show that international migration flows are highly responsive to income
per capita at destination. This elasticity is twice as high for within-EU migration, reflecting the higher
degree of labor mobility within the European Union. We also find that tightening of laws regulating
immigrant entry reduce rapidly and significantly their flow.


Francesc Ortega
Queens College CUNY
Economics department,
300A Powdermaker Hall,
65-30 Kissena Blvd, Flushing, New York 11367
fortega@qc.cuny.edu

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

The first decade of the new millennium has witnessed growing international mobility, especially towards
OECD countries (OECD, 2011). Economic factors, and in particular the large income diﬀerentials
between countries, are likely to play a very important role in determining migration flows. Other
factors aﬀecting the cost of migration are also fundamental in shaping those flows. A particularly

interesting question is to what extent and how rapidly immigration policies enacted by receiving
countries aﬀect these flows. While some studies (Clark et al. 2007, Mayda 2010) have considered the
role of immigration policies on migration flows, the limitation of data on both flows and policies has

severely constrained these analyses.
    In this paper we make two contributions to the literature on the determinants of international
migration flows. The first contribution is in terms of data. Building on Mayda (2010), we extend
the existing dataset on bilateral migration flows by including a larger number of receiving (15 OECD
destinations) and sending countries (120 countries of origin) and years (1980-2006). More importantly,
we also build a new quantitative measure of immigration policy restrictions to new immigration flows,
summarizing the eﬀects of quotas and admission requirements.1 Following some mechanical rules and
carefully reading the content of hundreds of laws we classify them based on whether they tightened or

relaxed the requirements for entry.2
    Secondly, we extend the empirical model of utility-maximizing migration choices in Grogger and
Hanson (2011) by allowing for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants.3

Specifically, our model can be cast into the nested logit model by McFadden (1978). Under some dis-
tributional assumptions on the unobserved heterogeneity of individuals we then derive an empirical
specification that can be estimated using aggregate level data on bilateral migration flows, provided
a rich set of fixed eﬀects are included in the estimation. In such a model the aggregate number of
migrants from a given origin into a particular destination is a function of income per capita at desti-

nation, the cost of migration, and a set of origin-specific factors. As proxies for overall immigration
   1
     In this paper we do not address policies regarding asylum seekers. For an important reference in the European
context see Hatton (2005).
   2
     While our dataset improves upon existing data, we note that it is likely that measurement error is still pervasive:
the definition of migrant remains somewhat diﬀerent across countries, flows of undocumented are not appropriately
measured, and there may be lags in reporting. Moreover, classifying changes in immigration laws simply as discrete steps
that "tighten" or "loosen" the entry of immigrants is a very rough and imperfect proxy for the resulting implications
regarding immigration flows. In particular, there may be diﬀerences in implementation across countries and over time in
phasing-in and phasing-out of such laws. Hence the results need to be interpreted with some caution.
   3
     Grogger and Hanson (2011) disaggregate migration flows by education but we do not.



                                                           2
costs we use a number of measures of geographic and cultural distance between countries, plus our
measure of policy-driven tightness of entry for immigrants. We estimate the model on a bilateral panel
containing information on migration flows and immigration policies over time.

      Our main findings are as follows. First, confirming previous literature (such as Mayda 2010 and
Grogger and Hanson 2011), we show that destination income per capita is a key determinant of
migration choices. A 10 percent increase in income per capita at a particular destination is associ-
ated to a 7.6 percent increase in immigration flows. This elasticity doubles for intra-EU migration
flows, reflecting the higher integration within the European Union. We also find that when a typical

(non-European) immigrant destination, such as the US, Canada or Australia, tightens its entry laws
immigration flows fall already after one year. Specifically, the introduction of a new law that tight-
ens entry of immigrants for these countries reduces immigration by 6 percent within the same year.

Within the European Union the key laws aﬀecting immigration flows are the treaties regulating the
free movement of people within the Union.

      Our paper is also related to the literature on the determinants of international flows of goods and
people. Gravity regressions have become very popular in analyzing trade flows (e.g. Anderson and van
Wincoop 2003, Chaney 2008 and Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein, 2008) primarily because they can
be derived from an equilibrium model with optimizing firms. However, the literature on international
migration flows has lagged behind. A large part of the literature on migration flows estimated similar
models but often focusing on a single destination (and many origins) and using reduced-form models
not well justified by a rational choice framework (Clark et al. 2008, Karemera et al. 2000, Pedersen
et al 2004, and Garcia-Gomez and Lopez-Casasnovas 2006, among others). As a result, the empirical

estimates, while informative and interesting, lacked a theoretical foundation. Recent work in this
area includes Adsera and Pytlikova (2012) who focus on the role of linguistic distance, Beine et al.
(2011) who focus on the role of networks in shaping international migration flows, and McKenzie et

al. (2012), who exploit a unique dataset for migration out of the Philippines.4 Our emphasis on the

role of immigration policies on regulating inflows is inspired by the studies on the role of restrictions
in ending the First Great Migration (Hatton and Williamson 2004, Hatton 2010).5

      In a more structural fashion Grogger and Hanson (2011) analyzed the scale, selection and sorting
across destinations of migrants with diﬀerent education levels using a model based on optimal migration
  4
      Borjas (1987) studies the selection of migrants on the basis of the Roy model.
  5
      See Chiswick and Hatton (2003) for an even longer term perspective on international migration.



                                                           3
choices. In econometric terms, their model is an application of the logit model by McFadden (1974).
Their specification for the "scale" of migration uses the diﬀerence between the logs of the odds of
migrating to a specific country and the odds of not migrating at all as the dependent variable. In

comparison, our model features only one type of labor (aggregated across education groups), but
accommodates unobserved individual heterogeneity. Moreover, our model has a panel dimension that
allows us to include a much richer set of fixed eﬀects that control for origin-specific variables which
are often not available or very imprecisely measured (as the countries of origin are many and often
poor).6 Our work is also related to the work by Bertocchi and Strozzi (2010) and Mayda (2010) on

the evolution of immigration laws and citizenship, and their consequences for migration flows.7
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 presents the
theoretical model of migration choices and derives the estimating equation. Section 4 presents the

results and Section 5 concludes.



2        Data

Our data spans 15 countries of destination and 120 countries of origin over the period 1980-2006.8
While the period we consider is dictated in large part by the availability of reliable and comparable data
across most destination countries, there is also a logic in ending the period in 2006. Beginning in 2007

the onset of the great recession in several countries disrupted significantly migration flows, especially
in Europe. Moreover the immigration policies that we are considering for Europe (the Maastricht
treaty and the Schengen agreement) likely produced most of their eﬀects by that date, while some
more recent policies that we do not consider (the accession to the EU of some Eastern European
countries) aﬀected migration mainly post 2006. In Section 2.1 we describe in detail the construction

and source of the immigration data. In Section 2.2 we present the sources and construction of the
variables capturing the tightness of entry laws.
    6
     Bertoli and Fernandez-Huertas (2011) examine more general multilateral migration models.
    7
     See also Bertocchi and Strozzi (2008) for a historical analysis of the eﬀects of institutions on migration flows for a
reduced number of countries.
   8
     Table 2 reports the full list of destination countries.




                                                            4
2.1      Migration Flows

Our immigration data measure the yearly inflow of foreign citizens who intend to be residents in the

receiving countries. This definition implies that we measure all foreign-born (or in some cases foreign
nationals) who come to the country to reside there and not for temporary tourism, study or business

reasons9 . To span the whole period of analysis we merged bilateral immigration data from three
sources. The first source is Mayda (2010). That paper uses the original OECD series on flows of
migrants that were discontinued in 1994 and extends them up to 2005. The second source is United

Nations (2005), which reports very long time series but only for a subset of 15 destination countries.
This source goes back to the sixties for some countries, but ends in the early 2000s for all of them. The
third source is the International Migration database (IMD) gathered by the OECD and available up

to 2007.10 The latter has the most extensive coverage in terms of destination and sending countries,
but it only begins in 1998, and for some destinations it only has few countries as source. We have

made sure that the definitions of immigrant are consistent across databases for each receiving country.
All datasets use as primary sources the original data released by the statistical oﬃces of each receiving
country, which try to maintain internal consistency over time. In our checks we often find an exact
coincidence of the figures in overlapping periods. Occasionally there are slight diﬀerences introducing
discontinuities as we merge two series from diﬀerent sources. The national data are based on population
registers or residence permits. In both cases these are considered to be accurate measures of the entry
of legal foreign nationals. Table A1 in the Appendix summarizes the availability from each data source
by destination country. To construct the final migration flows, starting with the UN migration data,

we have filled in missing origin-destination-year observations using the IMD data. For the remaining
cells we have used the data from Mayda (2010). In a small number of cases we have also interpolated
observations to fill in missing values in intermediate years. We did this only when a data point for a

bilateral migration flow was missing and both the previous and following years were available. While
the OECD makes an eﬀort (especially since 1995) to maintain a consistent definition of immigrants
across countries, there are some diﬀerences between destination country definitions. An important
one is that some countries define immigrants on the basis of the place of birth, and others on the
basis of nationality. While this inconsistency can make a pure cross-country comparison inaccurate,
our analysis focuses on changes within destination countries over time. While our gathering and
  9
      Typically these statistics exclude people entering on non-immigrant temporary visas.
 10
      Downloadable at http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MIG.


                                                            5
organizing eﬀort has produced what we think is a significant improvement on existing data, several
limitations still exist. First of all only a limited number of receiving countries is covered, second we
miss most of the outflows of migrants due to return migrants (who are often poorly recorded), third

the timing of recording may not be the same as the time of entry. Aware of these limitations while
our results are new and interesting, we certainly ought to take them with caution. Further empirical
analysis and continued eﬀort in data gathering will be crucial to reach a consensus on the proposed
findings.
      Figure 1 plots the total immigration rates in our data, defined as the total annual inflows into

each destination country (aggregating across all origins), relative to the resident population in the
country at the beginning of the year. A few observations are worth noting. First, immigration rates
exhibit an upward trend in many countries: Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Norway, and New Zealand.

Second, immigration flows were higher during the 1990s than in the 2000s for a group of countries.
For example, annual inflows into Germany and Sweden peaked in the first half of the 1990s, reflecting

the fall of the Iron Curtain and the Yugoslavian war, with the subsequent westward migration. Over
our period of study, Spain has experienced a striking migration episode. Immigration flows into Spain
during the 1980s were practically zero and, in fact, Spain exhibited net outflows during this decade.
From the mid 1990s Spain received a spectacular immigration wave, with annual immigration rates
much higher than all other countries in our sample (up to 1.5% per year).11 The main reason behind
this immigration wave is the robust economic growth displayed by the Spanish economy starting in

the mid 1980s and extending over two decades. It is also worth noting that housing and tourism
were the main engines of economic growth, and both sectors have employed a very large fraction of

immigrants (Gonzalez and Ortega 2012). At the same time the deep economic crises experienced by
Argentina and Ecuador during this period, together with the tightened entry requirements into the
US, increased the relative attractiveness of Spain as an immigrant destination. Our empirical model is

able to accommodate this large country heterogeneity in the relevant factors behind migration flows.


2.2      Immigration Laws

Immigration policy has become very salient in many countries. The issue of allowing in (or trying to
keep out) and absorbing existing immigrants is very contentious. The growing immigration pressure
 11
      With the Great Recession net immigration into Spain became practically zero in 2010 and negative in 2011.




                                                           6
has driven some countries to adopt substantial reforms of their immigration laws, aiming at controlling
immigration flows. On the other hand the need for the labor provided by some of these immigrants
(particularly in agriculture , construction, and personal services) has pushed governments to create

specific favored entry categories or to be lenient ex-post with those that entered illegally by passing
amnesties. Among economists there has been a growing interest on the study of the determinants of
immigration policy since the seminal paper by Benhabib (1996).12 It remains unclear to what extent
entry restrictions are able to control immigration flows.
    An important contribution of this paper is the creation of a database and a classification for

tightness of entry of immigration laws for the main OECD immigration countries categorized. Our
starting point are the laws collected by Mayda and Patel (2004) and the Social Reforms database of
the Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti (FRDB, 2007). Mayda and Patel (2004) documented the main

characteristics of the migration policies of several OECD countries between 1980 and 2000 and the
changes in their legislations over time. The FRDB Social Reforms Database collects information about
social reforms in the EU15 countries (except Luxembourg) over the period 1987-2005. We merged and
updated these two datasets obtaining the complete set of immigration reforms in the period 1980-
2006 for 12 of our 15 OECD countries.13 The resulting dataset includes more than 240 laws that we

analyzed and classified. The list of immigration laws by country and year and a brief description of
each of them can be found in the online appendix to the paper.14
    We then constructed an index that captures the direction of the change in entry tightness associated
to any major immigration law. Specifically, we initialize each country at zero in the first year. If no
relevant policy changes occur, the variable remains constant. In the year when an immigration law
is passed that entails a tightening of entry conditions the variable increases its value by one. On the
contrary, relaxation of entry conditions reduces the degree of tightness by one. A reform is considered
as tightening of entry laws if (i) it introduces or decreases quotas for entry, or (ii) it increases the
  12
     For more recent work on the political economy of immigration see: Dolmas and Huﬀman (2004), Ortega (2005, 2010),
Bertocchi and Strozzi (2010), Facchini, Mayda and Mishra (2011), or Facchini and Steinhardt (2011). In these models
immigration policy is largely a reflection of voters’ attitudes toward immigration. Some recent empirical contributions to
this literature are Mayda (2006), Facchini and Mayda (2009), and Ortega and Polavieja (2012) in the European context.
Hatton and Williamson (2005) provide evidence of the role of political economy forces as an important driver of the
immigration restrictions in the US around 1920.
  13
     For France, Japan and Luxembourg we constructed the immigration law variable but their immigration data were
very inconsistent and we did not use them in the analysis. For Italy, Finland and New Zealand we were unable to
construct the measure of entry laws in a reliable manner.
  14
     http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/gperi/data_codes/immigration_laws_appendix/immigration_laws_June_2012.xls




                                                         7
requirements, fees or documents for entry, or (iii) it increases requirements or the waiting time to
obtain residence or work permits. There are several reforms that may indirectly aﬀect ease of entry
but do not explicitly fit any of the categories above. In those cases we classified them as loosening or

tightening, or no change, by scrutinizing the content of each regulation.
       Admittedly, this variable captures only one specific dimension of immigration policies, namely how
numerically restricted and costly the process of admission to a country is. Besides entry laws, other
laws may also be relevant to migration decisions: integration and citizenship, access to public services
and employment, and so on. We believe our narrow focus allows us to build a more precise measure

that is closely linked to immigration flows.15
       Figure 2 plots our index variable for tightness of entry laws. Recall that the initial value for each
country has been set to 0. Hence only the within-country variation over time is meaningful and not the

cross-country variation. Given that in all our regressions we include fixed receiving country eﬀects, and
hence, we identify the impact of explanatory variables on the within-country variation over time, this
feature of the index does not aﬀect our findings. A quick glance at the evolution of entry tightness over
time reveals several episodes of substantial loosening of entry laws. For instance Canada and Germany
relaxed their entry requirements since 1990, Sweden since the mid 1990s, and the US between 1980
and the end of the 1990s. We can also identify episodes of tightening of entry laws: Denmark in the
2000s, and the United States beginning in year 2000 (essentially after the events of September 11,
2001). Overall there are more countries that have loosened their entry requirements than countries
that have tightened them. However, many countries passed measures in opposite directions, ending
up without a clear trend towards tightening or loosening, such as Spain or Belgium.

       As several of the countries in our sample are in Europe we also build three additional policy
variables that account for the evolution of the European integration process. We build destination-year
indicator variables for the adoption of the Maastricht and Schengen treaties, and an origin-destination-
year indicator for sharing a common currency. The Maastricht treaty dummy takes a value of one
after 1992 (year of the ratification of the treaty) for countries within the EU-15. For countries that
joined the EU later it takes a value of one from the year of adhesion onward (across all origins).
  15
    In a previous version of this paper (Ortega and Peri 2009) we explored the role of some of these more general aspects
of immigration laws. The results were not very robust and we decided to limit our attention to laws aﬀecting entry.
At any rate, the web appendix contains a brief description of the amendments to immigration laws concerning entry
conditions for all destination countries in our sample. The reader can use them to alter the criteria used to build our
specific measure of the tightness of entry laws.




                                                           8
The Schengen agreement, adopted in diﬀerent years by diﬀerent European countries, regulates and
coordinates immigration and border policies among the signatory countries. While it eases intra-EU
movement for citizens of the signatory countries, the agreement also implies more restrictive border

controls to enter the Schengen area. The corresponding dummy takes a value of one for destination
countries participating into the agreement only in the years in which the agreement is in place and 0
otherwise (across all origins). It is worth recalling that significant changes in migration laws were also
produced by the enlargement of the European Union first in May 2004 (with the accession of Poland,
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary and other Easter European countries) and then in 2007 (with the

accession of Bulgaria and Romania). These events, however, took place either at the very end or after
the ending date of our data coverage and hence their consequences are not analyzed in this study. We
leave the analysis of their impact to future research.

    Data on income per capita is from the Penn World Tables (version 7.0), expressed in US $ 2000
at purchasing power parity. The other control variables are the logarithm of the distance, a dummy

for sharing a contiguous border, a dummy for sharing a common language (not necessarily the oﬃcial
one) by large shares of the population, a dummy for having colonial ties, one for sharing legal origin
and one for sharing a common currency. The latter variable is time-varying and even though it mostly
reflects the creation and adoption of the European common currency, there are several other instances
of countries sharing currency, as we discuss below. These variables are from Glick and Rose (2001)
and Head, Mayer and Ries (2010).



3    Determinants of International Migration Flows

This section presents a model of migration choice across multiple locations and derives an estimating

equation. Our specification is consistent both with a simple logit model (McFadden, 1974) as well
as with a nested logit model (McFadden, 1978). Our migration model extends Grogger and Hanson
(2011) by allowing for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants. It

is plausible that migrants systematically diﬀer from non-migrants along important dimensions that
are hard to measure, such as ability, risk aversion and the psychological costs of living far from
home. An additional attractive feature of our empirical specification is that it is reminiscent of a
generalized gravity equation in which the logarithm of bilateral migration flows is a function of origin
and destination country fixed eﬀects and overall bilateral migration costs.


                                                    9
3.1          Migration model

We study the problem of the migration choice across multiple destinations:  ∈  = {1   }.

Agent , born in country of origin  ∈ , decides whether to stay in  or to migrate to any other
country. We denote by  =  \ {} the set of potential destinations for individuals born in country

, by excluding the country of origin.
          The utility from staying at the origin is given by:


                                                        =  +                                    (1)


where the  is deterministic and country-of-origin specific and   is stochastic and individual
specific. The first term captures the average utility of staying in country  while the second is an
idiosyncratic individual-specific term. Analogously, the utility from migrating to destination  ∈ 

is
                                                        =  +                                    (2)

In this case the deterministic component of the utility varies by origin and destination pair so as to

allow for bilateral costs of migration. Specifically, we shall assume that  =  −  , where 
is the present value of the expected earnings at destination and  encompasses the deterministic
component of the costs of migrating to country  from origin . The stochastic terms   and   in

these equations capture unobserved components of the individual utility associated with each choice.
Grogger and Hanson (2011) adopt the standard logit assumption, namely, that all stochastic terms are
identically and independently distributed as type-I extreme value. While highly tractable, the logit
model imposes very strong assumptions on substitution patterns.16
          We wish to consider a more general stochastic specification. The reason is that it is highly plausible

that migrants may diﬀer systematically from non-movers in aspects that are very hard to measure,
such as talent, risk-aversion, or the psychological cost of living abroad. That is to say, there may be
individual unobserved factors that induce correlations across the disturbance terms of equations (1)

and (2). Specifically, we assume that the stochastic term of the stay option is simply   =  while
for each destination  ∈  we have   =   +  , where   is drawn from a probability distribution
with mean zero and is uncorrelated with  . These individual random eﬀects, however, are allowed
     16
          This is the well-known property of independence of irrelevant alternatives.



                                                                10
to be correlated. In particular we allow migrants to have correlated utility within a destination. This
implies that migrants could be a selected group and our structure takes care of this selection, correlated
within destination countries. The random variables  and  are all identically and independently

distributed as type-I extreme value. These assumptions on the stochastic components of the model give
rise to the nested-logit model (McFadden 1978), which allows for more general substitution patterns

while still remaining analytically tractable.17 In particular, it allows for closed-form solutions for the
choice probabilities of staying in the country of origin ( ) or migrating to destination  ∈  ,  :

                                                       
                                  =                ³P                ´                                              (3)
                                             +      ∈    
                                                ³P                ´
                                                           
                                                     ∈                    
                                  =                ³P                ´ P                                           (4)
                                               +                 ∈
                                                                                 
                                                        ∈


       Simple algebra delivers the following log odds ratios:18


                                                              ⎛             ⎞
                                     µ            ¶               X
                                       
                       ln       =            −  − (1 −  ) ⎝ln     ⎠ for  ∈                                (5)
                                        
                                                                       ∈
                                   
                       ln       =        for   ∈                                                                 (6)
                                   

As in the logit model, the odds ratio between two destinations depends only on the relative attractive-
ness between those two destinations (equation (6)). However, the odds ratio between the origin and
any given destination (equation (5)) contains an additional term, which corrects for the correlation
across destinations induced by the individual-specific unobserved characteristics (selection).19

       The probability that an individual chooses one location approximately coincides in the aggregate
  17
     For a given origin country, the first nest contains only the location of origin and the second nest contains all other
possible locations. See Berry (1994) for a detailed discussion of the nested logit model and its relationship to other
random-utility models.
  18
     Parameter  is known as the dissimilarity parameter and governs the degree of correlation across the stochastic terms
in the destination equations. Setting  = 1 corresponds to zero correlation, which delivers the familiar expression for the
log odds ratio of the logit model. Under our assumptions, there will be non-negative correlation among the disturbance
terms of the destination equations. This implies that 0    1.
  19
     A similar term arises generally in gravity models of trade and migration and is usually referred to as multilateral
resistance (Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)). This term accounts for the influence of third countries in determining
the flows between a given pair of countries. See Bertoli and Fernandez-Huertas (2011) for a general discussion in the
context of migration flows.




                                                             11
population with the share of individuals born in country  that choose that particular location.20
               P
Thus  =   =1  , where  denotes the number of individuals born in country  that choose

location . Hence, expression (5) can be written as

                                                                         ⎛                    ⎞
                                               µ              ¶                 X
                                                   
                         ln  = ln  +             −  − (1 −  ) ⎝ln              ⎠                   (7)
                                                    
                                                                                ∈

       It is important to note that except for  all terms in the right-hand-side of the equation are
constant across destinations and only vary by country of origin.21 Over time diﬀerent locations will
experience diﬀerent levels of income and wages, which will aﬀect their relative attractiveness and,
hence, the shares of migrants that they will receive. By considering a period-specific choice we derive
the multi-period version of the previous relationship:

                                                                         ⎛                    ⎞
                                               µ             ¶                 X
                                                                                       
                         ln  = ln  +                 
                                                         −  − (1 −  ) ⎝ln            ⎠                   (8)
                                                   
                                                                                ∈

for any destination  ∈  in time period .


3.2      Estimating Equation

Let us consider how we can estimate the relationship we just derived on the basis of panel data on
bilateral migration flows.22 Equation 8 can be rewritten as


                                           ln  =  +  +                                             (9)


which features origin-by-year fixed eﬀects ( ) capturing all time-varying terms that are constant

across destinations  ∈  and only vary by year and country of origin, namely the first and third
term in the right hand side of expression (8). The term  accounts for measurement error due to
the fact that we approximate probabilities with frequencies in the finite sample.
       Now we can be more specific about the variables that determine the average attractiveness of a
particular destination for all individuals. We assume that  is as follows:
  20
     This is an application of the law of large numbers.
  21
     Bertoli et al (2010) use micro-data to estimate a similar model, which allows them to identify coeﬃcient  .
  22
     See Berry (1994) for an analogous exercise where data on aggregate market shares is used to estimate the structural
parameters of a consumer’s problem consisting in choosing among alternative products.




                                                             12
                                             =  +  +  +  2                          (10)

         For a particular destination , the term  denotes the expected earnings at that destination in
year , which we shall proxy with income per capita.  represents a destination country fixed eﬀect

that accounts for time-invariant characteristics of the receiving country that also influence migration
decisions, such as institutions, culture and attitudes toward immigration that vary much across coun-

tries, but very slowly within country over time. The variable  , which varies over time and across
countries, stands for the tightness of entry laws described above. Presumably, when a particular desti-
nation tightens its entry requirements, the cost of choosing that destination increases (and the utility

falls) as it becomes more costly to enter the country. Finally the term  accounts for country-pair
specific variables that aﬀect the cost of migration from a given origin to a particular destination.
This cost is a function of bilateral geographical distance, cultural distance (measured by a common
language), past colonial ties between the two countries, whether the two countries share a common
currency, and so on.



4         Results

4.1         Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the main variables used in the analysis. Specifically, this table
reports averages across years and country pairs. The observations span the period 1980-2006 annually,
with missing values for some countries. The average bilateral migration flow is 1,498 individuals,

with a very large standard deviation. Several countries pairs have zero migration flows between them.
The largest flows, experienced between Mexico and the US in the years around 2000 and between
Poland and Germany in the years around 1990 were as large as 300,000 people per year. As one

would expect, the average income (GDP) per person at destination is much larger than average GDP
per capita among countries of origin (by a factor of almost 4). We proxy for migration costs using
bilateral distance and dummy variables for contiguous countries, common language, common legal
origin, colonial ties (the countries were in the same colonial empire), and a common currency.23
Finally, we also have three policy variables. The average of the entry tightness variable takes on a
    23
         We point out that the latter is time-varying.



                                                            13
negative value which indicates that across years and countries, entry laws were loosened more often
than they were tightened. We also include Maastricht and Schengen indicator variables. On average,
these indicators take the value of one for 21 to 25 percent of the origin-destination-year observations.

      Table 2 reports destination country averages across years. Column 1 reports the average yearly flow
of immigrants (across years) for the average bilateral pair involving each specific destination country
and all origins. Germany and the United States report the highest average bilateral migration flows.
Columns 2 reports the average population size (in millions) in the country of destination and Column
3 shows the average population in the country of origin for that destination. Similarly, Columns 4 and

5 report GDP per person for the destination country and for the average country of origin for that
destination. Clearly, income per person is several times larger in the destination country than in the
average of the countries of origin. These ratios range from 1.5 (for destination New Zealand) to 5.7

(destination Norway), as reported in Column 6. The average across all destinations is 3.8.


4.2      Income per Capita and Bilateral Costs as Determinants of Migration Flows

We now estimate our main migration model in equation (9). Mainly, the dependent variable is the log
of annual migration flows (plus one) between a particular country pair. This allows us to maintain the

exact logarithmic specification, obtained from our model, and at the same time keep the information
from the zero-migration pairs. Our main hypothesis is that income per capita at destination has a
positive eﬀect on migration flows, given income per capita at the origin. Variables that proxy for
higher costs of migration (such as geographical or cultural distance) are expected to have a negative
eﬀect while having colonial ties or a common currency is likely to facilitate migration between a given

pair of countries.24
      Let us emphasize that, relative to the existing literature, which mainly uses cross-sectional data
(such as Grogger and Hanson 2011) or data relative to only one destination country (such as Clark et al
2007) this paper uses a full panel specification with multiple origins, multiple destinations and several
years. This allows us to control much more carefully for origin and destination country specific factors,

identifying the eﬀects of income and immigration policies based solely on within-destination-country
variation over time.
      Table 3 presents the results from estimating specification (9). The explanatory variables are the
 24
      These variables have been known to play an important role in determining migration decisions since Taylor (1994).




                                                           14
logs of income per person at destination and origin (lagged one year), the log of distance, and dummy
variables for sharing a border, sharing a common language, having a common currency, or having
colonial ties25 . In general the sign and significance of bilateral variables is as expected. Distance

decreases significantly migration flows, while sharing a border, sharing the oﬃcial language, sharing
legal origins and having been part of the same colonial empire all increase significantly the size of

bilateral migrants26 . Across specifications we vary the sets of fixed eﬀects that we include (in the
form of dummy variables). In the theoretically justified specification (Columns 4 and beyond) we
include a full vector of origin-year dummy variables. They capture factors, including the unobserved

heterogeneity between migrants and non migrants, that vary across origin and year but not destination.
Column 1 does not include any fixed eﬀects and Column 2 includes only destination fixed eﬀects. In
these two sets of specifications, the point estimates of the income coeﬃcients are not as expected (the

sign of the destination income is negative), suggesting the presence of origin-year specific confounding
eﬀects. Column 3 includes both origin fixed eﬀects and destination fixed eﬀects. This specification,
which is closer to what our theoretical model implies, delivers the expected signs: income per capita
at destination is positively associated with migration flows while income per capita at origin appears
to have a negative eﬀect. A one percent increase in income per capita at destination is associated to a

0.54 percent increase in migration flows from each origin country. Likewise a one percent increase in
income per capita at the origin appears to reduce migration flows to each destination by about 0.33
percent. Previous estimates found, sometimes, an ambiguous eﬀect of income per capita in the country

of origin on migration. Some have argued that income may aﬀect emigration positively up to a certain
income level (by reducing the poverty trap and relaxing the budget constraint for migrants) and then,
once potential migrants become richer, further increase in income may aﬀect migration negatively.
However, in our case, in which we control for country fixed eﬀects, splitting countries between those
with income below the World median and those above gives very similar coeﬃcients on the country of

origin income. In a specification as 3 in Table 3 the coeﬃcients on income per person in the country of
origin, allowing for diﬀerent eﬀects (not report in the Table), is estimated at -0.31 for origin countries
  25
     The set of controls that we include in the bilateral regression contains those variables commonly used in the trade and
migration literature as proxy for migration costs. Far from being an exaustive list of variables aﬀecting the geographic
and cultural distance between countries they however capture the most important diﬀerences. The goal of this paper is
to identify the eﬀect of income and immigration policies and not the role of each cultural trait on international migration.
  26
     We have also performed diﬀerent specifications. For instance if countries were still in the same colonial empire after
1945, then the eﬀect on migration flows is 0.85, while if the colonial tie ended in 1945 it is only 0.77. Similarly we tried
with non-linear specification of log distance, but the coeﬃcient on a quadratic and cubic term was not significant.




                                                            15
below the world median income and -0.32 for those above.
          Column 4 is the first column including the whole vector of origin-year fixed eﬀects, besides desti-
nation fixed eﬀects and hence is the one consistent with our model. In this case, note that the eﬀect of

income per capita in the country of origin is absorbed by the origin-year fixed eﬀects and hence we do
not have an estimate of it. As expected, income per capita in the destination country has a positive
and significant eﬀect on migration flows. The eﬀect is estimated precisely (at around 0.6), and the
results are very robust. Hence this specification reveals that it is very important to use panel data
and to control for unobserved shocks and heterogeneity in order to obtain the correct estimates of the

eﬀect of income on migration flows. While the model is a very simplified representation of migration
decisions and, as acknowledged above, the data have limitations it is very encouraging to see that
the preferred model has the flexibility needed to obtain reasonable results. The signs of the control

variables are also all as expected and significant. Geographic distance reduces migration flows while
common language, currency, legislation or a shared colonial past all increase bilateral migration flows.
27    In Column 5 we restrict the analysis to the subsample of European origin and European destination
country pairs. We notice a large increase in the point estimate of per capita income at destination
as determinant of the flows. The estimated coeﬃcient suggests an elasticity of destination income
per capita of 1.82. At the same time most of the controls now exhibit much lower point estimates (in
absolute value). This suggests that, within Europe, barriers to migration are much less important, and
migration is much more sensitive to economic conditions at destination, once we control for income
per capita and other time-varying factors at the origin. Column 6 reports the estimates when we
restrict the analysis to the subsample of non-European destinations (and all origins). These estimates
are very similar to those obtained in Column 4 using the whole sample (elasticity 0.57).
          Columns 7-10 perform several robustness checks. In Column 7 we replace all missing values for
bilateral migration flows by zeros, which increases the sample size by about 50 percent. This is

because in many instances some countries do not report small bilateral flows. Hence a reasonable
approximation is to replace those entries with a zero value. The estimated coeﬃcient for the income
variable is only slightly larger (0.78) than that shown in Column 4. Column 8 restricts the estimation to

the subsample of 1985-2005, for which we have relatively fewer missing values than for the whole sample
     27
    Our main goal is to include controls for the cost of bilateral migrations that capture the main determinants of those
and allow us to estimate consistently the eﬀect of income and immigration laws. We enter those variables as linear
control (we experimented with non-linear specifications without finding much evidence of quadratic and cubic terms),
and we limit ourselves to the most commonly used variables.



                                                           16
period (1980-2006). Again, the point estimate (0.56) is essentially unaﬀected. Column 9 includes a
full set of origin-destination dummy variables, which absorb all time-invariant bilateral variables that
aﬀect migration flows.28 This is a very demanding specification as we absorb all bilateral-specific

factors as well as all origin by time factors. Still, we obtain that the destination income per capita
plays a highly significant role in determining migration flows, with a slightly lower elasticity of 0.3829 .

Finally, Column 10 reports the estimates obtained on a subsample where only 5-year periods are
considered (1985, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005). Short-term confounding factors and reverse causality
of immigration on income are arguably less of a concern with longer time lags in the explanatory

variables. Moreover a 5-year interval allows a fuller response of migration flows to variation of income
and of other variables. The estimated elasticity of migration to income per person at destination is
0.41, very significant and quantitatively close to our preferred estimate (0.63).
       Although we need caution in interpreting the results, due to the highly stylized nature of the
model and to data limitations, Table 3 provides evidence that the empirical specification implemented

in regressions (4) to (10) delivers plausible and fairly robust estimates. Income per person in the
destination country is a very important determinant of migration, particularly among countries with
low barriers to migration (such as within Europe).30 Changes in income per person have significant

short-run (one year) as well as medium-run (five years) eﬀects on immigration flows.


4.3      The Role of Immigration Restrictions

In this section we extend the previous regression model by including a vector of time-varying immigra-
tion policies. Policy makers and researchers are interested in evaluating the eﬀectiveness of immigration

restrictions in controlling immigration flows. Historically, restrictions have played a crucial role but it
is unclear whether the same is true in the current context with lower transportation and communica-
tion costs and stronger economic incentives to migrate between poor and rich countries.31 Specifically,

we consider our measure of tightness of entry laws. This is an indicator that records the introduction
of immigration laws and their direction in tightening or loosening ease of entry. We also include two
  28
     Sharing a common currency is a time-varying variable.
  29
     The reason that we do not report a specification with a destination by year eﬀect is that such eﬀect would absorb
any impact of the receiving-country income and of receving country’s immigration policies. This would render impossible
to estimate the eﬀects of the variables that constitute the focus of this paper.
  30
     On a similar note, Llull (2012) finds that the income elasticity of migration flows is a function of geographical
distance.
  31
     See Taylor’s (1994) account of the reasons behind the sharp drop in international migration in the interwar period.




                                                          17
more indicator variables to account for the increasing degree of economic interaction within Europe,
namely indicators for the presence of the Maastricht and Schengen treaties, and bilateral dummies for
having a common currency.32

       The Maastricht Treaty, formally known as the Treaty of the European Union, was signed in Feb-
ruary 1992 and became operative from 1993. It ushered in the first major step from a common market
toward greater economic and political ties among its member countries. The treaty led to the creation
of the Euro and reorganized the main institutions of the European Union. For our purposes it is worth
noting that the Maastricht Treaty increased cooperation in asylum, immigration, and foreign policy,

but it had no major implications for immigration from outside the European Union. The Treaty also
restated the principle of an internal market, characterized by the free movement of goods, persons,
services, and capital. It also lifted the remaining restrictions on migration from Spain and Portugal
to other EU countries, while citizens of the other EU member states were already free to move and
work within the EU.
       The Schengen Agreement was signed in June 1985 and implemented ten years later. Initially, only
five countries signed the agreement but over time the number of countries signing in has increased.
Its main goal was to create a large area with free internal labor mobility and a common external

frontier. Specifically, this treaty laid the guidelines for harmonization of entry and short stays by
non-EU citizens, asylum matters, and police and judicial cooperation among the country members.
The Schengen Agreement can be interpreted as a tightening of the EU border vis-a-vis the rest of the
world. For instance, the harmonization mandated by the Agreement forced to severe some ties with
former colonies. Spain was asked to eliminate its visa waiver programs with some former colonies (e.g.

Colombia in 2001 and Ecuador in 2003). The Agreement also led to the swift removal of border posts,
which despite its strong symbolism, did not add much to the existing eﬀective free internal mobility
of European workers within the European Union.33

       Before presenting the results we need to add some caveats. All variables, and especially the indi-
cator of tightness of entry laws, are rather coarse proxies for capturing the stance of immigration laws.
The fact that we consider only the introduction of laws, and not details about their implementation,

the fact that we cannot quantify how "significant" is the law and that we only include laws explicitly
  32
     The latter is fundamentally about the creation and adoption of the Euro, but not exclusively. For example, some
country pairs that shared a currency in 1995 follow: Australia and Tuvalu, Belgium and Luxembourg, Denmark and
Greenland, Spain and Andorra, or the US and Panama.
  33
     For more details see http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries.



                                                        18
aﬀecting entry all contribute to make our measure imperfect. Nevertheless as we are pioneering the
introduction of variables capturing specific immigration laws, and given the significant eﬀort done in
collecting those laws, it is still very interesting to measure their impact on migration. With this in

mind we move to presenting the empirical results.
   On the basis of their content we would expect a positive eﬀect of the Maastricht treaty on subse-
quent migration flows. Specifically, it probably enhanced migration flows within the European Union,
leaving unaﬀected inflows from outside. Regarding the Schengen Agreement we expect a negative
eﬀect on migration flows since it increased migration requirements (and, implicitly, migration costs)

for non-EU migrants, while probably not having an eﬀect on internal migration. Of course, the two
variables are highly correlated, however, the correlation coeﬃcient is well below one (0.70). Countries
diﬀered in their timing of accession to the EU. In addition, some countries have opted out of one of the

treaties. In particular, the UK signed the Maastricht Treaty (in 1993) but opted out of the Schengen
Agreement, as well as Ireland. In addition, some non-EU members also participated in the Schengen

Agreement (Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Switzerland).
   Table 4 reports our estimates of specification (9) including the immigration policy variables. As
in the previous table, the dependent variable is the log of annual migration flows (plus one). Besides
lagged income per capita at destination and the same set of control variables and fixed eﬀects as in
specification 4 of Table 3, we now include the time-varying immigration policy variables. Columns
1 and 2 include the entry policy variable either measured in the same year as the immigration flows
(specification 1) or lagged one period (specification 2). The policies should aﬀect migration flows from
the very first year that they become law. However, some implementation delay may generate stronger

eﬀects with some lag. The coeﬃcient on income per capita are slightly larger than in the previous table
(0.78-0.79 as opposed to 0.63 in Column 4 in the previous table), and highly significant. The degree
of tightness of entry laws has a significant negative eﬀect, indicating that as countries tighten their

entry conditions immigration flows fall already within the same year and (even more) the following
year. The Maastricht and Schengen indicator variables are introduced in Column 3 and also have the
expected signs: the former is associated with an increase in total migration flows while the latter had

a negative eﬀect. Sharing a common currency also appears to have a significant and positive eﬀect on
the size of migration flows.

   In column 4 we restrict the analysis to European country pairs. Two points are worth noting. First,



                                                  19
the coeﬃcient on income doubles, suggesting a much larger elasticity of migration flows to income per
capita within the European economic area, as was the case in the previous Table as well. Second,
the coeﬃcient of the Maastricht treaty takes on a larger positive value, reflecting the large eﬀect that

the process of European economic integration has on within-Europe migration flows. The Schengen
Agreement now is not statistically significant, supporting our expectation that its main eﬀect was to
reduce inflows from outside the European Union. The coeﬃcient on entry tightness now appears to be
positive and significant. This reflects the tightening of entry laws by European countries vis a vis non-
EU immigrants at the same time as internal restrictions to worker mobility were being eliminated.

Column 5 reports the estimates for the subsample of non-European destination countries (and all
origins). As expected, the point estimate on income per capita at destination is now lower (0.42),
but still highly significant. Also the coeﬃcient on entry tightness is still negative and significant, and

much larger in absolute value (-0.06 versus -0.02 earlier).
       In order to allow for a diﬀerential eﬀect of entry laws on migration from within the European

Union, we include an interaction of entry tightness and an European origin country indicator variable.
As expected, in Columns 6 through 9 we find a negative eﬀect of entry tightness on inflows from outside
the European Union, while negligible eﬀects on within-Europe migration flows (that is, the sum of
the two coeﬃcients), which are mostly aﬀected by accession to the EU and the subsequent adoption
of the Maastricht treaty. Column 6 shows that the results are robust to dropping the observations for
the first few years and for the last year, which feature more missing values.
       Column 8 reports the estimates for a specification that replaces the origin-year dummies by an
origin-specific cubic time trend. Of course, this is less flexible than the whole set of origin-year dummies

but it is much faster to implement.34 As we can see, the coeﬃcient on income per capita at destination

falls slightly (from 0.76 in Column 5 to 0.54) but retains its significance. The eﬀect on tightening entry
laws remains largely unchanged. Column 9 employs a more simplistic origin-specific linear time trend,

with very similar results. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that origin-specific polynomial
time trends are able to replace reasonably well the large set of origin-year dummies and hence can be
used instead of the more demanding model with country by year eﬀects in shorter panels.

       Column 10 reports an important robustness check, where we employ long (5-year) diﬀerences, as
we did already in the last column of Table 3. The number of observations is drastically reduced as
  34
    It also allows for the estimation of more computationally demanding nonlinear models within a short amount of
time.



                                                       20
we only consider 5-year diﬀerences. The results, however, confirm the findings in Column 4, with a
positive and significant eﬀect of destination income per capita and a negative and significant eﬀect of
entry tightness. While five years may not be long enough for all the immigration laws to produce their

eﬀect it is certainly a significant step towards the long-run. It appears, in fact, that in the medium
run the impact of immigration laws tightening entry conditions is stronger than in the short run. This
is very reasonable as immigrant inflow may take some time to respond to the immigration laws of a
country.
   Let us emphasize that these estimates are based on a very demanding specification, featuring

hundreds of fixed eﬀects. As a result, the identifying variation behind our estimates is very specific:
within-destination variation over time, after controlling for origin-year variation. We are not aware
of any previous analysis that provided estimates of the roles of per capita income and immigration

restrictions based on such a demanding specification.
   In conclusion, the estimates in Table 4 deliver a preferred elasticity of migration flows to destination

per capita income of 0.76 (Column 2). However, this estimate averages the very high elasticity for
within-Europe migration flows (1.90, Column 3) and a lower value (0.42, Column 4) for migration
flows to non-European destinations. Analogously, legislation that tightens entry laws is associated
with reductions in migration flows (about 2 percentage points for the typical restrictive law) but
this eﬀect largely arises from non-European destinations. For European country pairs, the treaties
governing the European integration process are the fundamental aspects of immigration policy. The
Maastricht treaty increased significantly the intra-European mobility, while the Schengen agreement
has reduced immigration flows from outside the European Union. Our results suggest that as barriers

to internal labor mobility within the EU have fallen there has been a tightening of entry laws vis-
a-vis immigration from the rest of the world. Let us emphasize, in concluding this section, that the
limitations of the existing immigration data (measurement error, potential heterogeneity of sources)

and of the variables measuring immigration policy call for some caution in interpreting the results.
While our estimates deliver rather robust and plausible implications, further work is needed in order
to understand the eﬀects of immigration policy on immigration flows.




                                                   21
5         Conclusions

This paper takes two important steps in the direction of establishing and implementing a common
framework to analyze the economic and policy determinants of international migration flows, guided
by the more developed empirical literature on international trade flows. First, we propose a discrete-
choice migration model with unobserved heterogeneity at the individual level that incorporates a rich

structure for migration costs. We exploit the nesting structure that arises from our model to derive
an estimating equation for aggregate bilateral migration flows, which we estimate using a large annual
panel of origin-destination countries over time. This provides a stronger identification for the roles

of income and migration policies in determining migration flows. Second, we gather a new dataset
containing information on immigration policies (tightness of entry laws and economic integration
within Europe) over time for the main immigrant destinations.
         We find several interesting results. First, a one percent increase in income per capita at a given
destination is associated with a 0.76 percent increase in immigration flows. This elasticity is twice as
large for intra-EU migration flows, reflecting the higher degree of mobility within the European Union.
Second, when a typical (non-European) immigrant destination, such as the US, Canada or Australia,
tightens its entry laws, immigration flows fall by about six percent. Third, in Europe the Maastricht
treaty has significantly increased internal migration by around 10%, while the Schengen treaty has
decreased immigration from outside the EU.
         Overall, our results suggest that the existing large income per capita diﬀerences between rich
and poor countries will continue to generate large international worker mobility. However, national
immigration policies also play a large role in determining the size of these flows, as had already been
the case in the past (Hatton and Williamson, 2005). We also find that regional European economic
integration has had a large eﬀect on the size and pattern of migration flows for European destinations.
Ultimately, these policies reflect voters’ views of the socioeconomic eﬀects of immigration on the

receiving countries. Immigration researchers should therefore continue to make progress in the study
of the channels through which economies absorb immigrants, particularly in the current context of
increasing economic interdependence.35

         We conclude by suggesting avenues for future research. We think that more work is needed to
    35
    Some recent contributions that emphasize the role of trade openness in mediating the economic eﬀects of immigration
are Iranzo and Peri (2009), di Giovanni et al. (2012), and Ortega and Peri (2012).




                                                          22
understand the microfoundations of aggregate migration flows. In particular, we need a better un-
derstanding of the nature of migration costs and how immigration policies shape these costs. More
research should also be directed to understanding migration decisions in response to macroeconomic

shocks, particularly in the current context of highly asymmetric shocks among European countries. In
terms of data the priority should be on assembling large homogeneous individual-level data (from na-
tional censuses) that provide information on migration decisions, and on coordinating eﬀorts across all
social sciences to produce more comprehensive and sophisticated quantitative measures of immigration
policies.




                                                  23
References

Adsera, Alicia and Mariola Pytlikova, 2012. “The role of language in shaping international migration."
IZA Working Paper 6333.

Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. (2003) “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border

Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170—92.

Beine, Michael Frederic Docquier, and Caglar Ozden, 2011. "Dissecting Network Externalities in

International Migration," Discussion Papers (IRES - Institut de Recherches Economiques et Sociales)
2011022, Universite’Catholique de Louvain, Institut de Recherches Economiques et Sociales (IRES).

Benhabib, Jess, (1996) "On the political economy of immigration" European Economic Review, 40 (9);
pages 1737-1743.

Berry, Steven T. (1994) "Estimating Discrete Choice models of Product Diﬀerentiation" RAND Jour-

nal of Economics, 25 (2).

Bertocchi Graziella and Chiara Strozzi.(2008) "International Migration and the Role of Institutions",

2008, Public Choice, Vol. 137, No. 1, pp. 81-102.

Bertocchi Graziella and Chiara Strozzi. (2010) "The Evolution of Citizenship: Economic and Institu-
tional Determinants", Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming, 2010.

Bertoli, Simone and Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, Jesus, 2011. “Multilateral Resistance to Migration,"
IZA Discussion Papers 5958, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Bertoli, Simone, Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga and Francesc Ortega, 2010. “Crossing the Border:
Self-Selection, Earnings and Individual Migration Decisions," IZA Discussion Papers 4957, Institute
for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Bertoli, Simone, Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga and Francesc Ortega, 2011. “Immigration Policies
and the Ecuadorian Exodus," World Bank Economic Review, Oxford University Press, vol. 25(1),
pages 57-76, March.

Borjas, George (1987) "Self Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants" American Economic Review
77(4), 531-553.

                                                    24
Chaney, Thomas (2008) "Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margin of International
Trade" American Economic Review 2008, 98:4, 1707—172.

Chiswick, Barry R. and Timothy J. Hatton, 2003. “International Migration and the Integration of
Labor Markets." Published in: M. Bordo, A. Taylor, J. Williamson (eds), Globalization in Historical

Perspective, NBER Conference Report, 2003, 65-119.

Clark X., Hatton T.J. and J. Williamson (2007) "Explaining U.S. Immigration 1971-1998" Review of
Economics and Statistics 89(2), 359-373.

di Giovanni, Julian, Levchenko, Andrei, and Ortega, Francesc, (2012). “A Global View of Cross-border
Migration." CReAM Discussion Paper 18/12.

Docquier,      Frederic    (2007)     "International     Migration        Datasets"     available   at
http://www.ires.ucl.ac.be/CSSSP/home_pa_pers/docquier/oxlight.htm.

Dolmas, J., Huﬀman, G., (2004). "On the Political Economy of Immigration and Income Redis-
tribution." International Economic Review.

Elmeskov J., Martin J.P. and Scarpetta S. (1998) "Key Lessons for Labor Market reforms: Evidence
from OECD Countries Experiences" Swedish Economic Policy Review, Vol. 5, No. 2, Autumn 1998

Facchini, Giovanni, and Mayda, Anna Maria (2009). “Does the Welfare State Aﬀect Individual At-

titudes toward Immigrants? Evidence across Countries,” The Review of Economics and Statistics.
Volume 91 (2), pages 295-314.

Facchini, Giovanni, Mayda, Anna Maria, and Mishra, Prachi (2011). “Do interest groups aﬀect US
immigration policy?,” Journal of International Economics. Volume 85 (1). Pages 114-128.

Facchini, Giovanni, and Steinhardt, Max (2011). “What drives U.S. immigration policy? Evidence
from congressional roll call votes.” Journal of Public Economics. Volume 95 (7-8), pages 734-743.

Fondazione       Rodolfo        DeBenedetti        (2007)       "Social        reform        database"

http://www.frdb.org/documentazione/scheda.php

Garcia-Gomez, Pilar and Guillem Lopez-Casasnovas (2006) "Hypotheses on immigration and welfare

(In Spanish)." Moneda y Credito, 222: 79-123.


                                                 25
Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (2002) ’Does a Currency Union Aﬀect Trade? The Time-Series
Evidence" European Economic Review 46(6) 1125-1151.

Gonzalez, Libertad and Francesc Ortega (forthcoming). “Immigration and Housing Booms: Evidence
from Spain." Journal of Regional Science.

Grogger, Jeﬀrey and Hanson, Gordon H., (2011). "Income maximization and the selection and sorting
of international migrants," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 95(1), pages 42-57, May.

Hatton, Timothy, 2005. “European Asylum Policy." National Institute Economic Review, 2005, 194
(1), 106-119.

Hatton, Timothy, 2010. “The Cliometrics of International Migration: A Survey." Journal of Economic
Surveys, 2010, 24 (5), 941-969.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeﬀrey G. Williamson (2005). “International Migration in the Long-Run:
Positive Selection, Negative Selection and Policy." Published in: D. Snower (ed.) Labour Mobility and
the World Economy, Kiel: Kiel Institute for World Economics.

Head, Keith, Mayer, Thierry, and Ries, John, 2010. "The erosion of colonial trade linkages after

independence," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 81(1), pages 1-14, May.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Yona Rubinstein, (2008). "Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
Partners and Trading Volumes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 123(2), pages
441-487, 05.

Iranzo, Susana and Peri, Giovanni, 2009. "Migration and trade: Theory with an application to the
Eastern-Western European integration," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 79(1),
pages 1-19, September.

Karemera D., Oguledo V.I. and Davis B. (2000) " A Gravity Model Analysis of International Migration

to North America" Applied Economics (32) 1745-1755.

Llull, Joan, 2011. “Understanding International Migration: Evidence from a New Dataset of Bilateral
Stocks (1960-2000)." Manuscript.




                                                 26
Mayda, Anna Maria (2006). “Who Is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of Indi-
vidual Attitudes toward Immigrants.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. Volume 88 (3), pages
510-530.

Mayda, Anna Maria (2007) "International Migration Flows: An Analysis of the forces and Constraints

at Work" Manuscript Georgetown University.

Mayda, Anna Maria (2010): "International Migrations: A Panel Data Analysis of the Determinants
of Bilateral Flows" Journal of Population Economics, 23 (4): pp. 1249-1274.

Mayda, Anna Maria and Krishna Patel (2004) "OECD Countries Migration Policy Changes." Appen-
dix to Mayda (2010), available at http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/amm223/papers.htm

McFadden, Daniel (1974) “Conditional logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior" in P. Zarembka
Eds. Frontiers in Econometrics, New York Acedemic press.

McFadden, Daniel (1978) “Modelling The Choice of Residential Location" in A.Karlgvist et al. Eds
Spatial Interaction Theories and Models; Amsterdam North Holland.

McKenzie, David, Theoharides, Caroline, and Yang, Dean (2012). “Distortions in the International
Migrant Labor Market: Evidence from Filipino Migration and Wage Responses to Destination Country
Economic Shocks." Mimeo.

OECD (2001) “OECD Social Expenditure database”, Public Expenditures Vol. 2001, Release 01.

OECD         (2011)   "Society    at    a     Glance     2011",      OECD       Social   Indicators,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/soc_glance-2011-en.

Ortega, Francesc (2005) "Immigration Policy and Skill Upgrading." Journal of Public Economics, 89,
1841-1863.

Ortega, Francesc (2010). "Immigration, Citizenship, and the Size of Government," The B.E. Journal
of Economic Analysis and Policy, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 10(1), pages 26.

Ortega, Francesc, and Giovanni Peri (2009) "The Causes and Eﬀects of International Migrations:
Evidence from OECD Countries 1980-2005." NBER Working Paper 14833.




                                                 27
Ortega, Francesc, and Giovanni Peri (2012) "The Eﬀect of Trade and Migration on Income." NBER
Working Paper 18193.

Ortega, Francesc, and Polavieja, Javier (2012). “Labor-market Exposure as a Determinant of Attitudes
toward Immigration.” Labour Economics. Volume 19, pages 298-311.

Pedersen, P. J., Pytlikova, M., and Smith, N. (2006) Migration into OECD countries 1990- 2000. In
Parson and Smeeding, editors, Immigration and the Transformation of Europe. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge.

Taylor, A. M. (1994), "Mass Migration to Distant Southern Shores: Argentina and Australia," in T.
J. Hatton and J. G. Williamson (eds.), Migration and the International Labor Market, 1850-1939,
London: Routledge.

United Nations (2005): “International Migration Flows to and From Selected Countries,” Revision
2005, Population Division, the Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Washington, D.C.




                                                28
Tables and Figures




                Table 1: Summary Statistics for the Main Variables.


                Variable                      Observations         Mean         Std. Dev.        Min           Max

                Bilateral Migration flow          45,565          1498.21       7239.56           0          455075
                GDP/Pop in Destination            41,515         23990.49       9750.22        4354.15      66964.37
                GDP/Pop in Origin                 38,877          6560.86       9833.51         62.95       89563.63
                Migration costs:
                 Distance                         41,515          7366.26       4402.26        160.93       19516.56
                 Contiguous                       41,515            0.02          0.14            0            1
                 Common language                  41,515            0.19          0.40            0            1
                 Common currency                  41,515            0.02          0.13            0            1
                 Common legislation               41,515            0.22          0.42            0            1
                 Colonial ties                    41,515            0.04          0.21            0            1
                Tightness of Entry Laws           35,805           -0.90          1.99           -6            2
                Maastricht                        35,805            0.25          0.43            0            1
                Schengen                          35,805            0.21          0.41            0            1


                Note: The sources for each variable are described in the text. Common language takes a value of one if a
                substantial share of the population in the two countries shares a common language. We constructed the
                variables on tightness of entry, Maastricht and Schengen.




                                                                  29
             Table 2: Main Variables in Destination country: average over the considered period



                             (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)                 (5)              (4) /
Destination country    Yearly Average     Population in      Population in     GDP/Population        GDP/Populatio         (5)
                       Bilateral Flow      Destination          Origin           Destination           n Origin
                       of immigrants
Australia                    737               18.1                34.1              21,305              6,068            3.5
Belgium                     1,023               10.1               49.2              21,498               7,208           3.0
Canada                      1,002               28.6               28.7              20,105               5,541           3.6
Denmark                      300                 5.2               35.6              27,541               5,510           5.0
Finland                      102                 5.0               32.2              22,132               5,402           4.1
Germany                     5,019               80.6               32.4              22,430               5,540           4.0
Italy                       1,443               57.0               29.6              17,945              5,279            3.4
Netherlands                  781               15.3                30.0              22,335              5,578            4.0
New Zealand                  727                 3.7               73.4              15,114              10,317           1.5
Norway                       169                 4.3               29.2              31,486              5,496            5.7
Spain                       2,028               39.6               33.3              13,087               5,504           2.4
Sweden                       309                 8.7               30.1              25,096              5,370            4.7
Switzerland                 2,747                7.0               54.4              36,427              8,277            4.4
United Kingdom              1,223              59.0                46.9              25,445              8,368            3.0
United States               3,991              261.2               27.4              26,421               5,505           4.8


Note: The period considered for all countries is 1980-2006, however, some countries have missing data in the early part of the
sample. Columns 2 and 3 are in millions of individuals. Columns 4 and 5 are in PPP year-2000 USD




                                                              30
  Table 3:          Income per capita, bilateral costs and migration flows.

 Specification:                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)
 Dep. Variable:
 ln(1+Migration)

 Lagged Ln(GDP/Pop)
 Destination                  -0.14***   0.62***    0.54***    0.63***       1.82***    0.57***    0.78***    0.56***    0.38***    0.41***
                               [0.05]     [0.10]     [0.06]     [0.06]        [0.17]     [0.14]     [0.07]     [0.07]     [0.04]     [0.13]
 Lagged Ln GDP/Pop
 Origin                        0.22***    0.21***   -0.33***
                                [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.02]
 Ln Distance                  -0.56***   -0.76***   -0.99***   -0.98***      -0.52***   -1.61***   -0.89***   -0.99***             -1.03***
                                [0.02]     [0.02]     [0.01]     [0.01]        [0.06]     [0.03]    [0.02]      [0.01]              [0.03]
 Contiguous                    1.39***    0.89***       0         -0.04       0.65***   -0.79***   0.49***       -0.06               -0.12
                                [0.09]     [0.08]     [0.05]     [0.05]        [0.06]     [0.16]    [0.07]      [0.05]              [0.12]
 Common language              1.04***    0.27***    0.54***     0.58***      -0.37***    1.01***   0.82***     0.58***             0.62***
                                [0.04]     [0.03]     [0.03]     [0.03]        [0.08]     [0.04]    [0.03]      [0.03]              [0.06]
 Common currency              0.29***       0.03    0.53***     0.96***       0.27***    0.94***   0.71***     0.91***   0.53***   0.86***
                                [0.10]     [0.09]     [0.06]     [0.06]        [0.07]     [0.12]    [0.08]      [0.06]    [0.05]    [0.13]
 Common Legislation           0.36***    0.19***     0.38***    0.33***       0.78***              0.27***     0.34***             0.30***
                                [0.03]     [0.03]     [0.02]     [0.02]        [0.05]               [0.02]      [0.02]              [0.05]
 Colonial ties                0.80***    1.31***    1.37***    1.48***       0.57***    0.30***    1.46***     1.52***             1.47***
                                [0.06]     [0.06]     [0.04]     [0.04]        [0.10]    [0.09]     [0.05]      [0.04]              [0.09]

 Observations                  37852      37852      37852      40307         4,374     14,643     59314      34610      40,307     7,540
 R-squared                      0.16       0.37       0.77       0.79         0.79       0.88       0.67       0.8        0.94      0.80
 Fixed effects
  Year                          yes        yes        yes        yes           yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes
  Destination                   no         yes        yes        yes           yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes
  Origin                        no         no         yes        yes           yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes
  Origin-year                   no         no         no         yes           yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes
  Origin-destination            no         no         no         no            no         no         no         no        yes         no
                                                                                         non-        All -     1985-                All (5-
 Sample                          All        All        All        All        Europe     Europe      Zeros      2005        All      year)


Note: All models include an intercept. Column 5 includes only European country pairs. Column 6 includes only non-European destinations (and all
origins). Column 10 uses only data for years 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, and 2005. Standard errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity robust and
clustered by country-pair. ***, **, * significant at 1%, 5%, 10% level.
                                                                        31
    Table 4: The Role of Immigration Policy: Tightness of Entry Laws


                                          1             2              3            4            5             6           7            8           9           10
                                         Basic      Lag(policy)       EU        Europe         Non-          With       1985-        Polyn-      Linear      Long-diff
Dep. Variable: ln(1+Migration)                                     policies       only       Europe     Interaction      2000        trend       trend
Lagged Ln GDP/Pop Dest.                0.78***        0.79***      0.76***      1.90***      0.42***       0.76***     0.71***      0.54***     0.50***       0.71**
                                        [0.07]         [0.07]       [0.08]       [0.22]       [0.14]        [0.08]      [0.09]       [0.05]      [0.04]       [0.33]
Entry Tightness                        -0.02***      -0.03***      -0.02***     0.07***     -0.06***      -0.03***     -0.04***     -0.02***    -0.02***     -0.05***
                                        [0.01]         [0.01]       [0.01]       [0.02]       [0.01]        [0.01]      [0.01]       [0.01]      [0.01]       [0.02]

Entry Tightness *European Origin                                                                          0.04***      0.05***      0.04***     0.04***
                                                                                                           [0.01]        [0.01]      [0.01]       [0.01]
Maastricht                                                          0.10***     0.29***                   0.10***       0.14***       -0.00        -0.00
                                                                     [0.04]      [0.08]                    [0.04]        [0.04]      [0.03]       [0.03]
Schengen                                                           -0.11***       0.05                   -0.11***      -0.11***       -0.03        -0.03
                                                                     [0.03]      [0.07]                    [0.03]        [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]
Common currency                        1.02***        1.02***      1.02***        0.10       1.04***      1.02***       0.96***     1.02***     1.01***      0.86***
                                         [0.06]        [0.06]        [0.06]      [0.08]       [0.11]       [0.06]        [0.07]      [0.06]       [0.06]      [0.26]
Ln Distance                            -0.98***      -0.98***      -0.98***    -0.64***     -1.52***     -0.98***      -0.98***     -0.98***    -0.98***     -1.59***
                                         [0.02]        [0.02]        [0.02]      [0.07]       [0.03]       [0.02]        [0.02]      [0.01]       [0.01]      [0.07]
Contiguous                                -0.08         -0.08         -0.08     0.53***     -0.53***        -0.07         -0.09       -0.07        -0.08      -0.69*
                                         [0.06]        [0.06]        [0.06]      [0.07]       [0.17]       [0.06]        [0.06]      [0.05]       [0.05]      [0.37]
Common language                        0.67***        0.66***      0.67***     -0.46***      1.06***      0.66***       0.67***     0.67***     0.67***      1.08***
                                         [0.03]        [0.03]        [0.03]      [0.08]       [0.04]       [0.03]        [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]      [0.09]
Common Legislation                      0.25***       0.25***       0.25***     0.84***                   0.25***      0.25***      0.25***      0.25***
                                         [0.02]        [0.02]        [0.02]      [0.05]                    [0.02]        [0.02]      [0.02]       [0.02]
Colony                                  1.42***       1.41***       1.42***       0.15      -0.17*        1.43***      1.51***      1.43***     1.43***        -0.15
                                         [0.04]        [0.04]        [0.04]      [0.12]     [0.10]         [0.04]        [0.04]      [0.04]       [0.04]       [0.23]
Observations                            34,749        34,749        34,749       3,620      13,469        34,749        29,746       34,749      34,749        2,537
R-squared                                 0.80           0.80         0.80        0.79       0.90            0.80         0.80        0.79         0.78         0.91
Fixed effects
 Destination                              Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Origin-year                              Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         No           No          Yes
Origin - Time trend                       No            No            No          No          No            No            No         Cubic       Linear        No
                                                                                                                                                              Non-
                                                                                             Non-                       1985-
Sample                                    All           All           All       Europe                      All                        All         All      Europe (5-
                                                                                            Europe                      2005
                                                                                                                                                              year)
    Note: All specifications include destination and origin-year fixed effects. Column 3 includes only European country pairs. Column 4 includes only non-European
    destinations (and all origins). The sample in columns 9 is analogous to columns 4 but uses only data for years 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005. Standard
    errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by country-pair. ***, **, * significant at 1%, 5%, 10% level.
                                                                                 32
Figure 1: Yearly immigration flows as percentage of resident population; 15 OECD Countries
                                                Australia                                                                                                     Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Canada                                                                                                   Denmark




                                                                                                                            1
           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                            .8
           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                                                 Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
 Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Immigration Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Immigration Rate
                                                                                                                             .6
             .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                                   .4
   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                            .2
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                       1980            1990                         2000                 2010                                           1980           1990               2000       2010                                        1980                    1990                       2000           2010                                  1980                      1990                    2000          2010
                                                      Year                                                                                                      Year                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                    Year




                                               Finlandia                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Italy                                                                                         The Netehrlands
                                                                                                                                                              Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                          1.4
               1




                                                                                                          1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8
               .8




                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Immigration Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Immigration Rate
     Immigration Rate




                                                                                                Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .6
                 .6




                                                                                                   .6     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .4
       .4




                                                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
               .2




                                                                                                          .2
               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                          0




                        1980           1990                   2000                2010                               1980                             1990                2000             2010                                                 1980          1990                         2000           2010                                              1980      1990                        2000          2010
                                                     Year                                                                                                       Year                                                                                                        Year                                                                                                    Year



                                              New Zealand                                                                                                      Norway                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spain
                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
           2




                                                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                 1.5




                                                                                                              Immigration Rate
 Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Immigration Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Immigration Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .6
       1




                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .5
           .5




                                                                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
           0




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0

                       1980            1990                     2000                 2010                                          1980                1990                2000            2010                                            1980           1990                      2000           2010                             1980                           1990                     2000           2010
                                                      Year                                                                                                       Year                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                   Year



                                                                                                                                                         United Kingdom
                                              Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
           1




                                                                                                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
           .8




                                                                                                                     Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Immigration Rate
 Immigration Rate




                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .6
            .6




                                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
   .4




                                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                             0
           0




                         1985   1990          1995           2000          2005     2010                                                1990   1995            2000          2005   2010                             1980                              1990                    2000               2010
                                                     Year                                                                                                      Year                                                                                              Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 33
                                                                                                                         Change in tightness                                                                       Change in tightness
                                                                                                              -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4       5       6                                    -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3        4   5   6
                              Change in tightness
                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3        4       5       6




                                                                                                      1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                1980




            1980
                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                1990




            1990
                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                                                                                         Year



                                                                                                                                                                        Germany




     Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Australia




                                                                        Sweden
                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                2000




            2000
                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                2010




            2010
                                                                                                                         Change in tightness                                                                       Change in tightness
                                                                                                              -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4       5       6                                    -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4   5     6
                              Change in tightness
                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3        4       5       6




                                                                                                       1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                1980




            1980
                                                                                                       1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                1990




            1990
                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                                                                                         Year




     Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Belgium




                                                                        Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                       The Netehrlands




                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                2000




            2000
                                                                                                       2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                2010




            2010
                                                                                                                         Change in tightness                                                                       Change in tightness
                              Change in tightness                                                                                                                                                       -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4   5      6
                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4       5       6                                     -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3        4       5       6




34
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1980




            1980
                                                                                                      1980




            1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1990




                                                                                                      1990




     Year
                                                                                                                                                                                          Year




                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Canada




                                                                                                                                                                   Norway




                                                                              United Kingdom




            2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000




                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 2: Changes in tightness of immigration entry laws over time; 12 OECD countries.




            2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010




                              Change in tightness
                                                                                                      2010




                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3        4       5       6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Change in tightness
            1980




                                                                                                                         Change in tightness                                                            -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4   5     6
                                                                                                              -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3            4       5       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                1980




                                                                                                      1980




            1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                1990




                                                                                                      1990




     Year
                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                         Year




                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                                                                       Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Denmark




            2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                2000




                                                                                                      2000




            2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                2010




                                                                                                      2010
                                    APPENDIX
Table A1: Sources of the Immigration Data



                                                 United        International Migration
Sources of the Data:          Mayda (2010)       Nations       Database
                                                 Years
country                       Years covered      covered       Years covered
AUSTRALIA                     1983-2005          1960-2004     1998-2006
BELGIUM                       1984-2005          1960-2003     1998-2006
CANADA                        1980-2005          1961-2004     1998-2006
DENMARK                       1990-2004          1980-2004     1998-2006
FINLAND                       n.a.               1980-2004     1998-2006
GERMANY                       1984-2005          1965-2004     1998-2006
ITALY                         n.a.               1980-2000     1998-2006
NETHERLANDS                   1984-2005          1960-2004     1998-2006
NEW ZEALAND                   n.a.               1950-2004     1998-2006
NORWAY                        1984-2005          1980-2003     1998-2006
SPAIN                         n.a.               1980-2004     1998-2006
SWEDEN                        1980-2005          1960-2004     1998-2006
SWITZERLAND                   1984-2005          n.a.          1998-2006
UNITED KINGDOM                1982-2006          1964-2003     1998-2001
UNITED STATES                 1980-2006          1946-2004     1998-2006


Note: this table summarizes the source for migration data for each receiving country.
The main sources are Mayda (2010), United Nations and IMD. For each country the
specific database covers a certain year range, which is indicated in the table above.




                                         35
