                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECT OF SCHOOL CHOICE ON INTRINSIC MOTIVATION AND ACADEMIC
                              OUTCOMES

                                         Justine S. Hastings
                                       Christopher A. Neilson
                                        Seth D. Zimmerman

                                        Working Paper 18324
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18324


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




The authors would like to thank Brian Jacob and participants at the 2011 ASSA meetings for helpful
comments. Sarah Johnston provided outstanding research assistance. Hastings thanks the Brown University
Population Studies and Training Center and the Yale University Institution for Social and Policy Studies
for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Justine S. Hastings, Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth D. Zimmerman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of School Choice on Intrinsic Motivation and Academic Outcomes
Justine S. Hastings, Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth D. Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 18324
August 2012
JEL No. I20,I21,I24

                                              ABSTRACT

Using data on student outcomes and school choice lotteries from a low-income urban school district,
we examine how school choice can affect student outcomes through increased motivation and personal
effort as well as through improved school and peer inputs. First we use unique daily data on individual-level
student absences and suspensions to show that lottery winners have significantly lower truancies after
they learn about lottery outcomes but before they enroll in their new schools. The effects are largest
for male students entering high school, whose truancy rates decline by 21% in the months after winning
the lottery. We then examine the impact attending a chosen school has on student test score outcomes.
We find substantial test score gains from attending a charter school and some evidence that choosing
and attending a high value-added magnet school improves test scores as well. Our results contribute
to current evidence that school choice programs can effectively raise test scores of participants. Our
findings suggest that this may occur both through an immediate effect on student behavior and through
the benefit of attending a higher-performing school.


Justine S. Hastings                                   Seth D. Zimmerman
Brown University                                      Yale University
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street                                    37 Hillhouse Ave.
Providence, RI 02912                                  New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER                                              seth.zimmerman@yale.edu
justine_hastings@brown.edu

Christopher A. Neilson
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06511
christopher.neilson@yale.edu
I.     Introduction


The federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) of 2001 set out to reform public education by
introducing accountability measures coupled with a public school choice requirement for all
schools receiving federal Title I funds (Title I schools). The public school choice component
requires that districts allow parents of children at persistently under-performing schools the
option to send their child to a higher-performing school. Such school choice and accountability
programs are intended to provide all students the opportunity to obtain a high-quality education.
       This paper examines whether and how school choice and accountability systems
accomplish these goals. Using data on student outcomes and school choice lotteries from a low-
income urban school district, we consider two mechanisms through which school choice may
improve student outcomes. First, school choice may raise intrinsic motivation for students who
are offered the opportunity to attend a high-quality school. Second, students who choose to
attend high-quality schools may benefit from improved school and peer inputs.
       To evaluate the role these two mechanisms plays in improving student outcomes, we look
at changes in test scores, absences, and suspensions for winners and losers of school choice
lotteries. We measure the effects of changes in intrinsic motivation separately from the effects of
changes in school inputs by estimating the impact winning the lottery has on absences and
suspensions after students learn about lottery outcomes but before they enroll in their new
schools. We use unique daily data on student absences and suspensions to address the question of
whether student behavior responds positively to the opportunity to attend a better school even
before that opportunity is realized. We then measure the impact of attending a chosen school on
student test scores using lottery assignments as an instrument for chosen school attendance. This
impact reflects a combination of changes in student effort and gains in school quality.
       We find that the opportunity to attend a better school has positive and significant effects
on both student attendance and test scores. After students are notified of lottery outcomes,
truancy rates for choice lottery winners fall relative to those for lottery losers, whose truancy
rates do not change relative to lottery non-entrants with similar observable characteristics. The
effects are largest for male students entering high school, whose truancy rates decline by 21% as
a result of winning the lottery. This suggests that the opportunity to attend a first choice school
improves intrinsic motivation for students even before they arrive at their new school.


                                                                                                      1
       Once lottery winners attend their chosen schools, we find sizable gains in test scores
relative to those who lost the choice lottery. Students who attend first choice schools realize
average test score gains (across all subjects) of 0.19 student-level standard deviations. Test score
effects are heterogeneous across the type of first choice school, with students who chose a high
achieving “No Excuses” charter school experiencing large gains in combined test scores of over
three-tenths of a student-level standard deviation. These gains are concentrated in reading and
writing. Students who chose public magnet schools experience gains in both reading and math,
but the point estimates are smaller and marginally-significant-to-insignificant across
specifications. We find that score gains for magnet school lottery winners are generally
consistent with predictions based on OLS estimates of magnet and default school quality:
differences in value added measures by score subject between magnet choice and home school
predict the change in test score for lottery winners (Deming et al. 2011). However, lotteries for
charter schools do not conform to these predictions. One explanation for this finding is that
selection into specialized charter schools is more strongly correlated with unobservable
determinants of academic success in areas the charter may specialize in, as opposed to selection
into magnet programs, which in many cases follow similar curricula to non-magnet public
schools.
       Our results build on a growing literature that exploits the random assignment of children
to schools to evaluate the effects of charter and magnet attendance on test scores (Cullen, Jacob,
and Levitt 2006; Cullen and Jacob 2008; Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2006, 2008); Hastings and
Weinstein 2008; Hoxby and Murarka 2009; Angrist et al 2011; Deming et al 2011). In the
context of this literature, our estimates of the effects of lottery outcomes on same-year absence
rates are (to our knowledge) the first analysis to examine the potential for an individual’s own
intrinsic motivation to increase achievement as a result of school choice. Our findings indicate
that changes in student effort may drive at least part of the effects observed in previous studies.
This is consistent with increasingly convincing evidence on the importance of non-cognitive
skills in determining academic outcomes (see, e.g., Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua 2006). In
addition, we find that students’ test scores benefit substantially from attending first choice
schools. This adds to evidence that school choice programs can effectively raise test scores of
those participating both by the intrinsic effect offering choice has on student motivation and
effort and through the benefit of attending a higher-performing school.


                                                                                                      2
II.      Background


Public School District Description
         Our analysis focuses on public and charter schools in a mid-sized urban school district
which we will refer to as “the district.”1 As in many urban areas, the district primarily serves
minority and low-income children. It has an enrollment of approximately 20,000 students, of
whom more than 80% are eligible for free lunch, 12% are English language learners and
approximately 90% are either black or Hispanic.
         Students in the district participate in standardized tests each year, which vary depending
on grade level. The State Mastery Test (MT) is taken at the end of grades three through eight and
has separate reading, writing, and math. The State Academic Performance Test (APT) test is
administered in grade ten and also covers mathematics, reading, writing, and science.2 Students
receive separate APT scores for each subject, and students who fail a subject are required to
retake it the following year. Performance on these standardized tests is part of the State’s
achievement evaluation system under No Child Left Behind (NCLB).
         Starting in the early 1990s, the district undertook a series of educational reforms that
resulted in the current district-wide magnet school and charter school choice program.3 In 2002
and 2007, the district received one of roughly a dozen five-year grants provided under the
voluntary school choice program (VSCP) provision of NCLB.4 The VSCP supports projects that
“offer the widest variety of choices to students in participating schools, including options that
allow students to transfer from low-performing schools to higher-performing schools.” District
students can choose from a large menu of schooling options. Currently, half of the schools in the
district (20) are magnet schools, and over a third of the students in the district (7,000) apply to
them each year through a centralized lottery system. Of nine district high schools, eight are
magnet schools open to choice, implying that almost all high school students either participate in
school choice themselves or attend school with students who did.

1
  While the district supported this project, they requested we not disclose their name in this working paper.
2
  For a number of our student cohorts, the APT and MT science tests were administered in a more limited subset of
grades than were the other tests. We therefore exclude the science tests from our analysis.
3
  This school choice program satisfies the NLCB choice requirement that students attending Title I Improving
schools be given the option to attend another non-failing school in the district. The school choice program has been
cited as a model for other districts nationwide implementing Title I Choice programs under NCLB.
4
  A Department of Education press release describing the program and program recipients is available at
http://www2.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/2007/07/07272007.html. Accessed July 15th, 2012.

                                                                                                                       3
         In addition to the magnet schools, charter schools run by a prominent charter school
chain have operated in the district since 1998. The first charter opened in 1998, serving
elementary and middle school students. The charter has since expanded to include two
elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school. This charter school chain follows
the “No Excuses” school model, which aims to improve outcomes for urban students from
disadvantaged backgrounds through long school days, long school years, a rigorous teacher
evaluation process, and an emphasis on parental involvement. “No Excuses” schools are
frequently cited as examples of successful urban charter schools,5 and they serve a large and
growing body of urban students. Table 1 displays a breakdown of student characteristics within
each school type pooled across the academic years 2005-2006 through 2008-2009.


The School Choice Lottery Process
         Students are admitted to charter and magnet schools via lottery. Lotteries take place once
each year, typically in March. Students submit an ordered list of up to three schools to the
district, which then conducts a first-choice maximizing lottery. The lotteries proceed as follows.
First, students are grouped by first choice school, grade, and, if applicable, preference category
(some schools give preference to students who live within a certain neighborhood-walk-zone or
have siblings who already attend the school).6 Within each group, students are assigned a ranking
by lottery number. Admissions are processed for priority lotteries first, and then non-priority
lotteries if space permits. If open spots remain after the first choice round is complete, unplaced
students are grouped according to their second choice (and priority group where applicable), and
the process repeats.
         Table 2 shows the characteristics of the students who participate in the school choice
lottery by grade level. Students are most likely to participate in lotteries in transitional grades;
these are students entering school between pre-kindergarten and first grade, fifth and sixth
graders entering middle school, and ninth graders entering high school. Overall, lottery
participants are more likely to be black, less likely to be Hispanic, and less likely receive free
lunch than non-participants. Table 2 also compares test scores for students applying to lotteries
in the year they apply versus their counterparts who do not apply. We standardize the test scores

5
 See, e.g., Angrist et al. 2011.
6
 The majority of district magnet schools accept out-of-district students in addition to in-district students. These
schools run separate lotteries for in- and out-of-district students.

                                                                                                                      4
to the state-wide mean and standard deviation by grade level. In general, students exercising
choice are higher scoring than their non-choice counterparts, particularly entering grade nine.
         In practice, the first-choice maximization procedure results in most students either
receiving their first choice or not being placed in any of their selected schools.7 We define
lotteries by priority, grade, and first choice school. Within this triplet, lottery number alone
should determine admission and the lottery number should be orthogonal to baseline student
characteristics. Of the 16,107 students over our 4 years of data who submitted school choice
applications for charter and magnet schools, 8,404 of them were in lotteries with at least ten
students and for whom some students were admitted and others were declined admission. We
will focus our analysis on these marginal lottery groups, because it is within these groups that
randomly assigned lottery numbers impact students’ attendance options.


III.     Using Lottery Outcomes as Exogenous Variation


Estimation framework
         Our goal is to examine how school choice affects student effort and academic
performance. We measure changes in effort using measures of attendance and behavior in the
spring semester after lottery outcomes are announced but before students attend their newly
chosen school. This allows us to separate effects of lottery outcome on behavior from the effects
of policies in place at the chosen school. We measure the effect of attending the chosen school
using test score outcomes from the end of the first school year after lottery outcomes are
announced (the first year of lottery school attendance for complying lottery winners).
         To estimate these effects, we need variation in admission to and attendance at first choice
schools that is orthogonal to the outcomes of interest conditional on observables. Following the
literature, we use lottery numbers conditional on lottery dummies to generate the needed
exogenous variation in admission to and attendance at first choice schools. This identification
strategy requires that lottery numbers be randomly assigned and that they strongly predict
admission to and attendance at chosen schools. We start by verifying that these two properties
hold in the district’s school choice lotteries.

7
 Overall, 51.7 percent of students were placed in their first choice school, 32.0 percent of students were waitlisted,
and 12.3 percent placed in their second or third choice school. The remaining 4 percent of students left the lottery
process and did not receive a placement.

                                                                                                                         5
Constructing Sample and Lottery Instrument
        The lottery and assignment files include students’ choices, their priority group for each
choice (i.e., data on whether they have a sibling in a listed school or live in its zoned
neighborhood), an indicator for whether they are applying from within or outside the district,
their lottery number, and the school to which they are assigned. The choice lists, priority
indicators, and in-district indicators allow us to identify groups of students competing for
admissions spots, and the lottery numbers allow us to create admission ranks within these
groups. However, the school assignment variables are the product of an assignment process that
begins with the lottery and ends after the start of the next school year when classroom rosters are
finalized. Between lottery notification in the early spring and the beginning of the next school
year the following fall, some initially rejected students are pulled in off of a waitlist as lottery
winners decline their positions or students already enrolled in the target school choose to leave.
        Final school assignments thus reflect families’ endogenous responses (e.g., families that
were easiest to reach when called for a newly open spot), and endogenous errors in forecasts of
school principals as to how many choice spots they would have in the fall (if more students than
expected are retained, more slots open up). Therefore, rather than using reported lottery
assignments to instrument for school attendance, we construct a simulated lottery outcome
variable using records on the number of seats available within each lottery block at the time of
the lottery. If a student entered a lottery in which g seats were available, and had one of the best
g numbers in that lottery, then we code that student as having won the simulated lottery.
        We will use the simulated lottery outcome to generate exogenous variation in school
attendance and focus our analysis on school choices for which winning the lottery is a strong
determinant of final admission. For many small lotteries, where only a handful of seats are
available, there is little correlation between lottery number and final admissions assignment. We
exclude lotteries for which the estimated coefficient in a univariate regression of final first choice
assignment on simulated lottery outcome is less than 0.2. Our results are generally insensitive to
changing this cutoff value, though reducing it weakens the relationship between lottery results
and school assignment, and raises our standard errors. Appendix A describes in detail the
construction of our lottery winning indicator, its correlation with final admission, and the
lotteries that are included versus excluded from our final sample.


                                                                                                       6
        We arrive at our final sample as follows. We start with a total of 16,107 lottery
participants across all charter and magnet school choices over 4 years. We first drop any
observations for students who participate in a lottery (defined by priority, grade level, and school
choice for each school year) which has fewer than ten students or a lottery for which all students
are admitted or all students are waitlisted. This leaves us with 8,404 observations. We next drop
the 247 observations without a normal grade progression, reducing our sample to 8,157
observations. Finally, we drop observations where the first choice school is a “transitional”
magnet school targeting at risk students with special needs (25 observations), the district’s
smallest charter school (21 observations), or a magnet in another district (248 observations). This
leaves us with 7,863 observations in what we term the marginal lottery sample. We then impose
the regression-based cutoff for the correlation between lottery number and admission by the start
of the school year. This reduces our sample size further to 4,277. We observe outcome year
math, reading, and writing scores for 1,799 of these students. This group makes up the sample
used in our test score analysis. We analyze subsets of students for whom baseline scores and
school zone information are available when necessary. To construct the sample used for our
truancy analysis, we take the marginal lottery sample and link it to absence and suspension
records from the year in which the lottery took place. Records are available for 4,293 students.
We do not impose the regression-based cutoff in our truancy sample because a) students may
benefit from motivational effects at the time of notification even when lotteries turn out be non-
binding ex post, and b) a strong first stage effect of lottery outcome on first choice attendance is
not required for this component of the analysis.
        Table 3 tests the balance of baseline characteristics across simulated lottery outcomes for
the full sample and for samples used in the test score analysis.8 The table gives point estimates
and standard errors for θ, from regressions of the form


                                                         ′
(1)                                                              ,


where      is the predetermined baseline characteristic labeled in each row of the table,                is the
simulated lottery outcome, and          is a vector of lottery dummies. Our lottery outcomes should

8
 As we discuss below, truancy specifications are based on within-individual changes before and after lottery
notification and do not rely on lottery balance. We therefore focus on the test score sample here.

                                                                                                                  7
not predict predetermined characteristics. We show these regression estimates for four basic
samples. The first sample is all students in marginal lotteries (i.e., that lotteries that contained
both losers and winners). The second sample examines only students in the standardized test
taking grades, three to ten, and the third sample adds the further restriction that students have
baseline test scores to examine the impact of winning the lottery on baseline test score. Columns
2 and 3 demonstrate balance in baseline characteristics for students in lotteries used in the
analysis of outcome year scores. The restriction that students must have baseline scores reduces
the sample size by 42%, as many students applying to district magnets are either too young to
have test scores or are coming from nearby suburban districts through regional school choice
programs, and therefore do not have baseline test scores within the district data.9
           Out of 15 total balance specifications, none are significant at the five percent level. P-
values from F-tests of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on all baseline variables are jointly
equal to zero are reported in the last row of Table 3. We fail to reject the null at the ten percent
level in any joint specification, and view this as being consistent with our null hypothesis that
simulated lottery outcomes are exogenous. We now examine the impact of winning the lottery on
measures on student effort and student achievement.


IV.        Results


Effect of Winning a Lottery on Student Effort
           We begin by using daily student-level data on absences and suspensions to examine the
impact of winning admission to a chosen school on student effort. Our goal is to determine
whether winning (losing) admission to a chosen school encourages (discourages) students
enough to generate a significant measurable change in truancy. To estimate the impact of lottery
notification on student absences and suspensions, we estimate regressions of the following form:


(2)                                                          ∗       _


which can be written in first differences as
(2.a)                                   ∆                        _

9
    Attempts to access state-level score data are ongoing.

                                                                                                        8
where Yiyt is truancy rate (defined here as the average weekly number of absences and
suspensions) for student i in period t of school year y. The indicator, postt, takes the value of 1
for t after lottery notification, and our variable of interest, postt*won_lotteryi, is an interaction
between winning the lottery and postt. We aggregate our daily data into a two-period model and
take first differences within student to avoid potential bias in our standard errors due to
autocorrelation in truancies (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004). Our coefficient of
interest, , captures post-lottery change in the truancy rate for lottery winners relative to lottery
losers.
          Table 4 presents the difference-in-difference estimates for all students and within gender
and age groups. We disaggregate by these characteristics because they play an important role in
determining truancy rates. The first three columns present results pooled across genders for all
grades, grades 4 and above, and grades 7 and above. The results show negative and significant
impacts of winning the lottery on truancies of approximately 7% (-0.02/0.27), implying that
lottery winners have 7% lower truancies than lottery losers post-lottery notification. Notice that
the mean difference post vs. pre lottery is positive – overall truancies rise in the latter part of the
school year, but rise less for those winning the lottery. The next six columns show the same
results for males (columns 4-6) and females (columns 7-9). Almost all of the full-sample effect is
coming from males, who experience a 14-21% decline in truancies as a result of winning the
lotteries. The lower effect of 14% (-0.038/0.272) is observed in the pooled grade sample; when
we focus on older students, the impact increases to 21%. This is not surprising as overall
truancies rise with age among males, and older children have more autonomy when it comes to
choosing whether to attend school and how to behave while there.
          These results suggest that particularly among males, intrinsic motivation may be an
important aspect of school choice’s impact on academic achievement. However, it is unclear if
winning the lottery to attend a chosen school decreases truancies by offering positive motivation
(hope), or if it increases truancies among lottery losers through negative motivation
(discouragement). To make this important distinction, we compare changes in truancy rates after
lottery notification for both winners and losers to changes in truancy rates for lottery non-
participants. When conducting this comparison, we use a propensity score approach to better
match the baseline characteristics of the students not participating in the lottery to those of

                                                                                                          9
lottery participants (Hirano et al., 2003; Barsky et al., 2002; Imbens, 2004; Hastings et al. 2007).
Let the propensity score, ̂ , be the probability that a student applies to a lottery as a function of

baseline characteristics. We reweight observations outside of our lottery sample by                       , which

balances the distribution of baseline characteristics between the lottery and non-lottery samples.
To construct the propensity score, we estimate a separate probit for each grade and school year,
controlling for home school fixed effects, demographics, and pre-notification truancies.
          Table 5 presents the results. The first row is the mean change in truancies for lottery
losers while the second row is the mean change in truancies for lottery winners, both measured
relative to the change in truancies in the non-lottery group. The results suggest that the impact on
truancies is coming primarily from a decrease in truancies among lottery winners (the positive
motivation effect). For the pooled gender results in columns 1-3 and the subgroup results for
males in columns 4-6, the coefficient on lottery winning is negative and significant and very
close in magnitude to the results presented in Table 4. The coefficients on lottery losing are
negative, but close to zero and insignificant. Tests of equality of the coefficients on lottery
winning and losing reject the hypothesis that the effects are equal at the 5% level or higher.
Among girls, there is no significant impact on lottery winners or losers relative to each other or
to the control group.
          These results are consistent with the hypothesis that school choice benefits students by
raising levels of intrinsic motivation. Being offered a slot at a chosen school appears to cause
male students in particular to put more effort into school attendance after lottery notification,
implying that some of the academic benefits of school choice accrue even before students attend
the chosen school.10 This motivational impact may spill over into the subsequent year’s academic
achievement. We now measure the impact of choice on standardized test score performance.


Effect of Attending a Chosen School on Academic Achievement
          We first conduct a lottery-based evaluation of test score gains for students whose school
choices are determined by lottery outcomes. Following the literature, we estimate the following
equations using our simulated lottery outcome as an instrument for attending a first choice
school.

10
   This result may be conceptually connected to the medical literature on placebo effects; the mental impact of
treatment can have a significant and sometimes equal impact to actual treatment.

                                                                                                                    10
                                                        ′
(3)                                                             ,


                                                            ′
(4)                                                             ,


where      is student test score,     is a dummy variable equal to one if student i attends their target
school and zero otherwise,          is a k-vector of observable and predetermined student
characteristics, and      is a mean-zero error term. We use an indicator for winning the lottery, Zi,
to attend a chosen school as an instrument for attending a chosen school. We will also present the
reduced-form Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effects, substituting Zi for Di in equation (3).
          Table 6 reports estimates of the effects of lottery outcomes on first choice attendance,
sample attrition, and outcome-year test scores. Because many students lack baseline test scores,
we present the results for all students who have outcome test scores (column 1) as well as for
those with both outcome and baseline test scores (column 2). Specifications in the first column
do not include any controls, while specifications in the second column control for baseline test
scores.
          The first panel of Table 6 presents first stage results within the sample of students for
whom outcome test scores are available. For these students, winning the simulated lottery raises
the probability of first choice attendance by 59 percentage points. For the subgroup of students
with available baseline test scores, the first stage estimate is 61 percentage points. The strength
of our first stage estimates suggests that our simulated lottery outcome closely approximates
actual lottery results.
          The second and third panels address the relationship between lottery outcome sample
attrition within the sample of lotteries where at least some students have outcome test scores. The
dependent variable in the second panel is an indicator variable equal to one if a student is not
enrolled in a district school in the test score outcome year. Students who win the lottery are 9.2
percentage points less likely to exit (or, in the case of out-of-district students, not to enter) the
district. This represents more than three quarters of the mean attrition rate of 12 percent. The
dependent variable in the third panel is an indicator variable equal to one if we do not observe
test scores in all subjects in the outcome year. Lottery losers are 14.4 percentage points more
likely than lottery winners to have missing outcome year test scores.

                                                                                                        11
         Column two presents specifications in which we regress the relevant measure of attrition
on lottery outcome, baseline combined score, and the interaction between lottery outcome and
baseline combined score. The magnitudes of the main effect estimates are similar to those
reported in the first column. Students with higher baseline scores are no more likely to leave the
district than other students, but are substantially less likely to have missing outcome year score
data. The estimated coefficients on the interactions between baseline score and the attrition
measures are close to zero and statistically insignificant. There is thus no evidence that the
attrition differential between winners and losers is related to test score. For our analysis of test
score effects, we use outcome-year observations for which all scores are observed. We discuss
the impact of attrition on our estimates of test score effects in more detail below.
         The fourth panel shows the impact of winning the simulated lottery on test score
outcomes. On average, winning the lottery raises combined test scores (the average of reading,
writing, and math scores) by 0.111 student-level standard deviations. The combined score effect
is significant at the one percent level. Controlling for baseline scores in the sample of students
for whom these scores are available raises the estimated effect size to 0.161.11 We then split our
sample by magnet and charter schools. Winning the lottery to attend a charter school raises
combined test scores by a statistically significant 0.260 standard deviations in the full sample,
and 0.244 standard deviations among the sample with baseline test scores. Magnet schools have
no significant positive impact on test scores in the full sample, however when we control for
baseline test scores, winning a lottery to attend a magnet school increases combined test scores
by 0.124 student-level standard deviations – significant at the one percent level, and about half of
the effect of winning the lottery to attend the charter school.
         To address the impact that differential attrition could have on our estimates, we compute
non-parametric bounds following Lee (2009). Under the assumption that censoring is monotonic
(i.e., students observed if they lose the lottery would also have been observed if they had won),
these bounds capture the range of possible effects for students who do not attrit.12As show in
Table B1, these bounds are generally quite wide due to large differential attrition and large
variation in outcome test scores. In the full sample, the point estimate of the lottery effect is

11
   The increase in estimated effects appear to be driven largely by the sample change; including additional
demographic controls in the column one specification does not meaningfully affect our estimates.
12
   We compute Lee bounds separately within each lottery and take the entrant-weighted average upper- and lower-
bound effects over all lotteries. 14 percent of students enrolled in lotteries where winners had higher attrition rates
than losers; in these lotteries we assumed that attrition was exogenous.

                                                                                                                      12
0.111, with an upper bound of 0.316 and a lower bound of -0.094. In the subsample with baseline
test scores, the point estimate is 0.160 with an upper and lower bound of 0.280 and 0.041,
respectively. For the magnet school lotteries, where attrition and outcome test score variance are
larger, the lower bound, point estimate, and upper bound for the ITT effect are (-0.173, 0.063,
0.295) and (-0.014, 0.132, 0.269) for, respectively, the full sample and baseline-test-score
sample.13 For the charter lotteries, the lower bound estimate is well above zero for both samples,
suggesting that even in the worst-case attrition scenario charter lottery winners experience
meaningful gains in test scores.


Explaining heterogeneous effects
         A portion of the estimated gains from attending a chosen school may be attributable to
increases in student effort or motivation that arise before students benefiting in any direct way
from attendance at the first choice school. In addition, there may be heterogeneity in the
effectiveness of various magnet schools, and magnets and charters may specialize in improving
particular skills and may attract students and families with different characteristics and
expectations. To further understand the factors driving the effects in Table 6, we disaggregate
results by subject (reading, writing, and math).
         Table 7 presents IV estimates of the effects of first choice school attendance on test
scores by first choice school type and test subject, where we instrument for first choice school
attendance with simulated lottery outcome. The first panel of Table 7 presents results for the full
sample of lottery participants. First choice attendance has a small and statistically insignificant
effect on math scores, but large and highly significant effects on reading, writing, and combined
scores. First choice attendance raises reading scores by 0.24 standard deviations, writing scores
by 0.30 standard deviations, and combined scores by 0.19 standard deviations.
         The next two panels present results for magnet and charter school lottery entrants. The
estimated effects are heterogeneous across school type. Magnet schools raise students’ math
scores by 0.16 standard deviations (significant at the ten percent level), while charters have a
negative and statistically insignificant effect. Magnet schools raise students reading scores by
0.19 standard deviations (significant at the 5 percent level), compared to 0.35 standard deviations


13
  We are currently working with state officials to collect test score data for attrited students who move to other
districts to hopefully tighten our estimates for magnet schools.

                                                                                                                     13
(significant at the one percent level) for charter schools. Finally, magnet schools have little effect
on writing scores, while charter schools raise writing scores by a strikingly large 0.79 standard
deviations. Combined score gains for magnet school attendees are 0.12 standard deviations,
compared to 0.35 standard deviations for charters.
        Both magnets and charters appear to raise students’ scores, but they have different mean
impacts across the three subjects tested. The estimated impact of attending a chosen school may
include gains that are attributable to school-level factors that affect all students in all subjects
(i.e., school-level mean value added), gains that reflect school-level subject-specific productivity,
and gains that reflect heterogeneity in the match quality between the student and the chosen
school or school/subject combination. Heterogeneous student-school match effects may be
particularly important in the context of schools with academic programs that are specialized in
terms of subjects, learning methods, or learning environments. For instance, the charter school’s
use of a “No Excuses” model differentiates it from other district schools, and students may select
into the charter based on its use of this model.
        Let     denote test scores for student i if she attends school j.


(5)




Scores for student i in school j depend on her own observable characteristics        , a population-
wide school academic quality measure,        , student i’s responsiveness to academic quality,
(e.g., effort, preferences for achievement, or heterogeneous production, with a population mean
of one (Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2009)), a mean-zero school-student match effect            that
could be known to parents at the time of choice, and an idiosyncratic error term realized after the
student attends the school,     . Academic quality       is equal to the sum of   , the estimated
school effect from a regression of test scores on student observables and school dummies, and an
error term    . Depending on whether students select into schools on the basis of unobservable
test score determinants, the    may or may not have zero mean.




                                                                                                       14
           Let        1 and       0 denote the first choice and home school, respectively. Let              1 if
student i attends her chosen school and                0 if she attends her home school. Observed test
scores at the end of the first year can be written as


                                                             ∆
(6)

where ∆ denotes the difference between the chosen and home school value of the corresponding
variable,                        and          ∆   are random coefficients, and        ∆
       ∆              is an error term. To estimate the mean      and   among students who choose a
particular school, we use the simulated lottery numbers as an instrument for              , and its
interaction with the difference in value added between the chosen and home schools as an
instrument for         ∆ . The estimation equation is

                                          ′
 (7)                                               ∆

where            is a lottery fixed-effect and       is a home school fixed effect. To recover the ∆ ,
we first estimate an OLS regression of test scores on individual characteristics, a cubic function
in baseline test score, and school dummies. The coefficients on the school dummies are the ′s.
Schools in the district including the charters and magnets are sufficiently large that "shrinking"
the value added measures using an Empirical Bayes approach did not substantially impact our
value added estimates. We abstract from sampling error in the ∆δ when estimating standard
errors in our IV specifications.
           Because lottery compliance is imperfect, we interpret our estimates        and      as local
average treatment effects for students who comply with the lottery outcome. For these students,
  is the mean score gain given a home school and lottery target school with equal value added
estimates, while         is the score gain per unit of value added differential. If students selecting into
schools through the lottery or through other admissions channels do so in a way that is
uncorrelated with their unobservable heterogeneity terms, then            and    will converge in
probability to their population averages of zero and one, respectively. Deviations of                 and
from these values provide evidence of selection into schools that is correlated with student
heterogeneity. Note that non-lottery-based selection that systemically biases the             away from

                                                                                                             15
the    can produce evidence of selection into schools even if lottery-based selection is
uncorrelated with student heterogeneity.
       Table 8 summarizes      ,    , and ∆ for students who chose first choice schools of
different types. On average, charter and magnet lottery entrants choose target schools with
combined-score value added estimates that are about 0.17 standard deviations above the value
added estimates for their default zoned school. Notice that this is nearly identical to the 0.19
standard deviation combined score gain for students who attend their first choice school. The gap
for charter lottery students is slightly higher at 0.18, compared to 0.16 for magnet applicants.
However, charter applicants typically have access to higher value added home schools: the
average default school value added for charter applicants is -0.01, compared to -0.19 for magnet
applicants. Also, though average value added gaps are similar for charter and magnet applicants,
the gaps for magnet applicants are much more variable. The standard deviation of the value
added gap for magnet applicants is 0.10, compared to 0.05 for charter applicants. Patterns in
school value added are similar for math scores. Charter school applicants have a smaller value
added gap than magnet applicants in reading score and a much larger gap in writing scores.
However, magnet and charter applicants make good choices on average, in the sense that the
large majority apply to schools better than their zoned school.
       Table 9 presents instrumental variables regressions of the form described in equation (7)
for math, reading, and writing scores. In the full sample, the coefficient on value added
interacted with winning the lottery is significant and close to 1 for math and writing scores, and
close to one but insignificant for reading. The impact of attending a chosen school for those with
a choice and home school of equal mean “quality” is insignificant and close to zero, suggesting
that on average selection on idiosyncratic match or ability to capitalize on increased school
quality is not a primary determinant of choosing an alternative school. However, comparing
magnet and charger schools, we see a very different pattern. Among magnet schools, it appears
that value added gains in math impact own gains almost one-for-one. There is a similar but
insignificant impact for reading, and a small and insignificant impact on writing scores. In
contrast, the charter school, which has a reputation for improving math skills that may drive
student selection, has a positive and significant coefficient on value added gain in math of 4.244,
which is statistically different from 1 with a p-value of 0.046. In addition, moving from a home
to charter school with the same value added in math implies a negative and significant loss in

                                                                                                   16
math scores. In fact, students only gain from charter entry if the value added of their home
school is at least 0.21 (0.911/4.244) lower than the value added of the charter. These coefficients
suggest that selection on unobservables makes measuring the average treatment effect of the
charter on math difficult. This is consistent with the observation that math program at the charter
has a strong reputation amongst local students; it is possible that this reputation drives student
selection. For the charter school, all students gain in writing, suggesting selection on positive
gains in writing, but those gains are unrelated to the quality gap between the charter and the
home school.
        In sum, we find substantial gains in test scores for students choosing charter schools in
this district, and evidence of gains among students choosing magnet schools though the estimates
are noisier in part due to large differential attrition. Overall, test score increases for students
choosing magnet programs are consistent with measures in increased value added between the
choice and home school. However, selection into charter schools appears to be driven to a
greater extent by unobservable student characteristics. Since charters are allowed to highly
specialize and may attract students of parents looking for specialized schools to meet what they
believe are their children’s idiosyncratic needs, lottery estimates of local average treatment
effects may be very different than what an average student might expect to gain if randomly
assigned to that school. Magnet schools may not be so highly targeted or specialized, and
particularly in the context of a broad magnet choice program where a large fraction of public
schools are magnet choice schools.


V.      Conclusions


        We provide evidence that school choice has important impacts on motivation and test
score performance for low-SES students using data from a mid-size urban school district. We
find that winning the lottery to attend a chosen school has an immediate impact on absences and
suspensions after notification, and that this result is particularly strong for older male students.
We interpret this as students exerting more effort towards academics at their current school due
to an increase in intrinsic motivation from knowing that they will be able to attend a school of
their choice in the subsequent school year. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to separately



                                                                                                       17
identify this important channel through which NCLB school choice provisions may positively
affect academic achievement among low-income and minority students.
       In addition, we find evidence that attending the chosen school has a large and significant
impact on student test scores particularly for the charter school in our sample. The lottery-based
estimates of the effects of magnet school attendance are consistent with the predictions of a
simple model in which the gains from attending the chosen school are equal to the difference
between the chosen school and default school effects identified in an OLS value-added model.
Lottery-based estimates of the effects of attending a charter school are not consistent with these
predictions. For charters, heterogeneous effects and selection appear to play a stronger role; we
find that selection into charter schools is more closely tied to unobservable test score
determinants than selection into magnet schools. Overall, we add to the growing evidence that
shows that schools and school choice can have important impacts on student achievement,
particularly for students coming from persistently under-performing inner-city schools.




                                                                                                    18
References:

Angrist, Joshua D., Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. (2006). "Long-Term Educational

     Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in

     Colombia." American Economic Review. 96(3): 847-862.

Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.

     Walters. (2011) “Who Benefits from KIPP?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5690.

Barsky, Robert B., John Bound, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Joseph P.Lupton. (2002).

     "Accounting for the Black-White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric Approach." Journal of the

     American Statistical Association. 97: 663-673.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. (2004). "How Much Should We

     Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1):

     249-275.

Deming, David J., Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. (2011).

     ““School Choice and College Attendance: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” NBER

     Working Paper No. 17438.

Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt. (2006). “The Effect of School Choice on

     Participants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica. 74(5): 1191-1230.

Cullen, Julie Berry, and Brian A. Jacob. (2008). “Is Gaining Access to a Selective Elementary

     School Gaining Ground? Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” In Jonathan Gruber, ed.

     An Economics Perspective on the Problems of Disadvantaged Youth. Chicago, IL:

     University of Chicago Press.

Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, Douglas O. Staiger, and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. (2007).

     "The Effect of Randomized School Admissions on Voter Participation." Journal of Public

     Economics. 91(5-6): 915-937.
                                                                                                19
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. (2006, 2008). “Heterogeneous

     Preferences and the Efficacy of Public School Choice.” NBER Working Paper No. 12145.

Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. (2008). “Information, School Choice and

     Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of

     Economics. 123(4): 1373-1414.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. (2006). "The Effects of Cognitive and

     Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor

     Economics. 24(3): 411-482.

Hirano, Keisuke., Guido Imbens, and Geert Ridder. (2003). "Efficient Estimation of Average

     Treatment Effects using the Estimated Propensity Score." Econometrica. 71(4): 1161-1189.

Hoxby, Caroline M., and Sonali Murarka. (2009). “Charter Schools in New York City: Who

     Enrolls and How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement.” NBER Working Paper No.

     14852.

Imbens, Guido. (2004). "Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under

     Exogeneity: A Review." Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1): 4-29.

Lee, David S. (2009). "Training Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on

     Treatment Effects." Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071-1102.




                                                                                             20
                                                                   TABLE 1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
                     Distinct                                                                       Percent       Percent
                     Schools                                                                         Not          with at        Percent with        Percent    Percent    Percent
                       in 4        Student-     Percent      Percent       Percent      Percent      F/R          Least 5         at least 1        Proficient Proficient Proficient
                     Years1         Years        Black       Hispanic       White       Female      Lunch2       Absences3       Suspension4         in Math    Reading    Writing
Preschool
    Magnet              15          1,311         42.3          31.3         24.0         48.0        15.6           75.8              0.2                -              -               -
     Zoned              24          6,175         51.4          41.0         6.0          48.8        2.1            60.6              0.0                -              -               -
Elementary5
    Charter             2            1,384        72.3          24.9         2.5          48.1         5.5            -                 -               88.0           62.9           89.7
    Magnet              13          14,707        53.1          33.6         11.4         48.9         7.9           69.1              6.9              67.7           44.6           69.7
    Zoned               22          18,653        44.7          43.1         9.9          48.6         5.8           74.4              6.9              57.9           33.4           57.3
Middle6
    Charter             2            1,805        72.7          25.4         1.4          48.1        28.8            -                -                86.7           69.2           88.8
    Magnet              16          11,411        54.1          30.1         14.3         50.5         9.0           69.9             20.3              67.4           56.9           70.3
    Zoned               17          11,709        46.2          43.4         8.9          47.3         5.3           75.2             23.5              56.2           45.0           57.2
High7
    Charter             1             70          58.6          41.4          0.0         57.1        30.0            -                -                83.1           95.3           100.0
    Magnet              11          21,346        54.6          27.8         16.1         51.8        7.1            80.5             18.1              47.9           60.8           68.2
    Zoned               4           1,478         57.8          38.4         3.4          39.3        1.8            81.2             34.9              25.4           39.2           55.7
Note: Observations are at the student-year level over 4 years of data (2005-2006 through 2008-2009). Students who attrited and those in the seven transitional and special education
programs are not included. Students at the District's smallest charter school, which is not part of a national chain, are not included. 1Number of different schools that served a given grade
level over the 4-year period. 2Students recorded as having sent in forms reporting that they do not qualify for free or reduced lunch. 3Students with at least 5 recorded absences, excused or
unexcused, over the course of the school year. 4Students with at least 1 suspension in the school year. Data on absences and suspensions is not available for charter students. 5Grades K-4.
6
  Grades 5-8. 7Grades 9-12.




                                                                                                                                                                                        21
                                                                     TABLE 2: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
                                          1
                        Pre-K                           Kinder-garten             Grades 1-4                 Grade 5               Grade 6-8                 Grade 9              Grade 10-12
Participated in
Lottery?              No                      Yes        No          Yes         No          Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes          No          Yes         No          Yes
Demographics
  Percent Black       49.5                     53       44.8         52.1        48.7        61.7        49.2         60         51.7        58.1        52.2        56.4        56.4        69.2
  Percent Hispanic    40.9                    29.1      39.9          36         39.1        29.5        38.3        28.4        36.3        28.7        34.9        29.6        26.9        19.5
  Percent White       7.9                     15.5      12.4         9.9         10.2        7.2         10.8        10.1        10.7        11.9        11.8         13         15.2        10.7
  Percent Female      48.4                     50       48.3         48.8        48.8        47.2        47.4        50.8        48.3        48.3        40.1         56         51.5         52
  Percent Not F/R
                      3.1                     14.1       6.2         9.5         6.3         7.5          7.4        14.4         8.1        10.1         3.6         7.7         6.5         8.2
   Lunch2
  N Student-years    6,594                    1,224     4,711       2,880      24,683       3,111       4,969       1,483      17,570       1,891       4,598        4,291      16,594        798
Academic Achievement
  Mean Baseline
   Math3               --                      --         --          --       -0.563       -0.49      -0.595       -0.531      -0.63       -0.658      -0.973      -0.567      -0.802      -0.903
  Mean Baseline
   Reading             --                      --         --          --        -0.77      -0.632       -0.738      -0.653      -0.659      -0.671      -0.916      -0.567      -0.624      -0.737
  Mean Baseline
   Writing             --                      --         --          --       -0.647      -0.579       -0.652      -0.614      -0.584      -0.635      -0.901      -0.582      -0.586      -0.656
  N (All Baseline
   Scores4)            --                      --         --          --        3,927        360        3,183        810       11,005         902       1,304        2,484       3,668        127
Note: Observations are at the student-year level over 4 years of data (2005-2006 through 2008-2009). 1Column headings refer to the grade the student is entering in the year following the
lottery. 2Students recorded as having sent in forms reporting that they do not qualify for free or reduced lunch. We do not have F/R status for lottery participants who left the district. 3Mean of
math, reading, & writing z-scores from the spring the lottery took place in. 4No. of student*yr obs. in our sample with test scores for all three tests in the spring the lottery took place.




                                                                                                                                                                                           22
                  TABLE 3: IMPACT OF WINNING THE LOTTERY ON
                            BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Coefficients are from the Regression of the
Following on an Indicator for Winning our
Simulated Lottery:                               (1)      (2)                                                  (3)
                                              0.441**  0.542**                                              0.555**
First Choice Attendance                        (0.012)  (0.015)                                             (0.019)
                                                0.009    0.010                                                0.024
Black                                          (0.014)  (0.018)                                             (0.023)
                                               -0.008   -0.022                                               -0.033
Hispanic                                       (0.013)  (0.017)                                             (0.023)
                                                0.001    0.016                                                0.011
White                                          (0.008)  (0.009)                                             (0.011)
                                                0.025    0.026                                                0.009
Female                                         (0.015)  (0.018)                                             (0.022)
                                                                                                              0.058
Baseline Math Z-Score                                                                                       (0.037)
                                                                                                              0.052
Baseline Reading Z-Score                                                                                    (0.037)

                                                                                                              0.018
Baseline Writing Z-Score                                                                                     (0.034)
P-value from joint F-test                                                  0.456            0.121             0.426
Observations                                                               7,863            3,377             1,964
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%. Lottery block fixed effects
included in all specifications. Sample is limited to marginal lottery students who chose a magnet (other than the
one which is a transitional school) or charter (other than the District's smallest charter) as their first choice school.
Students who did not have a normal grade progression are dropped. (1) All marginal students. (2) Marginal
students in lotteries with good first stages and in grades 3-10. (3) Marginal students in lotteries with good first
stages, in grades 3-10, and with all three baseline test scores.




                                                                                                                            23
     TABLE 4: IMPACT OF WINNING A LOTTERY ON TRUANCIES IN THE MONTHS FOLLOWING ADMISSION NOTIFICATION
                             Male and female students           Male only                   Female only
                        All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+ All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+ All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+

Won lottery X Post                   -0.019*          -0.023*          -0.023         -0.038**        -0.053**        -0.063**          -0.002           0.002           0.008
                                     (0.009)          (0.011)         (0.013)          (0.014)         (0.017)         (0.021)         (0.012)          (0.014)         (0.016)
Post                                 0.062**          0.065**         0.063**          0.065**        0.074**         0.079**          0.060**          0.057**         0.049**
                                     (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.011)         (0.014)         (0.008)          (0.010)         (0.011)

Observations                           4,293            2,870          2,215            2,059            1,312           982             2,234           1,558           1,233
R-squared                              0.001            0.002          0.001            0.004            0.008          0.009            0.000           0.000           0.000
Mean Weekly Truancies                  0.268            0.264          0.279            0.272            0.276          0.293            0.265           0.254           0.267
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%. Sample is limited to marginal lottery students who chose a magnet (other than the one transitional
magnet) or charter (other than the District's smallest charter) as their first choice school. Students without a normal grade progression in the year following the lottery are
dropped. The dependent variable is mean weekly truancies. Estimated using first differences with observations at the student-year level.




                                                                                                                                                                                24
     TABLE 5: IMPACT OF WINNING A LOTTERY ON TRUANCIES IN THE MONTHS FOLLOWING ADMISSION NOTIFICATION
                             Male and female students           Male only                   Female only
                        All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+ All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+ All Grades Grade 4+ Grade 7+

Lost lottery X Post                    -0.007           -0.011          -0.017           -0.004          -0.006         -0.003           -0.009           -0.016          -0.028
                                      (0.008)          (0.010)         (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.015)         (0.019)         (0.011)          (0.014)         (0.017)
Won lottery X Post                   -0.026**         -0.034**        -0.040**         -0.042**        -0.059**        -0.066**          -0.011           -0.014          -0.020
                                      (0.008)          (0.010)         (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.013)         (0.017)         (0.011)          (0.014)         (0.017)
Post                                 0.069**          0.076**         0.079**          0.069**         0.080**         0.082**          0.068**          0.073**         0.077**
                                      (0.005)          (0.006)         (0.008)          (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.007)          (0.010)         (0.012)

Observations                           37,035          18,524          10,423           19,205           9,609           5,496           17,830            8,915          4,927
R-squared                              0.001           0.002            0.002            0.003           0.005           0.006            0.000            0.001          0.001
Mean Weekly Truancies                   0.342           0.379           0.439            0.346           0.384           0.443            0.338            0.374          0.435
P Value t-test                          0.034           0.033           0.070            0.005           0.001           0.002            0.856            0.886          0.623
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%. Sample includes lottery winners, losers, and nonparticipants. Students without a normal grade
progression in the year following the lottery are dropped. The dependent variable is mean weekly truancies. Estimated using first differences. Observations are at the student-year
level, and are propensity-score weighted to balance baseline characteristics amongst lottery participants and non-participants (see main text). Reported p-values are for t-tests of
the null hypothesis that the lost lottery and won lottery coefficients are equal.




                                                                                                                                                                                 25
      TABLE 6: ITT EFFECTS OF WINNING A SCHOOL CHOICE LOTTERY
Intent to Treat                                                          (1)                     (2)
Panel I
             First Choice Attendance                                  0.587**                 0.609**
                                                                      (0.020)                 (0.027)
           Mean First Choice Attendance                                0.484                   0.470
                  Observations                                         1,799                    959
Panel II
                 Attrition from district                             -0.093**                 -0.079**
                                                                      (0.013)                  (0.023)
                      Baseline score                                                            0.013
                                                                                               (0.016)
              Baseline score*won lottery                                                       -0.006
                                                                                               (0.024)
                     Mean Attrition                                     0.121                   0.105
                     Observations                                       2,780                   1,436
Panel III
         Attrition from full score sample                            -0.144**                 -0.104**
                                                                      (0.019)                  (0.033)
                      Baseline score                                                          -0.137**
                                                                                               (0.023)
              Baseline score*won lottery                                                        0.026
                                                                                               (0.035)
                  Mean score attrition                                  0.353                   0.334
                      Observations                                      2,780                   1,436
Panel IV
              Pooled Combined Z-Score                                 0.111**                 0.161**
                                                                      (0.0349)                (0.0263)
                      Observations                                      1,799                    957
         Magnet School Combined Z-Score                                 0.063                 0.124**
                                                                      (0.0387)                (0.0304)
                      Observations                                      1325                     698
              Charter Combined Z-Score                                0.260**                 0.244**
                                                                      (0.0765)                (0.0506)
                      Observations                                       474                     259
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%. Lottery block fixed
effects included in all specifications. Coefficients are from regressions of outcome variables on an
indicator for winning our simulated lottery. Sample is limited to marginal lottery students who chose a
magnet (other than the one transitional magnet) or charter (other than the District's smallest charter) as
their first choice school. Students who did not have a normal grade progression are dropped. Students in
lottery blocks where the first stage coefficient is <.2 are dropped. Outcome z-score for students entering
9th grade is their score from 10th grade as 9th graders do not take state tests. (1) Sample is all marginal
students with all three outcome test scores (all three 10th grade scores for 9th graders); sample for the
attrition regression is all students in lotteries which include students with outcome scores (2) Baseline
test scores for each subject are included in these specifications. Sample is marginal students with baseline
and outcome test scores in all three subjects; sample for the attrition regression is all students in lotteries
which include students with outcome scores.


                                                                                                                  26
                        TABLE 7: IV ESTIMATES OF EFFECTS OF FIRST CHOICE ATTENDANCE
                                          BY SUBJECT AND SCHOOL TYPE
                                      All schools              Magnet               Charter

Effect of First Choice                               Obs/Lotteries                            Obs/Lotteries                             Obs/Lotteries
                                   Coefficient                               Coefficient                               Coefficient
Attendance on :                                       in Sample                                in Sample                                 in Sample

Math Z-Score                          0.083               1,799                0.163+              1,325                  -0.092              474
                                     (0.071)               47                  (0.090)              39                   (0.112)               8
Reading Z-Score                      0.235**              1,799                0.185*              1,325                 0.346**              474
                                     (0.071)               47                  (0.089)              39                   (0.113)               8
Writing Z-Score                      0.296**              1,799                 0.072              1,325                 0.785**              474
                                     (0.065)               47                  (0.077)              39                   (0.117)               8
Combined Z-Score3                    0.190**              1,799                0.118+              1,325                 0.346**              474
                                     (0.059)               47                  (0.072)              39                   (0.101)               8
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%, + Significant at 10%. All specifications are IV regressions with
our indicator for winning our simulated lottery used to instrument for first choice attendance. Lottery block fixed effects included in all
specifications. Sample is limited to marginal lottery students who did not attrit and who chose a magnet (other than the one transitional magnet) or
charter (other than the District's smallest charter) as their first choice school. Students in lottery blocks where the first stage coefficient is <.2 are
dropped. Students without a normal grade progression are dropped. Outcome z-score for students entering 9th grade is their score from 10th grade
as 9th graders do not take state tests. 1First choice school is classified by the District as a Tier 1 school based on the '08-'09 school year. 2First
choice school is classified by District as a Tier 2 or Tier 3. 3Combined z-score is the mean of non-missing scores.




                                                                                                                                                             27
      TABLE 8: DIFFERENCES IN AVERAGE VALUE ADDED GAIN FOR LOTTERY
            FC type        Home1       FC2    Gap3     Gap SD4       N
Combined
Score      Magnet           -0.189   -0.022   0.164     0.098      1,197
           Charter          -0.012    0.169   0.181     0.052       459
           Total             -0.14   0.028    0.169     0.088      1,656

Math score        Magnet                   -0.329           -0.142         0.178             0.155             1,197
                  Charter                  -0.004            0.188         0.192             0.066              459
                  Total                    -0.239           -0.055         0.182             0.137             1,656

Reading
score             Magnet                   -0.197           -0.028         0.167             0.123             1,197
                  Charter                  -0.003            0.112         0.115             0.061              459
                  Total                    -0.143           0.009          0.153             0.112             1,656

Writing
score             Magnet                   -0.039           0.131          0.172             0.118             1,197
                  Charter                  -0.046           0.329          0.375              0.08              459
                  Total                    -0.041           0.183          0.228             0.142             1,656
Note: Descriptive statistics for value added estimates of zoned schools and target schools. 1Mean value added of zoned
school. 2Mean value added of chosen or target school in lottery. 3Mean gap between zone and target value added 4SD of gap
between zoned and target value added. Sample includes all students in marginal lotteries.




                                                                                                                        28
                TABLE 9: IV ESTIMATES OF THE IMPACT OF SCHOOL VALUE-ADDED
                                MEASURES ON STUDENT OUTCOMES
                                                  Full Sample   Magnet                                                      Charter
Math              First Choice                       -0.180      -0.071                                                    -0.911**
                                                    (0.125)     (0.141)                                                     (0.342)
                  First Choice*Score Gap            1.309**      1.100*                                                    4.244**
                                                    (0.508)     (0.534)                                                     (1.628)

Reading              First Choice                                                0.073                  -0.063               0.210
                                                                                (0.127)                (0.166)              (0.259)
                     First Choice*Score Gap                                      0.841                  1.183                0.994
                                                                                (0.615)                (0.702)              (1.853)

Writing              First Choice                                               -0.029                  0.051               1.197*
                                                                               (0.130)                 (0.148)              (0.538)
                     First Choice*Score Gap                                    1.366**                  0.177                -1.106
                                                                               (0.452)                 (0.732)              (1.358)

N                                                                                1,653                  1,194                 459
Lotteries                                                                          43                    35                    8
Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** Significant at 1%, * Significant at 5%. All specifications are IV regressions. The
instruments are simulated lottery outcome and simulated lottery outcome interacted with the VA gap between the first choice
school and the zoned school. Lottery block fixed effects and zone school fixed effects included in all specifications. Sample is
limited to marginal lottery students who did not attrit and who chose a magnet (other than the one transitional magnet) or charter
(other than the District's smallest charter) as their first choice school. Students in lottery blocks where the first stage coefficient is
<.2 are dropped. Students without a normal grade progression are dropped.




                                                                                                                                       29
     APPENDIX A: SAMPLE CONSTRUCTION AND LOTTERY INSTRUMENT FIT


This appendix describes the procedure we use to construct the simulated lottery outcome
variable. If lottery results are fully determined by a random rank ordering, implementing our
identification strategy only requires data on lottery numbers, priority groups, and the number of
seats allocated for each grade and school choice. The data from the district contain the chosen
schools, the student’s priority groups (for each choice), as well as their lottery number and their
home school. However, instead of recording if students were admitted based on lottery number,
the data record whether the student was eventually admitted by the subsequent fall. This
includes, for example, the many admissions that are made off of the first-choice waitlists as
families move or change their plans, or schools readjust their available seat limit between March
and August.14


Thus, we reconstruct the original lottery-based admissions using the lottery numbers, choices,
priorities and available seats at the time the lottery was run. We generate an indicator for
winning the lottery if the student’s lottery number was less than the cut-off number of seats
available for that school and choice at the time the lottery was run. Concretely, if school choice
C had a total number of spots         allocated to within-district admission, for example, we assign the
student with the      th lowest lottery number and priority group an admission if                    .


For most lotteries, lottery-based admissions are positively correlated with the actual admissions
as of the subsequent fall when the annual school choice file is closed out. However, for many of
the small lotteries, the simulated admission indicator is only weakly positively correlated with
actual admissions. To assess the strength of the relationship between simulated and observed
lottery outcomes, we estimate the equation


(A.1)



14
  While waitlist rank is determined by lottery number, when a slot becomes available, parents are contacted in
sequence until a parent is reached and takes the slot. Thus lottery number alone does not determine wait-list
admission.
                                                                                                                 30
separately for each lottery. Here,           is an indicator variable equal to one if a student was
admitted to the chosen school by the fall, while               is an indicator equal to one if the student was
a lottery winner. The parameter of interest is             , which measures how much more likely
simulated lottery winners were to gain actual admission than were simulated lottery losers.


Figure A1 and the first panel of Table A1 report summary statistics for                       weighted by the
number of student-level observations, while Figure A2 and the second panel of Table A1 report
the same statistics weighted by number of lotteries. Figure 1 shows that there is substantial
heterogeneity in the extent to which eventual admissions conform to the lottery-only results.
However, the median student was 35.3 percentage points more likely to win the lottery if she had
a low enough lottery and priority number, and 25 percent of students participated in lotteries
where having a low enough lottery and priority number implied a 66.4 percentage-point boost in
probability of admission. Charter school lotteries conformed more closely simulated results: on
average, winning the lottery increased the chance of being admitted by the fall by 45.9
percentage points, with 25 percent of students in lotteries where the simulated outcome raised the
probability of winning by at least 74.2 percentage points. In magnet school lotteries, the mean
boost from in selection probability from simulated victory was 31.2 percent, with the top quartile
of students experiencing at least a 60 percent gain.


Comparing Figure A1 to Figure A2, we see that weighting results by lottery rather than student
pushes the distribution of estimates downward. This is because lotteries in which the simulated
lottery outcome has a weak relationship with observed lottery outcome generally have few
participants. For these small lotteries, projected available seats and student mobility may add
noise to the process, attenuating the correlation between lottery admissions and eventual
admissions.15


Lotteries in which simulated lottery outcome has a very weak relationship with reported lottery
outcome likely admitted many students through the potentially endogenous waitlist process. We


15
  In particular, seat projections are made prior to March for the coming year. Principles use projections of how
many students may be held back to forecast additional available seats. Thus, the projections are typically
conservative as there is no overflow space should too many students be admitted. This projection process causes
some lotteries, and particularly those for small classes to admit most students off of the waitlist rather than off of
original lottery number.
                                                                                                                         31
do not want to include these in our sample. For our analysis, we drop all lotteries in which    is
less than 0.2. This reduces our sample size from 7,863 to 4,277. Our results are generally
insensitive to changes in this cutoff value, though reducing the cutoff value raises our standard
errors, particularly for estimates of magnet school effects.




                                                                                                    32
                   Figure A1                                                    Figure A2

                                               Weighted by student-years




                                   .3
                                   .2
                         Density
                                   .1
                                   0




                                        -.5       0                  .5           1
                                                       Coefficient


                                               Weighted by lottery blocks
                                   .5
                                   .4
                         Density
                                   .3
                                   .2
                                   .1
                                   0




                                         -.5       0                 .5           1
                                                       Coefficient



      TABLE A1: CHARACTERISTICS OF LOTTERY INSTRUMENT FIT ACROSS
                              LOTTERIES
                                                               First Lottery Instrument Fit1
                                                                25th              50th           75th
Marginal Lotteries2                            Mean           Percentile       Percentile      Percentile
Weighted by N Students
  All Schools                                     0.344                     0         0.333            0.664
  Charter3                                        0.459                     0         0.647            0.742
  Magnet4                                         0.312                     0         0.267               0.6
Weighted by Lottery
  All Schools                                     0.227                     0             0               0.5
  Charter3                                        0.315                     0             0            0.728
  Magnet4                                         0.213                     0             0            0.444




                                                                                                            33
APPENDIX B: ADDRESSING THE IMPACT OF DIFFERENTIAL ATTRITION ON
      ITT ESTIMATES OF WINNING A SCHOOL CHOICE LOTTERY




       TABLE B1: LEE BOUNDS FOR ESTIMATES IN TABLE 6, PANEL IV,
          ITT IMPACT OF WINNING A LOTTERY ON COMBINED TEST
                        SCORES BY SCHOOL TYPE
                                                Sample with
                              Pooled Sample    Baseline Scores
       Pooled                Estimate    N    Estimate          N
       Point                  0.111    1,799   0.160           959
       Upper Bound             0.316   1,602   0.280           874
       Lower Bound            -0.094   1,602   0.041           875

       Magnet                             Estimate        N            Estimate             N
       Point                               0.063        1,325           0.132              700
       Upper Bound                          0.295       1,159           0.269              629
       Lower Bound                         -0.173       1,159           -0.014             630

       Charter                            Estimate        N            Estimate             N
       Point                               0.260         474            0.237              259
       Upper Bound                         0.374         443            0.306              245
       Lower Bound                         0.125         443            0.176              245
       Lee (2009) bounds computed separately within lotteries and averaged using entrant-level
       weights. The first column is for the pooled sample corresponding to column 1 estimates in
       Table 6. The second column estimates the impact among those with baseline test scores,
       using the difference between outcome and baseline test scores as the dependent variable.
       This column corresponds to the results in column 2 of Table 6.
