NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF FINANCIAL FRICTIONS FOR LIFE INSURERS
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 18321
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18321
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012


A.M. Best Company, WebAnnuities Insurance Agency, and Compulife Software own the copyright
to their respective data, which we use with permission. We thank Mary Anomalay, Jahiz Barlas, Minsoo
Kim, Peter Nebres, and Julia Pei for assistance in putting together the data on annuity and life insurance
prices. For comments and discussions, we thank three referees, Jennie Bai, Jeffrey Brown, Itamar Drechsler,
Kenneth Froot, Stefano Giglio, Victoria Ivashina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Zain Mohey-Deen, Lubos
Pastor, Anna Paulson, Michael Roberts, David Scharfstein, Amir Sufi, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen.
We also thank seminar participants at Aalto University; Copenhagen Business School; Emory University;
Erasmus University; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Kansas City, Minneapolis,
New York, and San Francisco; Harvard University; London Business School; MIT; Northwestern
University; Norwegian Business School; Oxford University; Princeton University; Stanford University;
Tilburg University; University of British Columbia, Chicago, Hong Kong, Houston, Melbourne, Minnesota,
New South Wales, Sydney, Technology Sydney, Tokyo, Washington, and Wisconsin; UCLA; UCSD;
2012 SED Annual Meeting; 2012 NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy Workshop;
2012 System Committee Meeting on Financial Structure and Regulation; 2012 Wharton Conference
on Liquidity and Financial Crises; 2012 NBER Public Economics Program Meeting; 2012 Boston
University/Boston Fed Conference on Macro-Finance Linkages; 2013 Utah Winter Finance Conference;
2013 NBER Insurance Working Group Meeting; 2013 Shanghai Macroeconomics Workshop; 2013
EFA Annual Meeting; and 2014 AFA Annual Meeting. The authors declare that they have no relevant
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Financial Frictions for Life Insurers
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 18321
August 2012, Revised November 2014
JEL No. G01,G22,G28
ABSTRACT
During the financial crisis, life insurers sold long-term policies at deep discounts relative to actuarial
value. The average markup was as low as –19 percent for annuities and –57 percent for life insurance.
This extraordinary pricing behavior was due to financial and product market frictions, interacting with
statutory reserve regulation that allowed life insurers to record far less than a dollar of reserve per
dollar of future insurance liability. We identify the shadow cost of capital through exogenous variation
in required reserves across different types of policies. The shadow cost was $0.96 per dollar of statutory
capital for the average company in November 2008.
Ralph S.J. Koijen
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
rkoijen@london.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401-1804
yogo@minneapolisfed.org

Traditional theories of insurance markets assume that insurance companies operate in
an eﬃcient capital market and supply policies at actuarially fair prices. Consequently, the
market equilibrium is primarily determined by the demand side, either by life-cycle demand
(Yaari 1965) or by informational frictions (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976). In contrast to
these traditional theories, we ﬁnd that the pricing behavior of these ﬁnancial institutions is
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by ﬁnancial frictions as well as product market frictions that lead to a
price war.
Our key ﬁnding is that life insurers reduced the price of long-term policies from November
2008 to February 2009, when falling interest rates implied that they should have instead
raised prices. The average markup, relative to actuarial value (i.e., the present value of
future insurance liabilities), was −16 percent for 30-year term annuities and −19 percent
for life annuities at age 60. Similarly, the average markup was −57 percent for universal
life insurance at age 30. This pricing behavior contrasts sharply with the 6 to 10 percent
markup that life insurers earn in ordinary times (Mitchell et al. 1999). In the cross section
of policies, the price reductions were larger for those policies with looser statutory reserve
requirements. In the cross section of insurance companies, the price reductions were larger
for those companies that suﬀered larger balance sheet shocks (i.e., lower asset growth, higher
leverage, and larger deﬁcit in risk-based capital).
This extraordinary pricing behavior coincided with two unusual circumstances. First,
the ﬁnancial crisis had an adverse impact on insurance companies’ balance sheets, especially
those companies with large deferred (ﬁxed and variable) annuity liabilities whose guarantees
(i.e., embedded put options) turned out to be unproﬁtable. Second, statutory reserve regulation in the United States allowed life insurers to record far less than a dollar of reserve
per dollar of future insurance liability around December 2008. This allowed life insurers to
generate accounting proﬁts by selling policies at a price far below actuarial value, as long as
that price was above the reserve value. Insurance companies care about accounting proﬁts
insofar as it increases statutory capital (i.e., assets relative to accounting liabilities), which
is an important metric of capital adequacy for rating agencies and state regulators.
We develop a model of optimal insurance pricing to show that the extraordinary pricing behavior implies a high shadow value of statutory capital. In our model, an insurance
company sets prices for various types of policies to maximize the present value of proﬁts,
subject to both ﬁnancial and product market frictions. Financial frictions enter as a leverage
constraint on statutory capital, which captures the fact that insurance companies are rated
and regulated because of their incentives for excessive risk taking (i.e., moral hazard). Product market frictions enter through search frictions that make future demand increasing in
statutory capital (e.g., through higher ratings). The insurance company may reduce prices,
2

even below actuarial value, either to relax its leverage constraint or to boost future demand.
The shadow cost of capital embeds both ﬁnancial and product market frictions, which are
not separately identiﬁed by the ﬁrst-order conditions of the model.
We estimate the shadow cost of capital using panel data on the pricing of term annuities,
life annuities, and universal life insurance, which are merged with the ﬁnancial statements
of the insurance companies. Relative to other industries, life insurance presents a unique
opportunity to identify the shadow cost for two reasons. First, life insurers sell relatively
simple products whose marginal cost can be accurately measured. Second, statutory reserve
regulation speciﬁes a constant discount rate for reserve valuation, regardless of the maturity
of the policy. This mechanical rule generates exogenous variation in required reserves across
policies of diﬀerent maturities, which acts as relative shifts in the supply curve that are
plausibly exogenous.
We ﬁnd that the shadow cost of capital was $0.96 per dollar of statutory capital for
the average company in November 2008. This cost varies from $0.10 to $5.53 per dollar of
statutory capital for the cross section of insurance companies in our sample. Those companies
with higher shadow cost sold more policies while reducing prices, consistent with a downward
shift in the supply curve. In addition, those companies with higher shadow cost raised or
retained more capital, through capital injections from their holding companies and reduction
of stockholder dividends. Many of the holding companies in our sample appear constrained
during the ﬁnancial crisis, as evidenced by application for government assistance such as the
Troubled Asset Relief Program, issuance of public equity, or suspension of dividends. Hence,
capital injections from these holding companies to their insurance subsidiaries could have
been limited by frictions in external capital markets. However, we cannot conclusively rule
out a price war arising from product market frictions as an alternative explanation.
We rule out default risk as an alternative explanation for several reasons. First, the
markups on term annuities are too low to be justiﬁed by default risk, given reasonable
assumptions about the recovery rate. Second, the term structure of risk-neutral default
probabilities implied by term annuities does not match that implied by credit default swaps
in magnitude, slope across maturity, or variation across insurance companies. Finally, the
absence of discounts on life annuities during the Great Depression serves as out-of-sample
evidence against default risk as a sole explanation.
The extraordinary pricing of liabilities complements related evidence on the asset side
of the balance sheet during the ﬁnancial crisis. Financially constrained life insurers sold
corporate bonds with the highest unrealized capital gains, carried at historical cost according
to the accounting rules, in order to improve their capital positions (Ellul et al. 2012). They
also sold downgraded bonds at ﬁre-sale prices in order to reduce their required capital (Merrill
3

et al. 2012). An important diﬀerence between our work and the traditional theory of ﬁre
sales (Shleifer and Vishny 1992) is that policies are liabilities that insurance companies issue
to households, rather than assets that they trade with other institutional investors in the
secondary market. In addition, an important advantage of the liability side is that the
counterfactual (i.e., pricing in the absence of frictions) can be more accurately measured
than the asset side, so that we can better quantify the cost of ﬁnancial frictions.
Our ﬁnding that the supply curve for life insurers shifts down in response to a balance sheet shock, causing prices to fall, contrasts with the evidence that the supply curve
for property and casualty insurers shifts up, causing prices to rise (Gron 1994, Froot and
O’Connell 1999). Although these ﬁndings may seem contradictory at ﬁrst, they are both
consistent with our supply-driven theory of insurance pricing. The key diﬀerence between life
insurers and property and casualty insurers is their accounting of liabilities under statutory
reserve regulation. Life insurers were able to raise statutory capital by selling new policies
because their reserve valuation was more aggressive than mark to market during the ﬁnancial
crisis. In contrast, property and casualty insurers must reduce their statutory capital when
selling new policies because their reserve valuation is always more conservative than mark
to market.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes our data and
documents key facts that motivate our study of insurance prices. Section II reviews aspects
of statutory reserve regulation that are relevant to our analysis. In Section III, we develop
a model of optimal insurance pricing, based on ﬁnancial and product market frictions interacting with statutory reserve regulation. In Section IV, we estimate the shadow cost of
capital through the insurance pricing model. Section V discusses the merits and limitations
of ﬁnancial frictions as an explanation for the evidence. In Section VI, we rule out default
risk as an alternative explanation. Section VII concludes with broader implications of our
study for household ﬁnance and macroeconomics.
I.

Annuity and Life Insurance Prices
A.

Data Construction
Annuity Prices

Our sample of annuity prices is from the WebAnnuities Insurance Agency, which has published quotes from the leading life insurers at a semiannual frequency from January 1989 to
July 2011 (Stern 1989–2011) and at a monthly frequency from January 2007 to August 2009
(Stern 2007–2009). Following Mitchell et al. (1999), we focus on single premium immediate
annuities in nonqualiﬁed accounts (i.e., only the interest is taxable). These policies cannot
4

be lapsed because the premium is paid up front as a single lump sum. Our data consist of
two types of policies: term and life annuities. For term annuities, we have quotes for 5- to
30-year maturities (every ﬁve years in between). For life annuities, we have quotes for “life
only” policies without guarantees as well as those with 10- or 20-year guarantees. These
quotes are available for both males and females aged 50 to 85 (every ﬁve years in between).
A term annuity pays annual income for a ﬁxed maturity of M years. Since term annuities
have a ﬁxed income stream that is independent of survival, they are straight bonds rather
than longevity insurance. An insurance company that issues a term annuity must buy a
portfolio of Treasury bonds to replicate its future cash ﬂows. A portfolio of corporate bonds,
for example, does not replicate the cash ﬂows because of default risk. Thus, the law of one
price implies that the Treasury yield curve is the appropriate cost of capital for the valuation
of term annuities. Let Rt (m) be the zero-coupon Treasury yield at maturity m and time t.
We deﬁne the actuarial value of an M-year term annuity per dollar of income as
(1)

Vt (M) =

M


1
.
m
R
(m)
t
m=1

We calculate the actuarial value for term annuities based on the zero-coupon yield curve for
oﬀ-the-run Treasury bonds (Gürkaynak, Sack and Wright 2007).
A life annuity with an M-year guarantee pays annual income for the ﬁrst M years regardless of survival, then continues paying income thereafter until the death of the insured. Let
pn be the one-year survival probability at age n, and let N be the maximum attainable age
according to the appropriate mortality table. We deﬁne the actuarial value of a life annuity
with an M-year guarantee at age n per dollar income as
(2)

N
−n m−1

1
l=0 pn+l
+
.
Vt (n, M) =
m
Rt (m)
Rt (m)m
m=1
m=M +1
M


We calculate the actuarial value for life annuities based on the appropriate mortality
table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve. We
use the 1983 Annuity Mortality Basic Table prior to January 1999 and the 2000 Annuity
Mortality Basic Table since January 1999. These mortality tables are derived from the actual
mortality experience of insured pools, based on data provided by various companies. Thus,
they account for adverse selection in annuity markets, that is, an insured pool of annuitants
has higher life expectancy than the overall population. We smooth the transition between
the two vintages of the mortality tables by geometric averaging.

5

Life Insurance Prices
Our sample of life insurance prices is from Compulife Software (2005–2011), which is a
computer-based quotation system for insurance agents. We focus on guaranteed universal
life policies, which are quoted for the leading life insurers since January 2005. These policies
have constant guaranteed premiums and accumulate no cash value, so they are essentially
“permanent” term life policies.1 We pull quotes for all US states for the regular health
category and a face amount of $250,000. We focus on males and females aged 30 to 80
(every ten years in between).
Universal life insurance pays out a death beneﬁt upon the death of the insured. The
policy is in eﬀect as long as the policyholder pays an annual premium while the insured is
alive. We deﬁne the actuarial value of universal life insurance at age n per dollar of death
beneﬁt as

(3)

Vt (n) =

1+

N
−n−1
m=1

m−1

l=0 pn+l
Rt (m)m

−1 N −n 

 m−2 pn+l (1 − pn+m−1 )
l=0

m=1

Rt (m)m

.

This formula does not account for the potential lapsation of policies, that is, the policyholder
may drop coverage prior to the death of the insured. There is currently no agreed-upon standard for lapsation pricing, partly because lapsations are diﬃcult to model and predict. Although some companies price in low levels of lapsation, others take the conservative approach
of assuming no lapsation in life insurance valuation.
We calculate the actuarial value for life insurance based on the appropriate mortality
table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve. We
use the 2001 Valuation Basic Table prior to January 2008 and the 2008 Valuation Basic Table
since January 2008. These mortality tables are derived from the actual mortality experience
of insured pools, so they account for adverse selection in life insurance markets. We smooth
the transition between the two vintages of the mortality tables by geometric averaging.
Financial Statements and Ratings Information
The annual ﬁnancial statements and ratings information are from A.M. Best Company (1993–
2012a) for ﬁscal years 1992 to 2011, which is merged with A.M. Best Company (1999–2012b)
for ﬁscal years 1998 to 2011. These ﬁnancial statements are prepared according to the statutory accounting principles and ﬁled with the National Association of Insurance Commis1

Although Compulife has quotes for various types of policies from annual renewable to 30-year term life
policies, they are not useful for our purposes. A term life policy typically has a renewal option at the end
of the guaranteed term. Because the premiums under the renewal option vary across insurance companies,
cross-sectional price comparisons are diﬃcult and imprecise.

6

sioners. Throughout the paper, we use a measure of accounting equity that is relevant for
risk-based capital (A.M. Best Company 2004, p. 11), which is capital and surplus plus asset
valuation reserve and conditional reserves. We deﬁne the following variables for our analysis:
• Log assets: Logarithm of total admitted assets.
• Asset growth: Growth rate of total admitted assets.
• Leverage ratio: One minus the ratio of equity to total admitted assets.
• Risk-based capital relative to guideline: Best’s Capital Adequacy Ratio minus the
guideline for the current rating (A.M. Best Company 2011, p. 24).
• Net equity inﬂow: Ratio of capital and surplus paid in minus stockholder dividends to
previous equity.
We merge annuity and life insurance prices in a given ﬁscal year with the ﬁnancial statements at ﬁscal year-end. Although we have the ﬁnancial statements for all companies, our
sample is ultimately limited by the availability of historical data on annuity and life insurance prices. Our data sources, WebAnnuities Insurance Agency and Compulife Software,
draw from the larger companies in the industry with an A.M. Best rating of A− or higher
and agency- or broker-based marketing (as opposed to direct sales). Table 1 summarizes our
sample of insurance companies for ﬁscal years 1998 to 2011. In 2011, our sample covers 47
of 275 companies with an A.M. Best rating of A− or higher and agency- or broker-based
marketing. These companies represented 61 percent of the immediate annuity market and
42 percent of the life insurance market. Across all years, our sample covers 101 of 489
companies.
B. Summary Statistics
Table 2 summarizes our data on annuity and life insurance prices. We have 870 semiannual
observations on 10-year term annuities from January 1989 to July 2011. The markup, deﬁned as the percent deviation of the quoted price from actuarial value, has a mean of 7.0
percent and a median of 7.2 percent. We can rule out adverse selection as a source of this
markup because term annuities are essentially straight bonds. Instead, the markup must be
attributed to marketing and administrative costs as well as economic proﬁts that could arise
from imperfect competition. The fact that the average markup on term annuities falls in
maturity is consistent with the presence of ﬁxed costs. The price of 10-year term annuities
varies signiﬁcantly across insurance companies, summarized by a standard deviation of 4.2
percent. Mitchell et al. (1999) ﬁnd similar variation for life annuities.
7

We have 13,675 monthly observations on life annuities from January 1989 to July 2011.
The average markup is 7.9 percent with a standard deviation of 7.6 percent. The pricing
data on life annuities with guarantees are available since May 1998. For 10-year guaranteed
annuities, the average markup is 4.2 percent with a standard deviation of 6.7 percent. For
20-year guaranteed annuities, the average markup is 4.5 percent with a standard deviation
of 6.5 percent.
We have 31,226 monthly observations on universal life insurance from January 2005 to
July 2011. The average markup is −5.8 percent with a standard deviation of 16.0 percent.
The negative average markup does not mean that insurance companies lose money on these
policies. With a constant premium and a rising mortality rate, policyholders are essentially
prepaying for coverage later in life. When a life insurance policy is lapsed, the insurance
company earns a windfall proﬁt because the present value of the remaining premiums is
typically less than the present value of the future death beneﬁt. Since there is currently
no agreed-upon standard for lapsation pricing, our calculation of actuarial value does not
account for lapsation. We are not especially concerned that the average markup might be
slightly mismeasured because our analysis focuses on the variation in markups over time and
across policies of diﬀerent maturities.
Table 2 shows that the data on the full cross section of annuity prices are available only
since May 1998. Therefore, we construct our main estimation sample in Section IV based on
the data from May 1998 to July 2011, which yields a total of 45,430 observations on annuity
and life insurance prices.
C. Extraordinary Pricing Behavior
Figure 1 reports the time series of the average markup on term annuities at various maturities,
averaged across insurance companies and reported with a 95 percent conﬁdence interval. The
average markup usually varies between 0 and 10 percent, except around November 2008.
The time-series variation in the average markup implies that insurance companies do not
change annuity prices to perfectly oﬀset interest-rate movements (Charupat, Kamstra and
Milevsky 2012).
For 30-year term annuities, the average markup fell to an extraordinary −15.7 percent
in November 2008. Much of this large negative markup arises from reductions in the price
of term annuities from May 2007 to November 2008, as we discuss below. In November
2008, the magnitude of the average markup is monotonically related to the maturity of the
term annuity. The average markup was −8.5 percent for 20-year, −4.0 percent for 10-year,
and −1.1 percent for 5-year term annuities. Excluding the extraordinary period around
November 2008, the average markup was negative for 30-year term annuities only twice
8

before in our semiannual sample, in October 2000 and October 2001.
Figure 2 reports the time series of the average markup on life annuities for males at
various ages. Our ﬁndings are similar to those for term annuities. For life annuities at
age 60, the average markup fell to an extraordinary −19.0 percent in December 2008. The
magnitude of the average markup is monotonically related to age, which is negatively related
to eﬀective maturity. The average markup on life annuities was −14.7 percent at age 65,
−10.3 percent at age 70, and −5.7 percent at age 75.2
Figure 3 reports the time series of the average markup on universal life insurance for
males at various ages. Our ﬁndings are similar to those for term and life annuities. For
universal life insurance at age 30, the average markup fell to an extraordinary −57.0 in
December 2008. The magnitude of the average markup is monotonically related to age. The
average markup on universal life insurance was −50.2 percent at age 40, −42.1 percent at
age 50, and −27.5 percent at age 60.
Figure 4 shows the cross-sectional relation between changes in annuity prices from May
2007 to November 2008 and four measures of balance sheet shocks at ﬁscal year-end 2008.
The ﬁgure reveals two interesting facts. First, most of the insurance companies reduced
prices during this period, which is remarkable given that falling interest rates implied rising
actuarial value. Second, the price reductions were larger for those companies with lower asset
growth, higher leverage ratio, lower risk-based capital relative to guideline, and higher ratio
of deferred annuity liabilities to equity. Deferred annuity liabilities, whose guarantees were
unproﬁtable during the ﬁnancial crisis, were an important source of balance sheet shocks for
those companies that were active in this market.
The fact that the price reductions were larger for those companies that suﬀered larger
balance sheet shocks raises ﬁnancial frictions as a potential explanation for the evidence.
However, the fact that even relatively unaﬀected companies reduced or kept prices constant
suggests that there are other important forces, such as product market frictions that lead
to a price war. The rest of the paper examines ﬁnancial and product market frictions as
potential explanations for the evidence.
II.

Statutory Reserve Regulation for Life Insurers

When an insurance company sells an annuity or life insurance policy, its assets increase by the
purchase price of the policy. At the same time, the insurance company must record statutory
2

In Appendix D, we estimate the average markup on life annuities relative to an alternative measure of
actuarial value based on the US agency yield curve. We ﬁnd that the average markup remains negative in
December 2008, under this conservative adjustment for the special status of Treasury bonds as collateral in
ﬁnancial transactions.

9

reserves on the liability side of its balance sheet to cover future insurance liabilities. In the
United States, the amount of required reserves for each type of policy is governed by state
law, but all states essentially follow recommended guidelines known as Standard Valuation
Law (National Association of Insurance Commissioners 2011, Appendix A-820). Standard
Valuation Law establishes mortality tables and discount rates that are to be used for reserve
valuation.
In this section, we review the reserve valuation rules for annuities and life insurance.
Because these policies essentially have no exposure to market risk, ﬁnance theory implies
that the market value of these policies is determined by the term structure of riskless interest
rates. However, Standard Valuation Law requires that the reserve value of these policies be
calculated using a mechanical discount rate that is a function of the Moody’s composite yield
on seasoned corporate bonds.3 Insurance companies care about the reserve value of policies
insofar as it is used by rating agencies and state regulators to determine the adequacy of
statutory reserves (A.M. Best Company 2011, p. 31). A rating agency could downgrade an
insurance company whose asset value has fallen relative to its statutory reserves.4 In the
extreme case, the state regulator could liquidate an insurance company whose assets are
deﬁcient relative to its statutory reserves.
A.

Term Annuities

Let yt be the 12-month moving average of the Moody’s composite yield on seasoned corporate
bonds, over the period ending on June 30 of the issuance year of the policy. For an annuity
issued in month t, Standard Valuation Law speciﬁes the following discount rate for reserve
valuation:
(4)

t − 1 = 0.03 + 0.8(yt − 0.03),
R

which is rounded to the nearest 25 basis point. This is a constant discount rate that applies to
all expected liabilities, regardless of maturity. The exogenous variation in required reserves
that this mechanical rule generates, both over time and across policies of diﬀerent maturities,
will allow us to identify the shadow cost of capital.
Figure 5 reports the time series of the discount rate for annuities, together with the 10year zero-coupon Treasury yield. The discount rate for annuities has generally fallen over the
3

The same discount rate is used for ﬁnancial reporting at the holding company level, prepared according
to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The key diﬀerence of GAAP, compared with statutory
accounting principles, is the deferral and amortization of initial acquisition costs, which tends to increase
reported equity (Lombardi 2006, pp. 4–7).
4
For example, A.M. Best Company (2009) reports that MetLife’s “ﬁnancial leverage is at the high end of
its threshold for the current rating level” at ﬁscal year-end 2008.

10

last 20 years as nominal interest rates have fallen. However, the discount rate for annuities
has fallen more slowly than the 10-year Treasury yield. This means that statutory reserve
requirements for annuities have become looser over time because a high discount rate implies
low reserve valuation.
The reserve value of an M-year term annuity per dollar of income is
(5)

Vt (M) =

M

1
.
tm
R

m=1

Figure 6 reports the ratio of reserve to actuarial value for term annuities (i.e., Vt (M)/Vt (M))
at maturities of 5 to 30 years. Whenever this ratio is equal to one, the insurance liabilities
are marked to market. That is, the insurance company records a dollar of reserve per dollar
of future insurance liabilities in present value. Whenever this ratio is above one, the reserve
valuation is more conservative than mark to market. Conversely, whenever this ratio is below
one, the reserve valuation is more aggressive than mark to market.
For 30-year term annuities, the ratio of reserve to actuarial value reaches a peak of 1.20
in November 1994 and a trough of 0.73 in January 2009. If an insurance company were to
sell a 30-year term annuity at actuarial value in November 1994, its statutory reserves would
increase by $1.20 per dollar of policies sold. This implies a loss of $0.20 in accounting equity
per dollar of policies sold. In contrast, if an insurance company were to sell a 30-year term
annuity at actuarial value in January 2009, its statutory reserves would only increase by
$0.73 per dollar of policies sold. This implies a gain of $0.27 in accounting equity per dollar
of policies sold.
B. Life Annuities
The reserve valuation of life annuities requires mortality tables. The American Society of
Actuaries produces two versions of mortality tables, which are called basic and loaded. The
loaded tables, which are used for reserve valuation, are conservative versions of the basic
tables that underestimate the mortality rates. The loaded tables ensure that insurance
companies have adequate reserves, even if actual mortality rates turn out to be lower than
those projected by the basic tables. For calculating the reserve value, we use the 1983
Annuity Mortality Table prior to January 1999 and the 2000 Annuity Mortality Table since
January 1999.
Let pn be the one-year survival probability at age n, and let N be the maximum attainable
age according to the appropriate loaded mortality table. The reserve value of a life annuity

11

with an M-year guarantee at age n per dollar of income (Lombardi 2006, p. 204) is
M
N
−n m−1


n+l
1
l=0 p
+
,
Vt (n, M) =
m
m


Rt
m=1 Rt
m=M +1

(6)

where the discount rate is given by equation (4).
Figure 6 also reports the ratio of reserve to actuarial value for life annuities and 10-year
guaranteed annuities for males aged 50 to 80 (every ten years in between). The time-series
variation in reserve to actuarial value for life annuities is quite similar to that for term
annuities. In particular, the ratio reaches a peak in November 1994 and a trough in January
2009. Since the reserve valuation of term annuities depends only on the discount rates, the
similarity to term annuities implies that discount rates, rather than mortality tables, have a
predominant eﬀect on the reserve valuation of life annuities.
C. Life Insurance
Let yt be the minimum of the 12-month and the 36-month moving average of the Moody’s
composite yield on seasoned corporate bonds, over the period ending on June 30 of the year
prior to issuance of the policy. For life insurance with guaranteed term greater than 20 years
issued in month t, Standard Valuation Law speciﬁes the following discount rate for reserve
valuation:
(7)

t − 1 = 0.03 + 0.35(min{yt , 0.09} − 0.03) + 0.175(max{yt , 0.09} − 0.09),
R

which is rounded to the nearest 25 basis point.
As with life annuities, the American Society of Actuaries produces basic and loaded
mortality tables for life insurance. The loaded tables, which are used for reserve valuation,
are conservative versions of the basic tables that overestimate the mortality rates. For
calculating the reserve value, we use the 2001 Commissioners Standard Ordinary Mortality
Table. The reserve value of life insurance at age n per dollar of death beneﬁt (Lombardi 2006,
pp. 67–68) is

(8)

Vt (n) =

1+

N
−n−1
m=1

m−1
l=0

pn+l

tm
R

−1 N −n 

 m−2 pn+l (1 − pn+m−1 )
l=0

m=1

tm
R

−

1 − pn
.
t
R

Finally, Figure 6 reports the ratio of reserve to actuarial value for universal life insurance
for males aged 30 to 60 (every ten years in between). Our earlier caveat regarding lapsation
applies to this ﬁgure as well, so that we focus on the variation in reserve to actuarial value
12

over time and across policies of diﬀerent maturities. The reserve value falls signiﬁcantly
relative to actuarial value around December 2008. As shown in Figure 5, this is caused by
the fact that the discount rate for life insurance stays constant during this period, while the
10-year Treasury yield falls signiﬁcantly. If an insurance company were to sell universal life
insurance to a 30-year-old male in December 2008, its statutory reserves would only increase
by $0.69 per dollar of policies sold. This implies a gain of $0.31 in accounting equity per
dollar of policies sold.
III.

Insurance Pricing under Financial and Product Market Frictions

We now develop a model of optimal insurance pricing that explains the evidence in Section I.
In our model, an insurance company sets prices for various types of policies to maximize the
present value of proﬁts, subject to both ﬁnancial and product market frictions. Financial
frictions enter through a leverage constraint on statutory capital, or the value of assets relative to statutory reserves (Gron 1990, Winter 1994). Product market frictions enter through
search frictions that make future demand increasing in statutory capital (e.g., through higher
ratings). The insurance company may reduce prices, even below actuarial value, either to
relax its leverage constraint or to boost future demand. The model shows that ﬁnancial
and product market frictions are not separately identiﬁed by the ﬁrst-order conditions for
insurance pricing.
A.

Insurance Company’s Maximization Problem
Balance Sheet Dynamics

We ﬁrst describe how the sale of new policies aﬀects an insurance company’s balance sheet,
which will allow us to introduce both ﬁnancial and product market frictions. The insurance
company sells Qi,t policies of type i = 1, . . . , I in period t at the price Pi,t . The diﬀerent
types of policies include annuities and life insurance, which are diﬀerentiated not only by
maturity but also by sex and age of the insured. The insurance company incurs a ﬁxed
(marketing and administrative) cost Ct in each period.
Let At−1 be the insurance company’s assets at the beginning of period t, and let Rt be
an exogenous return on its assets in period t. Its assets at the end of period t, after the sale
of new policies, is
(9)

At = Rt At−1 +

I

i=1

13

Pi,t Qi,t − Ct .

As discussed in Section II, the insurance company must also record statutory reserves on
the liability side of its balance sheet. Let Lt−1 be its statutory reserves at the beginning of
period t, and let Rt be an exogenous return on its statutory reserves in period t. Let Vi,t be
the reserve value of policy i in period t. Its statutory reserves at the end of period t, after
the sale of new policies, is
(10)

Lt = Rt Lt−1 +

I


Vi,t Qi,t .

i=1

We deﬁne the insurance company’s statutory capital as the value of its assets relative to
statutory reserves:
(11)

Kt = At − φ−1 Lt ,

where φ ≤ 1 is a constant. Equations (9) and (10) imply that the law of motion for statutory
capital is
(12)

Kt = Rt Kt−1 +

I 



Pi,t − φ−1 Vi,t Qi,t − Ct .

i=1

Financial Frictions
The insurance company faces a leverage constraint:
(13)

Lt
≤ φ ⇐⇒ Kt ≥ 0,
At

where φ is the maximum leverage ratio. This constraint can also be motivated as a simple
version of a risk-based capital constraint:
(14)

At − Lt
≥ ψ,
ρLt

where ρ is the risk charge and ψ is the guideline for a rating or regulatory action.5 Note that
equations (13) and (14) are equivalent when φ−1 = 1 + ρψ. At a deeper level, the leverage
constraint captures ﬁnancial frictions that arise from the incentives to take excessive risk
due to the presence of state guaranty funds or other agency problems.
In the model that is presented here, ﬁnancial frictions enter as a hard constraint instead
5

For example, A.M. Best Company (2004) speciﬁes ρ ∈ [0.75%, 3.5%] for interest-rate risk on general
account annuities and ψ = 160% as the guideline for an A+ rating.

14

of a continuous cost function. In Appendix B, we show that an alternative model in which
the insurance company faces a continuous cost on shortfalls in statutory capital has the same
implications for optimal insurance pricing.
Product Market Frictions
For each policy i in period t, a mass mi,t (Kt−1 ) of consumers matches with an insurance
company whose statutory capital is Kt−1 at the end of period t−1. Consumers are more likely
to match with insurance companies that have higher statutory capital, so that ∂mi,t /∂Kt−1 ≥
0 (Hortaçsu and Syverson 2004). The underlying assumption is that ratings, or reputation
in the product market more generally, is increasing in statutory capital. Conditional on
matching, each consumer demands qi,t (Pi,t ) policies at the price Pi,t , where ∂qi,t /∂Pi,t < 0.
Under these assumptions, the insurance company faces the following demand function:
(15)

Qi,t (Pi,t , Kt−1 ) = mi,t (Kt−1 )qi,t (Pi,t ),

with the properties that ∂Qi,t /∂Pi,t < 0 and ∂Qi,t /∂Kt−1 ≥ 0.6
An alternative microfoundation for a demand function with the same properties is an
insurance market with product diﬀerentiation along company characteristics (Anderson,
de Palma and Thisse 1992, Chapter 2). Demand increases in statutory capital because,
holding price constant, consumers attain higher utility by buying policies from insurance
companies with higher statutory capital.
Proﬁts and Firm Value
Let Vi,t be the actuarial value (or the frictionless marginal cost) of policy i in period t. The
insurance company’s proﬁt in each period is
(16)

Πt =

I


(Pi,t − Vi,t )Qi,t − Ct .

i=1

A simple way to interpret this proﬁt function is that for each type of policy that the insurance
company sells for Pi,t , it can buy a portfolio of Treasury bonds that replicate its expected
liabilities for Vi,t . For term annuities, this interpretation is exact because future insurance
liabilities are deterministic. For life annuities and life insurance, we assume that the insured
pools are suﬃciently large for the law of large numbers to apply.
6

We take the demand function as exogenously given because its microfoundations are not essential for our
immediate purposes. In Appendix A, we derive the demand function from ﬁrst principles in a fully speciﬁed
model with search frictions.

15

The insurance company chooses the price Pi,t for each type of policy to maximize ﬁrm
value, or the present value of proﬁts:
Jt = Πt + Et [Mt+1 Jt+1 ],

(17)

where Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor. The insurance company maximizes ﬁrm value,
subject to the leverage constraint (13) and the law of motion for statutory capital (12).
B. Optimal Insurance Pricing
Let λt ≥ 0 be the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint (13). The Lagrangian for
the insurance company’s maximization problem is
(18)

Lt = Jt + λt Kt .

The ﬁrst-order condition for the price of policy i in period t is
(19)

∂Lt
∂Kt
∂Kt
∂Jt
∂Πt
=
+ λt
=
+ λt
∂Pi,t ∂Pi,t
∂Pi,t
∂Pi,t
∂Pi,t
 ∂Q

∂Qi,t
i,t
−1 
=Qi,t + (Pi,t − Vi,t )
= 0,
+ λt Qi,t + Pi,t − φ Vi,t
∂Pi,t
∂Pi,t

where we refer to
(20)

λt = −

∂Πt
∂Pi,t

∂Kt
∂Pi,t

−1

= λt + Et Mt+1

∂Jt+1
∂Kt

as the shadow cost of capital. It measures the marginal reduction in proﬁts that the insurance
company is willing to accept to raise its statutory capital by a dollar.
Rearranging equation (19), the price of policy i in period t is
(21)

Pi,t = Vi,t

1
1−
i,t

−1



1 + λt φ−1 Vi,t /Vi,t
1 + λt

where
(22)

i,t = −

∂ log Qi,t
>1
∂ log Pi,t

16


,

is the elasticity of demand. When λt = 0, the insurance price reduces to
(23)

P i,t = Vi,t

1
1−
i,t

−1

.

This is the standard Bertrand formula of pricing, in which price is equal to marginal cost
times a markup that is decreasing in the elasticity of demand.
When λt > 0, the insurance price satisﬁes an inequality:
(24)

Pi,t ≷ P i,t if

Vi,t
≷ φ.
Vi,t

That is, the insurance price is higher than the Bertrand price if selling the policy reduces
statutory capital on the margin. This is the case with property and casualty insurers, whose
statutory reserve regulation requires that Vi,t /Vi,t > 1 (Committee on Property and Liability
Financial Reporting 2000). Conversely, the insurance price is lower than the Bertrand price
if selling the policy raises statutory capital on the margin. This was the case with life insurers
around December 2008, as shown in Figure 6.
The shadow cost of capital (20) embeds the importance of both ﬁnancial and product
market frictions. To see this, ﬁrst consider a special case of the model in which product
market frictions are absent (i.e., ∂Qi,t /∂Kt−1 = 0). The insurance company may reduce
prices, sacriﬁcing current economic proﬁts, in order to relax current or future ﬁnancial constraints. The incentive to reduce prices is increasing in the shadow cost, which measures the
importance of statutory capital for relaxing the leverage constraint today (through λt ) or at
some future state (through Et [Mt+1 ∂Jt+1 /∂Kt ]).
Now consider a special case of the model in which ﬁnancial frictions are absent (i.e., λt = 0
in all periods). The insurance company may reduce prices, sacriﬁcing current economic
proﬁts, in order to boost future demand. The incentive to engage in a price war is increasing
in the shadow cost, which measures the importance of statutory capital for boosting future
demand (through Et [Mt+1 ∂Jt+1 /∂Kt ]).
C. Empirical Predictions
The key predictions of the insurance pricing model (21) are consistent with the evidence
in Section I. In the cross section of policies, the model predicts that the price reductions
are larger for those policies with looser statutory reserve requirements (i.e., lower Vi,t /Vi,t ).
Consistent with this prediction, Figures 1 to 3 show that the price reductions during the
ﬁnancial crisis align with the diﬀerences in statutory reserve requirements across policies

17

of diﬀerent maturities in Figure 6. The model also explains why the extraordinary pricing
behavior was so short-lived. Figure 6 shows that the reserve value was signiﬁcantly lower
than the actuarial value from November 2008 to February 2009, which was a relatively short
window of opportunity for insurance companies to raise statutory capital through the sale
of new policies.
In the cross section of insurance companies, the model predicts that the price reductions
are larger for those companies with higher shadow cost of capital. Figure 4 supports this
prediction if those companies that suﬀered larger balance sheet shocks had higher shadow
cost, because they were either more constrained or more eager to boost future demand.
IV.

Estimating the Insurance Pricing Model

We now estimate the shadow cost of capital through the insurance pricing model (21). In
Appendix A, we take a complementary approach of calibrating and solving a fully speciﬁed
version of the model.
A.

Empirical Speciﬁcation

Let i index the type of policy, j index the insurance company, and t index time. Equation
(21) implies a nonlinear regression model for the markup:
(25)

log

Pi,j,t
Vi,t

= − log 1 −

1
i,j,t


+ log

1 + λj,t (Lj,t /Aj,t)−1 Vi,t /Vi,t
1 + λj,t


+ ei,j,t ,

where ei,j,t is an error term with zero conditional mean.
We model the elasticity of demand as
(26)

i,j,t = 1 + exp{−β  yi,j,t},

where yi,j,t is a vector of insurance policy and company characteristics. The insurance policy
characteristics in our speciﬁcation are sex and age. The insurance company characteristics
are the A.M. Best rating, log assets, asset growth, leverage ratio, risk-based capital relative
to guideline, current liquidity, and operating return on equity. We interact each of these
variables with a dummy variable that allows their impact on the elasticity of demand to
diﬀer between annuities and life insurance. We also include year-quarter and domiciliarystate dummies to capture additional variation in the elasticity of demand.

18

We model the shadow cost of capital as
λj,t = exp{γ  zj,t},

(27)

where zj,t is a vector of insurance company characteristics. Motivated by the reduced-form
evidence in Figure 4, the insurance company characteristics are log assets, asset growth,
leverage ratio, risk-based capital relative to guideline, and net equity inﬂow. We capture
time variation in the shadow cost through the yield spread between Moody’s Aaa corporate
and 20-year constant-maturity Treasury bonds. The corporate yield spread is an important
measure of borrowing costs that is closely related to time-varying risk premia in ﬁnancial
markets, which could arise from time-varying risk aversion. Our speciﬁcation also includes
year-quarter dummies that allow the shadow cost to be zero, by essentially turning oﬀ both
insurance company characteristics and the corporate yield spread.
B. Identifying Assumptions
If the elasticity of demand is correctly speciﬁed, equation (25) implies that the markup
has a positive conditional mean whenever the shadow cost of capital is zero. Therefore, a
positive shadow cost is identiﬁed by the combination of a negative conditional mean for the
markup and a ratio of reserve to actuarial value that is less than the leverage ratio (i.e.,
Vi,t /Vi,t < Lj,t /Aj,t).
Even if the elasticity of demand is misspeciﬁed, Standard Valuation Law generates relative
shifts in supply across diﬀerent types of policies that an insurance company sells, which are
suﬃcient to identify the shadow cost of capital. To illustrate this point, we approximate
equation (25) through a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation as
(28)

log

Pi,j,t
Vi,t

≈ αj,t + 1 +

1
λj,t

−1

Lj,t
Aj,t

−1

Vi,t
+ ui,j,t,
Vi,t

where
(29)

ui,j,t = −αj,t − 1 +

1
λj,t

−1

− log 1 −

1
i,j,t

+ ei,j,t

is an error term with zero conditional mean. For a given insurance company j at a given time
t, the regression coeﬃcient λj,t is identiﬁed by exogenous variation in reserve to actuarial
value across diﬀerent types of policies.

19

C. Shadow Cost of Capital
Panel A of Table 3 reports the estimated coeﬃcients in the model for the elasticity of demand
(i.e., β in equation (26)). The positive coeﬃcient on the dummy for A.M. Best rating implies
that insurance companies rated A or A− face a lower elasticity of demand and have higher
average markups than those rated A++ or A+. Similarly, the positive coeﬃcients on log
assets and the leverage ratio imply that larger and more leveraged insurance companies face
a lower elasticity of demand and have higher average markups.
Panel B of Table 3 reports the estimated coeﬃcients in the model for the shadow cost of
capital (i.e., γ in equation (27)). In the time series, the shadow cost is positively related to
the corporate yield spread. A standard deviation increase in the corporate yield spread is
associated with a 66 percent increase in the shadow cost. In the cross section of insurance
companies, the shadow cost is positively related to the leverage ratio, risk-based capital
relative to guideline, and net equity inﬂow, and is negatively related to log assets and asset
growth. The most important of these characteristics is the leverage ratio, by an order of
magnitude. A standard deviation increase in the leverage ratio is associated with a 155
percent increase in the shadow cost.
Figure 7 reports the time series of the shadow cost of capital for the average company
(i.e., at the mean of the insurance company characteristics). The shadow cost is positive
around the 2001 recession as well as during the ﬁnancial crisis. Our point estimate of the
shadow cost is $0.96 per dollar of statutory capital in November 2008. That is, the average
company was willing to accept a marginal reduction of $0.96 in proﬁts to raise its statutory
capital by a dollar. The 95 percent conﬁdence interval for the shadow cost ranges from $0.66
to $1.39 per dollar of statutory capital.
Table 4 reports the shadow cost of capital for the cross section of insurance companies
in our sample in November 2008. The shadow cost varies signiﬁcantly across insurance
companies. At the top of the list is MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company, whose
shadow cost was $5.53 per dollar of statutory capital with a standard error of $1.52. Its
assets shrank by 9 percent in 2008, and its leverage ratio was 97 percent at ﬁscal year-end
2008. The relative weakness of MetLife’s balance sheet is remarkable, given that it raised new
capital in 2008 that was 163 percent of its equity at ﬁscal year-end 2007. The last column of
the table shows that MetLife was not the only company that raised an extraordinary amount
of capital, through capital injections from the holding company and reduction of stockholder
dividends (Berry-Stölzle, Nini and Wende 2012, Niehaus 2013).
Near the bottom of Table 4 is American General Life Insurance Company with a shadow
cost of $0.13 per dollar of statutory capital. Its assets grew by 6 percent in 2008, and its
leverage ratio was 85 percent at ﬁscal year-end 2008. The relative strength of American
20

General’s balance sheet is due to new capital that it received from its holding company in
2008, as part of the government bailout of the American International Group.
D. Evidence on Quantities
The ﬁnancial statements contain data on new policies issued at an aggregated level that is
coarser than our pricing data. Speciﬁcally, they contain the total number of policies issued
for immediate annuities and life insurance, which are not broken down by type of policy.
With this caveat in mind, we now turn to the evidence on quantities.
If the price reductions are due to downward shifts in the supply curve, there should be
a positive correlation between quantity changes and the shadow cost of capital in the cross
section of insurance companies. Table 5 shows that there is such correlation in the data for
the cross section of insurance companies in Table 4. A dollar increase in the shadow cost
in November 2008 is associated with a 14.4 percentage point increase in the growth rate of
quantities from 2007 to 2009.
V.

Discussion on Financial Frictions

It is tempting to interpret Tables 3 and 4 as evidence for ﬁnancial frictions. However, an
insurance company that is part of a holding company can be ﬁnancially constrained only if
its parent is also constrained due to frictions in external capital markets, or its parent does
not inject enough capital due to frictions in internal capital markets. We now discuss these
two possibilities as part of a broader discussion on the merits and limitations of ﬁnancial
frictions as an explanation for the evidence.
A.

Frictions in External Capital Markets

Table 6 lists all publicly held holding companies that are parents of the insurance subsidiaries in Table 4. For each holding company, the table describes signiﬁcant activity to
recapitalize from September 2008 to July 2009. We deﬁne signiﬁcant activity as application
for government assistance, issuance of public equity, or reduction or suspension of dividends.
At the top of Table 6 are seven companies that applied for the Troubled Asset Relief
Program (TARP) and the ING Group, which received similar assistance from the Dutch
government. Only the most constrained companies would ordinarily apply for government
assistance because it comes with tighter capital regulation (e.g., forced suspension of dividends), restrictions on executive compensation, and potential loss of reputation in both
product and capital markets. The six companies that applied for TARP could be subdivided
into two categories. Allstate, the American International Group, and Prudential Financial
21

were already bank holding companies that were eligible for TARP. Genworth Financial, Lincoln National, the Phoenix Companies, and Protective Life were originally insurance holding
companies that had to acquire a bank in order to become eligible. Becoming a bank holding
company means that they would be subject to Federal Reserve supervision, so these four
companies were presumably constrained to take such a drastic step.
The second group in Table 6 consists of Manulife Financial and MetLife, which did not
apply for government assistance but issued public equity during the ﬁnancial crisis. For
these companies as well as Protective Life and Prudential Financial, which ultimately issued
public equity after withdrawing their application for TARP, we estimate the announcement
eﬀect of equity issuance on the stock price (e.g., Gron and Lucas 1998). The announcement
eﬀect has two potential interpretations. The ﬁrst is that the announcement eﬀect reﬂects
the cost of external capital that arises from debt overhang. Equity issuance could signal
that existing equity within the holding company, in addition to new capital that is raised,
will be used to repay the existing debtholders, including the policyholders of the insurance
subsidiaries. The second interpretation is that the announcement eﬀect merely reﬂects private information about proﬁtability, which would eventually be revealed to capital markets
anyway (Myers and Majluf 1984). With this caveat in mind, the ﬁnal column of Table 6
reports the announcement eﬀect as an imperfect measure of the cost of external capital.7
To illustrate our calculation with an example, MetLife announced an equity issuance
at the close of trading on October 7, 2008. Its market capitalization was $26,170 million,
and its abnormal return on the following day was −24.34 percent, according to the capital
asset pricing model. Therefore, the announcement was associated with a $6, 370 = 0.2434 ×
$26, 170 million reduction in market capitalization. MetLife raised $2,286 million in new
capital, which implies an average cost of $2.79 = $6, 370/$2, 286 per dollar of capital. This
average cost of external capital for the holding company is the same order of magnitude as
the marginal cost of internal capital for its insurance subsidiaries in Table 4. Any diﬀerence
between the two may be justiﬁed by convexity in the cost of equity issuance and frictions in
internal capital markets, as we discuss below.
The third group in Table 6 consists of ﬁve companies that did not issue public equity but
reduced or suspended dividends during the ﬁnancial crisis. These companies could have been
ﬁnancially constrained, but it is diﬃcult to tell based on changes in dividend policy alone.
The ﬁnal group in the table consists of ﬁve companies for whom there was no signiﬁcant
activity to recapitalize. These companies were presumably unconstrained.
7

It is diﬃcult to estimate the announcement eﬀect of applying for government assistance because the capital raised depends on the probability of success and the expected support conditional on success. Similarly,
the capital raised from a dividend reduction depends on the expected duration of the reduction, which is
diﬃcult to estimate.

22

On the one hand, some (if not many) of the holding companies in Table 6 appear constrained during the ﬁnancial crisis, which supports the view that their insurance subsidiaries
were also constrained. For these companies, the shadow cost of capital in Table 4 most likely
reﬂects the cost of ﬁnancial frictions. On the other hand, some of the holding companies in
Table 6 appear relatively unconstrained. For these companies, the case for ﬁnancial frictions
is much less compelling, and the shadow cost of capital in Table 4 most likely reﬂects the
incentives to engage in a price war due to product market frictions.
B. Frictions in Internal Capital Markets
The Insurance Holding Company System Regulatory Act (National Association of Insurance
Commissioners 2011, Appendix A-440) restricts the movement of capital within a holding
company as well as the payment of stockholder dividends to the parent. Through these laws,
state regulators protect the interests of policyholders by preventing holding companies from
extracting too much capital from their insurance subsidiaries. However, these laws could
also lead to frictions in internal capital markets.
As discussed in A.M. Best Company (2011, p. 21), regulatory uncertainty over the ability
to extract capital is an important source of risk for holding companies. Any capital that a
holding company injects into its insurance subsidiary may not be paid back as dividends, at
least in the foreseeable future. Moreover, this risk is greater in bad times when insurance
companies are subject to more regulatory scrutiny. Importantly, regulatory uncertainty could
alter the ex ante incentives of a holding company to inject capital into its insurance subsidiary.
While diﬃcult to prove or quantify, we raise frictions in internal capital markets as another
possibility for why the capital injections may have been limited during the ﬁnancial crisis.
VI.

Evidence against Default Risk

Pricing below actuarial value could reﬂect the possibility that policyholders may not receive
the full face value of policies in the event of future default. Since policies are ultimately
backed by the state guaranty fund (e.g., up to $250K for annuities and $300K for life insurance in California), the only scenario in which a policyholder would not be fully repaid is if
all companies associated with the state guaranty fund were to systemically fail. During the
ﬁnancial crisis, the pricing of annuities and life insurance remained linear around the guaranteed amount, and pricing was uniform across states with diﬀerent guaranty provisions. The
absence of kinks in pricing around the guaranteed amount rules out idiosyncratic default risk
that aﬀects only some companies, but it does not rule out systematic default risk in which
the state guaranty fund fails.
23

Suppose we were to entertain an extreme scenario in which the state guaranty fund
fails. Since life insurers are subject to risk-based capital regulation, risky assets (e.g., noninvestment-grade bonds, common and preferred stocks, nonperforming mortgages, and real
estate) account for only 16 percent of their assets (Ellul, Jotikasthira and Lundblad 2011).
The remainder of their assets are in safe asset classes such as cash, Treasury bonds, and
investment-grade bonds. Under an extreme assumption that risky assets lose their value
entirely, a reasonable lower bound on the recovery rate is 84 percent. To further justify this
recovery rate, the asset deﬁciency in past cases of insolvency typically ranges from 5 to 10
percent and very rarely exceeds 15 percent (Gallanis 2009).
Let dt (l) be the risk-neutral default probability between year l − 1 and l at time t, and
let θ be the recovery rate conditional on default. Then the market value of an M-year term
annuity per dollar of income is
(30)


M

θ + (1 − θ) m
l=1 (1 − dt (l))
.
Vt (M) =
Rt (m)m
m=1

Panel B of Table 7 reports the term structure of default probabilities implied by the markups
on term annuities in panel A. For MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company, an annual
default probability of 24.4 percent at the 1- to 5-year horizon and 17.9 percent at the 6- to
10-year horizon justiﬁes the markups on 5- and 10-year term annuities. There are no default
probabilities that can justify the markups on term annuities with maturity greater than 15
years. This is because equation (30) implies that the markup cannot be less than 16 percent
(i.e., one minus the recovery rate), which is clearly violated for term annuities with maturity
greater than 25 years.
Panel C of Table 7 presents further evidence against default risk based on the term
structure of risk-neutral default probabilities implied by credit default swaps on the holding
company of the respective subsidiary in panel B. First, the 6- to 10-year default probability
implied by term annuities is higher than that implied by credit default swaps for all companies, except American General Life Insurance Company. This ﬁnding is inconsistent with
default risk given that the policyholders of an insurance subsidiary are senior to the creditors
of its holding company. Second, term annuities imply an upward-sloping term structure of
default probabilities, which does not match the downward-sloping term structure implied by
credit default swaps. Finally, the relative ranking of default probabilities across the insurance subsidiaries in panel B does not align with the relative ranking across the respective
holding companies in panel C.
In Appendix E, we also ﬁnd out-of-sample evidence against default risk based on the
absence of discounts on life annuities during the Great Depression, when the corporate
24

default spread was even higher than the heights reached during the ﬁnancial crisis. Only
our explanation, based on ﬁnancial and product market frictions interacting with statutory
reserve regulation, is consistent with the evidence for both the Great Depression and the
ﬁnancial crisis.
VII.

Conclusion

We document extraordinary pricing behavior for annuities and life insurance during the
ﬁnancial crisis. The average markup was as low as −19 percent for annuities and −57
percent for life insurance. In the cross section of policies, the price reductions were larger for
those policies with looser statutory reserve requirements. In the cross section of insurance
companies, the price reductions were larger for those companies that suﬀered larger balance
sheet shocks. Traditional demand-side hypotheses, such as adverse selection or default risk,
do not explain our empirical ﬁndings.
Instead, the evidence supports the view that ﬁnancial and regulatory frictions have a
large and measurable impact on insurance markets. More broadly, our study highlights the
importance of supply-side frictions in consumer ﬁnancial markets. Previous work in household ﬁnance has mostly focused on demand-side frictions, such as borrowing constraints,
asymmetric information, moral hazard, and bounded rationality. Although these frictions
are undoubtedly important, we believe that supply-side frictions are also important for our
understanding of market equilibrium and welfare.
Another broader implication of our study is that we provide micro evidence for a class of
macro models based on ﬁnancial frictions, which is a leading explanation for the Great Recession (see Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov (2013)
for recent surveys). We believe that this literature would beneﬁt from additional micro
evidence on the cost of these frictions for other types of ﬁnancial institutions, such as commercial banks and health insurance companies. Our empirical approach could be extended
to estimate the shadow cost of capital for other types of ﬁnancial institutions.

25

References
A.M. Best Company, Best’s Insurance Reports: Life/Health, United States and Canada,
Oldwick, NJ: A.M. Best Company, 1993–2012.
, Best’s Statement File: Life/Health, United States, Oldwick, NJ: A.M. Best Company,
1999–2012.
, “Understanding BCAR for Life and Health Insurers,” A.M. Best Methodology, 2004.
, “MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company,” in “Best’s Insurance Reports:
Life/Health, United States and Canada,” Oldwick, NJ: A.M. Best Company, 2009.
, “Best’s Credit Rating Methodology: Global Life and Non-Life Insurance Edition,”
A.M. Best Methodology, 2011.
Anderson, Simon P., André de Palma, and Jacques-François Thisse, Discrete
Choice Theory of Product Diﬀerentiation., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Berry-Stölzle, Thomas R., Gregory P. Nini, and Sabine Wende, “External Financing in the Life Insurance Industry: Evidence from the Financial Crisis,” 2012.
Unpublished.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov, “Macroeconomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey,” in Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel, eds., Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World
Congress, Vol. 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, chapter 1, pp. 3–96.
Charupat, Narat, Mark J. Kamstra, and Moshe A. Milevsky, “The Annuity Duration Puzzle,” 2012. Unpublished.
Committee on Property and Liability Financial Reporting, “P&C Actuarial Issues
Associated with Implementation of NAIC Accounting Practices and Procedures,” 2000.
American Academy of Actuaries.
Compulife Software, Compulife Historical Data, Harrodsburg, KY: Compulife Software,
2005–2011.
Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, and Christian T. Lundblad, “Regulatory
Pressure and Fire Sales in the Corporate Bond Market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 101 (3), 596–620.

26

,
,
, and Yihui Wang, “Is Historical Cost Accounting a Panacea? Market
Stress, Incentive Distortions, and Gains Trading,” 2012. Unpublished.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Paul G. J. O’Connell, “The Pricing of U.S. Catastrophe
Reinsurance,” in Kenneth A. Froot, ed., The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1999, chapter 5, pp. 195–232.
Gallanis, Peter G., “NOLHGA, the Life and Health Insurance Guaranty System, and
the Financial Crisis of 2008–2009,” 2009. National Organization of Life and Health
Insurance Guaranty Associations.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy
in Business Cycle Analysis,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010, chapter 11,
pp. 547–599.
Gron, Anne, “Property-Casualty Insurance Cycles, Capacity Constraints, and Empirical
Results.” PhD dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA 1990.
, “Evidence of Capacity Constraints in Insurance Markets,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1994, 37 (2), 349–377.
and Deborah J. Lucas, “External Financing and Insurance Cycles,” in David F.
Bradford, ed., The Economics of Property-Casualty Insurance, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1998, chapter 1, pp. 5–28.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The U.S. Treasury
Yield Curve: 1961 to the Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (8),
2291–2304.
Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, “Product Diﬀerentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 403–456.
Lombardi, Louis J., Valuation of Life Insurance Liabilities, 4th ed., Winsted, CT: ACTEX
Publications, 2006.
Merrill, Craig B., Taylor D. Nadauld, René M. Stulz, and Shane M. Sherlund,
“Did Capital Requirements and Fair Value Accounting Spark Fire Sales in Distressed
Mortgage-Backed Securities?,” 2012. NBER Working Paper 18270.

27

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeﬀrey R.
Brown, “New Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities,” American
Economic Review, 1999, 89 (5), 1299–1318.
Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 1984, 13 (2), 187–221.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Accounting Practices and Procedures Manual, Kansas City, MO: National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
2011.
Niehaus, Gregory R., “Managing Capital and Insolvency Risk via Internal Capital Market
Transactions: The Case of Life Insurers,” 2013. Unpublished.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1976, 90 (4), 630–649.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A
Market Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 1992, 47 (4), 1343–1366.
Stern, Hersh L., Annuity Shopper, Englishtown, NJ: WebAnnuities Insurance Agency,
1989–2011.
, Comparative Annuity Reports, Englishtown, NJ: WebAnnuities Insurance Agency,
2007–2009.
Winter, Ralph A., “The Dynamics of Competitive Insurance Markets,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 1994, 3 (4), 379–415.
Yaari, Menahem E., “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer,” Review of Economic Studies, 1965, 32 (2), 137–150.

28

Table 1: Sample of Life Insurers and Their Market Share
Number of
insurance

Percent of
market covered

companies
Year
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
All

Total Covered
399
369
378
369
337
326
316
317
299
294
285
273
281
275
489

25
19
19
17
10
12
13
38
38
44
45
37
42
47
101

Immediate

Life

annuities

insurance

17
9
7
14
11
23
17
30
28
32
29
48
52
61

36
38
39
42
41
37
42

This table reports the total number of life insurers with an A.M. Best rating of A− or higher and agencyor broker-based marketing. It also reports the subset of these companies for which we have annuity or
life insurance prices and their market share by total face amount of immediate annuities and life insurance
issued.

29

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Annuity and Life Insurance Prices
Markup (percent)
Type of policy

30

Term annuities:
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years
25 years
30 years
Life annuities:
Life only
10-year guarantee
20-year guarantee
Universal life insurance

Observations

Mean

Median

Standard
deviation

Semiannual
Semiannual
Semiannual
Semiannual
Semiannual
Semiannual

646
870
394
390
318
309

6.5
7.0
4.4
4.1
3.7
3.1

6.7
7.2
4.5
4.0
3.7
3.2

3.7
4.2
4.7
5.7
6.7
7.9

Monthly
Monthly
Semiannual
Monthly

13,675
10,221
6,248
31,226

7.9
4.2
4.5
-5.8

8.4
4.9
4.9
-6.5

7.6
6.7
6.5
16.0

Sample begins

Frequency

December 1992
January 1989
May 1998
May 1998
May 1998
May 1998
January 1989
May 1998
May 1998
January 2005

The markup is deﬁned as the percent deviation of the quoted price from actuarial value. The actuarial value is based on the appropriate basic
mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve. The sample covers life insurers with an A.M. Best
rating of A− or higher from January 1989 to July 2011.

Table 3: Estimated Model of Insurance Pricing
Explanatory variable

Coeﬃcient

Panel A. Elasticity of demand
A.M. Best rating of A or A−
Log assets
Asset growth
Leverage ratio
Risk-based capital relative to guideline
Current liquidity
Operating return on equity
Female
Age 50
Age 55
Age 60
Age 65
Age 70
Age 75
Age 80
Age 85
Interaction eﬀects for life insurance
A.M. Best rating of A or A−
Log assets
Asset growth
Leverage ratio
Risk-based capital relative to guideline
Current liquidity
Operating return on equity
Female
Age 30
Age 40
Age 50
Age 60
Age 70
Age 80
Panel B. Shadow cost of capital
Corporate yield spread
Log assets
Asset growth
Leverage ratio
Risk-based capital relative to guideline
Net equity inﬂow
R2
Observations

0.102
0.197
0.011
0.168
-0.022
0.067
0.082
0.003
0.060
0.116
0.170
0.247
0.353
0.435
0.438
0.559

(0.021)
(0.014)
(0.006)
(0.019)
(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.003)
(0.050)
(0.046)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.046)
(0.054)

-2.896
-3.600
-1.172
-0.216
-0.118
-0.232
-0.862
-0.074
-6.522
-6.997
-6.930
-6.801
-6.439
-6.419

(0.482)
(0.472)
(0.192)
(0.053)
(0.040)
(0.102)
(0.141)
(0.045)
(1.257)
(1.274)
(1.259)
(1.258)
(1.248)
(1.247)

0.660
-0.240
-0.255
1.545
0.393
0.085
0.232
45,430

(0.052)
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.130)
(0.047)
(0.024)

This table reports the coeﬃcients in the models for the elasticity of demand (26) and the shadow cost of
capital (27). The omitted categories for the dummy variables are term annuities, A.M. Best rating of A++
or A+, and male. The model for the elasticity of demand also includes year-quarter and domiciliary-state
dummies, which are not reported for brevity. The model for the shadow cost also includes year-quarter
dummies, which are not reported for brevity. Robust standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered
by insurance company, type of policy, sex, and age. The sample covers life insurers with an A.M. Best rating
of A− or higher from May 1998 to July 2011.

31

Table 4: Shadow Cost of Capital in November 2008

32

Insurance company

Holding company

MetLife Investors USA Insurance
Pruco Life Insurance
National Integrity Life Insurance
John Hancock Life Insurance of New York
Pruco Life Insurance of New Jersey
AXA Equitable Life Insurance
John Hancock Life Insurance (USA)
Lincoln National Life Insurance
Sun Life Assurance of Canada (US)
Phoenix Life Insurance
OM Financial Life Insurance
Aviva Life and Annuity of New York
Allianz Life Insurance of North America
Texas Life Insurance
United States Life Insurance in City of New York
EquiTrust Life Insurance
Integrity Life Insurance
OM Financial Life Insurance of New York
Companion Life Insurance
Sun Life Insurance and Annuity of New York
Genworth Life Insurance of New York
Aviva Life and Annuity
Protective Life and Annuity Insurance
North American for Life and Health Insurance
Cincinnati Life Insurance
Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance
Security Life of Denver Insurance
ReliaStar Life Insurance of New York
C.M. Life Insurance
Metropolitan Life Insurance
Kansas City Life Insurance
United of Omaha Life Insurance
William Penn Life Insurance of New York
Lincoln Life and Annuity of New York
Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation
Protective Life Insurance
Penn Mutual Life Insurance
Lincoln Beneﬁt Life
Illinois Mutual Life Insurance
West Coast Life Insurance
Genworth Life Insurance
Banner Life Insurance
American National Insurance
American General Life Insurance
AAA Life Insurance

MetLife
Prudential Financial
Manulife Financial
Prudential Financial
AXA
Manulife Financial
Lincoln National
Sun Life Financial
Phoenix Companies
Old Mutual
Aviva
Allianz Group
American International Group
FBL Financial Group
Old Mutual
Sun Life Financial
Genworth Financial
Aviva
Protective Life
Cincinnati Financial
Genworth Financial
ING Group
ING Group
MetLife
Kansas City Life Insurance
Legal and General Group
Lincoln National
Protective Life
Allstate
Protective Life
Genworth Financial
Legal and General Group
American National Insurance
American International Group

Shadow cost
(dollars)
5.53
5.38
5.37
5.02
4.97
4.52
3.87
3.50
3.31
3.06
2.88
2.75
2.75
2.44
2.19
2.18
2.07
1.96
1.92
1.85
1.80
1.65
1.50
1.49
1.36
1.28
1.26
1.21
1.13
1.08
1.07
1.06
1.03
0.94
0.93
0.87
0.68
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.50
0.19
0.18
0.13
0.10

(1.52)
(1.39)
(1.20)
(1.39)
(1.26)
(1.12)
(1.09)
(0.82)
(0.88)
(0.64)
(0.66)
(0.61)
(0.70)
(0.51)
(0.51)
(0.47)
(0.40)
(0.42)
(0.39)
(0.37)
(0.38)
(0.36)
(0.35)
(0.30)
(0.30)
(0.25)
(0.28)
(0.26)
(0.21)
(0.25)
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.17)
(0.13)
(0.12)
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.03)

Asset
growth
(percent)

Leverage
ratio
(percent)

Net equity
inﬂow
(percent)

-9
-19
10
-15
-13
-22
-18
-17
-11
-8
-4
4
-3
5
0
14
3
-2
4
-2
8
12
21
27
-3
-11
0
-1
-13
-3
-8
-3
-1
-6
2
0
-8
-37
1
9
0
3
-2
6
25

97
97
95
96
97
97
98
96
97
94
95
94
97
93
94
95
92
93
91
92
94
95
94
93
88
92
94
92
90
94
89
90
90
90
90
92
86
87
89
90
90
84
86
85
81

163
43
59
134
0
0
25
-7
95
-7
44
25
22
0
90
20
25
0
0
69
40
7
0
30
0
39
14
29
0
-8
-2
-8
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
47
9
42
-3
142
14

This table reports the shadow cost of capital for the life insurers in our sample in November 2008, implied by the estimated model of insurance pricing. Robust standard errors,
reported in parentheses, are based on the delta method. Asset growth is from ﬁscal year-end 2007 to 2008. The leverage ratio and net equity inﬂow are at ﬁscal year-end 2008.

Table 5: Relation between Quantity Changes and the Shadow Cost of Capital
Explanatory variable
Shadow cost

Coeﬃcient
14.4
(4.1)
0.25
45

R2
Observations

The percent change in quantities, averaged over immediate annuities and life insurance issued, is from 2007
to 2009. The shadow cost of capital in November 2008 is for the cross section of insurance companies in
Table 4. The linear regression weights the observations by total admitted assets at ﬁscal year-end 2007.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.

33

Table 6: Signiﬁcant Activity to Recapitalize by the Holding Companies

Holding company

Date

34

Panel A. Applied for government assistance
Allstate
11/14/2008
2/25/2009
5/15/2009
5/19/2009
American International Group
9/22/2008
11/25/2008
Genworth Financial
11/1/2008
11/16/2008
4/9/2009
ING Group
10/19/2008
10/19/2008
Lincoln National
10/10/2008
11/13/2008
2/24/2009
6/22/2009
7/10/2009
Phoenix Companies
1/15/2009
2/7/2009
4/20/2009
Protective Life
11/3/2008
1/15/2009
4/1/2009
5/20/2009
Prudential Financial
10/1/2008
11/11/2008
5/14/2009
6/1/2009
6/9/2009
Panel B. Issued public equity
Manulife Financial
12/11/2008
3/4/2009
6/3/2009
8/6/2009
MetLife
10/15/2008
Panel C. Reduced or suspended dividends
Allianz Group
2/26/2009
AXA
4/30/2009
FBL Financial Group
5/21/2009
Legal and General Group
3/25/2009
Old Mutual
3/4/2009
Panel D. No significant activity
American National Insurance
Aviva
Cincinnati Financial
Kansas City Life Insurance
Sun Life Financial

Signiﬁcant activity
Applies for TARP.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.41 to $0.20 per share.
Receives approval for TARP.
Withdraws application for TARP.
Suspends dividends under an $85 billion credit agreement with the New York Fed.
Issues $40 billion of preferred equity to the US Treasury under TARP.
Suspends dividends.
Applies for TARP with plans to acquire InterBank, FSB.
Is rejected for TARP and cancels the acquisition of InterBank, FSB.
Issues 10 billion euros of preferred equity to the Dutch government.
Suspends dividends.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.415 to $0.21 per share.
Applies for TARP with plans to acquire Newton County Loan and Savings, FSB.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.21 to $0.01 per share.
Issues $690 million of common equity.
Issues $950 million of preferred equity to the US Treasury under TARP.
Applies for TARP with plans to acquire American Sterling Bank.
Suspends dividends.
Withdraws application for TARP after failing to acquire American Sterling Bank.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.235 to $0.12 per share.
Applies for TARP with plans to acquire Bonifay Holding Company.
Withdraws application for TARP after failing to acquire Bonifay Holding Company.
Issues $133 million of common equity.
Applies for TARP.
Reduces annual dividend from $1.15 to $0.58 per share.
Receives approval for TARP.
Withdraws application for TARP.
Issues $1,438 million of common equity.
Issues $2,275 million of common equity.
Issues $450 million of preferred equity.
Issues $350 million of preferred equity.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.26 to $0.13 per share.
Issues $2,286 million of common equity.

Announcement
eﬀect
(dollars)

0.76

1.18
0.72

2.79

Reduces annual dividend from 5.50 to 3.50 euros per share.
Reduces annual dividend from 1.20 to 0.40 euros per share.
Reduces quarterly dividend from $0.125 to $0.0625 per share.
Reduces ﬁnal dividend from 4.10 to 2.05 pence per share.
Suspends dividends.

This table reports signiﬁcant activity to recapitalize by the holding companies from September 2008 to July 2009. The holding companies are grouped into those that applied
for government assistance through the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) or similar foreign programs, those that issued public equity, those that reduced or suspended
dividends, and those with no signiﬁcant activity.

Table 7: Default Probabilities Implied by Term Annuities versus Credit Default Swaps in
November 2008
Maturity (years)
Company
Panel A. Markup (percent)
Allianz Life Insurance of North America
Lincoln Beneﬁt Life
MetLife Investors USA Insurance
Genworth Life Insurance
Aviva Life and Annuity
American General Life Insurance
Panel B. Default probabilities implied by
Allianz Life Insurance of North America
Lincoln Beneﬁt Life
MetLife Investors USA Insurance
Genworth Life Insurance
Aviva Life and Annuity
American General Life Insurance
Panel C. Default probabilities implied by
Allianz Group
Allstate
MetLife
Genworth Financial
Aviva
American International Group

5

25

30

-2.9
-7.7 -12.8 -18.2
-4.6
-6.3
-7.8
-9.9
-9.2 -12.1 -14.5 -17.3
0.0 -2.6
-4.0
-5.9
-8.7
0.1 -1.5
-2.1
-4.3
-7.9
-2.4 -3.3
-4.6
-7.8 -10.6
term annuities (percent)
0.0 72.6 100.0 100.0 100.0
3.2 19.6 16.5 100.0 100.0
24.4 17.9 100.0 100.0 100.0
0.1 15.4 14.5 100.0 100.0
0.0 8.4 10.1 100.0 100.0
5.4 1.6 78.6 100.0 100.0
credit default swaps (percent)
1.9 1.8
4.6 3.7
10.0 6.0
32.8 4.8
2.8 2.7
20.3 5.8

-21.7
-12.6
-20.9
-12.4
-11.9
-14.2

0.4
-1.4

10

15

20

100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0

Panel B reports the term structure of annual risk-neutral default probabilities that justify the markups on
term annuities in panel A. An implied default probability of 100 percent means that the markups are too
low to be justiﬁed by default risk, given a recovery rate of 84 percent. Panel C reports the term structure
of annual risk-neutral default probabilities implied by 5- and 10-year credit default swaps on the holding
company of the respective subsidiary in panel B. Appendix D describes how we estimate the term structure
of risk-neutral default probabilities from credit default swaps.

35

20−year term annuities
20

10

10
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

30−year term annuities
20

0

−10

−20
Dec 1988

0

−10
Average
95% confidence interval
Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

−20
Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Dec 1993

10−year term annuities

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

5−year term annuities
20

10

10
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

36

20

0

−10

−10

−20
Dec 1988

0

−20
Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Figure 1: Average Markup on Term Annuities
The markup is deﬁned as the percent deviation of the quoted price from actuarial value. The actuarial value is based on the zero-coupon Treasury
yield curve. The sample covers life insurers with an A.M. Best rating of A− or higher from January 1989 to July 2011.

Life annuities: Male aged 65

20

20

10

10
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

Life annuities: Male aged 60

0

−10

−20
Dec 1988

0

−10
Average
95% confidence interval
Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

−20
Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Life annuities: Male aged 70

Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Life annuities: Male aged 75
20

10

10
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

37

20

0

−10

−10

−20
Dec 1988

0

−20
Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Figure 2: Average Markup on Life Annuities
The markup is deﬁned as the percent deviation of the quoted price from actuarial value. The actuarial value is based on the appropriate basic
mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve. The sample covers life insurers with an A.M. Best
rating of A− or higher from January 1989 to July 2011.

Universal life insurance: Male aged 40
20

0

0
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

Universal life insurance: Male aged 30
20

−20

−40

−60
Dec 2004

−20

−40

Average
95% confidence interval

−60

Dec 2006

Dec 2008

Dec 2010

Dec 2004

Dec 2006

Date

Dec 2008

Dec 2010

Date

Universal life insurance: Male aged 50

Universal life insurance: Male aged 60
20

0

0
Markup (percent)

Markup (percent)

38

20

−20

−20

−40

−40

−60

−60

Dec 2004

Dec 2006

Dec 2008

Dec 2010

Dec 2004

Dec 2006

Date

Dec 2008

Dec 2010

Date

Figure 3: Average Markup on Life Insurance
The markup is deﬁned as the percent deviation of the quoted price from actuarial value. The actuarial value is based on the appropriate basic
mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve. The monthly sample covers life insurers with an
A.M. Best rating of A− or higher from January 2005 to July 2011.

Asset growth

Leverage ratio
0

Price change (percent)

Price change (percent)

0

−5

−10

−15

−5

−10

−15
20−year term annuities
Life annuities: Male aged 60

−20
−10

0

10
Percent

20

−20

30

85

95

100

Percent

Risk−based capital relative to guideline

Deferred annuity liabilities
0

Price change (percent)

39

0

Price change (percent)

90

−5

−10

−15

−5

−10

−15

−20

−20
−50

0

50
Percent

100

0

10
20
Share of capital and surplus

30

Figure 4: Relation between Price Changes and Balance Sheet Shocks
The percent change in annuity prices is from May 2007 to November 2008. Asset growth is from ﬁscal year-end 2007 to 2008. The leverage ratio,
risk-based capital relative to guideline, and the ratio of deferred annuity liabilities to equity are at ﬁscal year-end 2008. The best-ﬁtting monotone
linear spline with one knot weights the observations by total admitted assets at ﬁscal year-end 2007.

10

Annuities
Life insurance
10−year Treasury

Percent

8

6

4

2
Dec 1988

Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Figure 5: Discount Rates for Annuities and Life Insurance
This ﬁgure reports the discount rates used for statutory reserve valuation of annuities and life insurance,
together with the 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yield. The monthly sample covers January 1989 to July
2011.

40

Term annuities

Life annuities
1.2
Ratio of reserve to actuarial value

Ratio of reserve to actuarial value

1.2

1.1

1

.9

.8

.7
Dec 1988

5 years
10 years
20 years
30 years

1.1

1

.9

.8

.7

Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Male aged 50
Male aged 60
Male aged 70
Male aged 80
Dec 1993

10−year guaranteed annuities

Ratio of reserve to actuarial value

Ratio of reserve to actuarial value

41

1

.9

.7

Dec 2008

1.4

1.1

Dec 1988

Dec 2003

Universal life insurance

1.2

.8

Dec 1998
Date

Male aged 50
Male aged 60
Male aged 70
Male aged 80
Dec 1993

1.2

1

.8

.6
Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Dec 1988

Male aged 30
Male aged 40
Male aged 50
Male aged 60
Dec 1993

Dec 1998
Date

Dec 2003

Dec 2008

Figure 6: Reserve to Actuarial Value for Annuities and Life Insurance
The reserve value is based on the appropriate loaded mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries and the discount rate from Standard
Valuation Law. The actuarial value is based on the appropriate basic mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries and the zero-coupon
Treasury yield curve. The monthly sample covers January 1989 to July 2011 for annuities and January 2005 to July 2011 for life insurance.

Dollars per dollar of statutory capital

1.5

Shadow cost
95% confidence interval

1

.5

0
Dec 1999

Dec 2002

Dec 2005
Date

Dec 2008

Dec 2011

Figure 7: Shadow Cost of Capital
This ﬁgure reports the shadow cost of capital for the average company, implied by the estimated model
of insurance pricing. The 95 percent conﬁdence interval is based on robust standard errors, clustered by
insurance company, type of policy, sex, and age. The sample covers life insurers with an A.M. Best rating
of A− or higher from May 1998 to July 2011.

42

