                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOPING TO WIN, EXPECTED TO LOSE:
           THEORY AND LESSONS ON MICRO ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT

                                            Dean Karlan
                                            Ryan Knight
                                          Christopher Udry

                                        Working Paper 18325
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18325


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




The authors thank USAID-BASIS and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for funding, Matt Hoover
for project management and research assistance, and the field staff at Innovations for Poverty Action
for survey management. The authors thank the Ernst & Young Ghana office for their collaboration,
including subsidizing the consulting rates. The authors retained full intellectual freedom to report the
results throughout the study. All opinions herein are our own and not those of any of the donors or
partners. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Dean Karlan, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Hoping to Win, Expected to Lose: Theory and Lessons on Micro Enterprise Development
Dean Karlan, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 18325
August 2012
JEL No. D21,D24,D83,D92,L20,M13,O12

                                              ABSTRACT

Many basic economic theories with perfectly functioning markets do not predict the existence of the
vast number of microenterprises readily observed across the world. We put forward a model that illuminates
why financial and managerial capital constraints may impede experimentation, and thus limit learning
about the profitability of alternative firm sizes. The model shows how lack of information about one’s
own type, but willingness to experiment to learn one’s type, may lead to short-run negative expected
returns to investments on average, with some outliers succeeding. To test the model we put forward
first a motivating experiment from Ghana, and second a small meta-analysis of other experiments.
In the Ghana experiment, we provide inputs to microenterprises, specifically financial capital (a cash
grant) and managerial capital (consulting services), to catalyze adoption of investments and practices
aimed towards enterprise growth. We find that entrepreneurs invest the cash, and take the advice, but
both lead to lower profits on average. In the long run, they revert back to their prior scale of operations.
The small meta analysis includes results from 18 other experiments in which either capital or managerial
capital were relaxed, and find mixed support for this theory.


Dean Karlan                                          Christopher Udry
Department of Economics                              Yale University
Yale University                                      udry@yale.edu
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

Ryan Knight
Yale University
70 Winchester Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
ryan.knight@yale.edu
I.      Introduction
In developing countries, firm size within an industry often varies all the way from single‐person firms to
large firms. Naturally, this leads many entrepreneurs to aspire to grow, but if special managerial talent is
necessary to succeed at larger scale, how do individuals learn whether they have what it takes to
manage a larger enterprise? We start off with a model that incorporates heterogeneity in
entrepreneurial talent, unobserved to all, to help understand the experimentation and learning process
for micro‐entrepreneurs about their optimal size. We show how financial and managerial capital market
imperfections can impede experimentation, and thus limit learning about the profitability of alternative
ways of organizing one’s business.

The model makes a simple prediction: on average most businesses will not, in fact, do better after
attempting to grow, but there are a few that will succeed. Specifically, relaxing credit or managerial
capital constraints may allow some entrepreneurs to experiment, but such experimentation will not
necessarily lead to success and in fact on average will not succeed. This is consistent with the stylized
evidence that few firms transform from microenterprises into small or medium enterprises. This
stagnation comes despite a plethora of effort from government, NGOs and social businesses, through
for example microcredit and training. We have learned that microcredit generates important impacts
but not transformational positive impacts on firm size (for credit targeted at informal sector
entrepreneurs, see Attanasio et al 2011; Banerjee et al 2011; Karlan and Zinman 2011; Augsburg et al
2012; for credit targeted at individuals with some formal sector employment, see Karlan and Zinman
2009). Micro‐training programs similarly generate positive but not transformational impacts (Karlan and
Valdivia []; Drexler et al []; Bruhn and Zia 2011 and Berge, Bjovatn and Tungodden (2010).

We present several sources of evidence to test the model, both primary (an experiment in Ghana
conducted by the authors) and secondary (a series of experiments by others, reported elsewhere and
summarized here), and find mixed support empirically. The primary data source is a randomized
controlled trial conducted in Ghana with microentrepreneurs, specifically tailors. We provide inputs to
the tailors in the form of financial capital (a cash grant) and/or managerial capital (consulting services),
to catalyze adoption of investments and practices aimed towards enterprise growth. We find that
entrepreneurs invest the cash and take the advice, but both lead to lower profits on average. In the long
run, they revert back to their prior operations. We do not have a large enough sample size to detect
with statistical significance any positive outliers, but we present anecdotal evidence of such. We then
discuss secondary evidence from other recent, similar experiments. We examine two types of
experiments, cash grant experiments and lending experiments, and find evidence supporting this model
(although not every result in the other papers lines up with the predictions in our model).

In the Ghana experiment, 160 tailors were randomly assigned to one of the three treatment groups or a
control group. The first treatment group tests investment behavior after relaxing capital constraints by
providing 200 cedi grants (about US $133) to 38 small tailors and seamstress in and around Accra,
Ghana. The second treatment group tests the managerial ability theory by providing one year of
management consulting services from Ernst & Young, a major international consulting firm, to 41 tailors.



                                                                                                           2
The third treatment group, containing 36 tailors, received both the cash grant and the managerial
training. The control group contained 45 tailors.

Working with managerial consultants was not intended to test a policy per se, as their fees would likely
be too high for a scalable intervention. Rather, the intent was an enterprise experiment: let four
talented, creative individuals, who know the local business environment, provide mentorship and
consulting services to micro‐entrepreneurs to see if they could generate transformative change.

At the baseline, the microenterprises did not appear to be well managed by standards in the managerial
performance literature (Bloom et al []). Only 17% of the respondents reported keeping any written
financial records, 7% reported spending any money on marketing in a year and only 30% of shops were
rated as very organized by our enumerators.

The context and dichotomy of experiences is perhaps well illustrated by stories of two of the
respondents.

“Jess” was 26 years old, had attended vocational school to be a seamstress, and financed her start‐up
capital herself. She was single, with no children, and cared for a sick mother. She had a bank account but
had never applied for a loan from a bank or microfinance institution. She sewed out of a wooden kiosk,
and the fair value of her total capital was 765 Cedis ($510). She carried all of her materials back and
forth from her home to the shop every day because she was worried they would be stolen from her
shop, which lacked a secure padlock, and had been broken into before. A strong padlock would cost
about 25 Cedis ($17), but she had drained all of her working capital from the business caring for her
mother. She had recently stopped sewing for an extended period of time because caring for her mother
took so much of her time, and when she returned she found that her primary clients had found another
seamstress during her absence. She wanted to rebuild her customer base, but did no marketing and had
no signs advertising her shop. She spoke softly, did not make eye contact and was shy with new people,
but spoke briskly to well‐known clients.

Across town, “Sarah” was 28 years old, had attended a polytechnic school for fashion, and inherited her
business four years before the baseline. She had two bank accounts, one for business and one personal,
and unlike Jess had previously received a loan. The fair value of her capital was 2730 Cedis. Sarah had
two good sewing machines and a couple of special purpose machines, which she kept in her concrete
shop. The quality of her sewing was good, and she was already keeping transaction records at the
baseline. However, her shop was on an out‐of‐the‐way street in a tough neighborhood, so she slept on
the floor of her shop to protect her machines. She identified a new site on a main road that she wanted
to move to, but she was having trouble saving up enough money. She had a natural ease with
customers, but her relationships with her employee and apprentice were tense. The consultants judged
Sarah to have great potential and they wanted to help her start marketing, but were concerned her
location and ability to effectively manage her employees as she grew.

Both of these women appeared to face capital constraints. Jess had liquidated her business money for a
personal emergency, and could not afford a small amount for a padlock to protect her investment. Sarah


                                                                                                           3
believed that a new location would be more profitable, but she could not save enough to make the
move.

Both also faced managerial challenges. Jess needed to work on her customer service and needed to
develop a plan to reconnect with her old clients and attract new clients. Sarah needed to learn to be a
more effective manager and begin doing marketing.

Jess and Sarah both received the double treatment of the mentoring and the capital grants. At the end
of the study, Jess was mourning her lost mother and hardly working. She had not reclaimed her old
clients or launched any new marketing campaigns. She tried out record keeping for a time, but stopped
keeping any records. She invested the capital grant in fabrics that she hoped to sell from her kiosk, but
still had no padlock and was still carrying her material back and forth from home every day she worked.
The consultant worked on a plan to put a little money away every day for the padlock, but she was not
saving. Her profit increased from 30 Cedis in December 2008 to 80 Cedis in December 2010, half of the
average increase in control group profit of 109 Cedis over the same time period.

Sarah, on the other hand, stood out for how well she adopted the consulting. With her consultant’s
guidance, she began “sew and sell” – sewing products with no specific customer in mind and selling
them from her shop. She saved the capital grant for improvements to her new shop and expanded her
record keeping. She added a small dressing room area to her shop and gave purified water satchels and
candies out to clients. She designed a label with her phone number on it that she started affixing to all of
the items she sewed. She successfully helped an apprentice start her own business, found a new
apprentice to replace her, and hired a second employee.

Sarah’s experience shows that there is much that a micro‐entrepreneur can do to expand her business
and improve business practices. Sarah’s efforts increased her profits from 90 Cedis in December 2008 to
333 Cedis in December 2010, a substantial increase that is more than twice the average control group
increase of 109 Cedis. Jess’ experience shows that it is not always easy, and not everyone is capable of
making large changes in their business model.

We found that, on average, the experience of the tailors was similar to that of Jess than to that of Sarah.
The consultants’ recommendations were adopted for a time, but the tailors had abandoned them one
year after the training stop. On average, there was no positive impact on profit or revenue from the
consulting and, if anything, there was a negative impact. The tailors who received the capital grant
invested the money in their businesses, but these investments did not increase profits. In fact, one year
after the capital grant, profit was lower among those who received the capital drop compared to the
control group.

This paper proceeds as follows: Section II will put forward a theoretical model as described above,
Section III will present the setting and experimental design, Section IV the data, and Section V the results
from the Ghana experiment. Section VI will present the meta analysis of the other 18 experiments.
Section VII concludes.




                                                                                                            4
II.       Financial Markets and Entrepreneurial Experimentation
Imperfect financial markets, combined with non‐convexities in the production technology, are the
classic foundation for poverty trap arguments in the informal sector and provide a formal foundation to
motivate many financial market interventions. We combine this classic model with uncertainty about
the profitability of moving to a larger scale. This helps us understand why entrepreneurs in a
competitive market might aggressively invest when financial market constraints are relaxed, yet achieve
on average negative profits from these investments. A parallel model helps us to understand a similar
pattern for business training, in which entrepreneurs at least temporarily adopt suggested new
techniques that turn out to be unprofitable.

Consider two business techniques which cost xl  xh . The revenue of the low technique is                            ( xl ) and we
assume that this technique is profitable, i.e.,               ( xl )  xl  0 . Every existing entrepreneur has repeatedly
used technique l and knows  ( xl ) . Technique l is equally profitable for all entrepreneurs. Technique h,

however, is profitable only for some: if you are a `good’ entrepreneur, you’ll get                       g ( xh ) such that
 g ( xh )  xh   ( xl )  xl . On the other hand, if you are a ` bad’ entrepreneur you’ll earn
 b ( xh )  xh   ( xl )  xl . The key is that entrepreneurs do not know their type until they invest xh and
thus try h. Before trying h the entrepreneur believes that her likelihood of being type g is p. Once she
tries h, she knows with certainty if she is of type g.2 The entrepreneur gets instantaneous utility from
                                                                                        
consumption of u( c ) and maximizes the simple expected utility Et                     
                                                                                       
                                                                                           u(c ) . The entrepreneur has no
                                                                                        t

access to financial markets, so if she has current assets w her value function is

                                             u ( w  x )                                            
                                                                                                    
(0)                 V ( w, p)  max 1[ x  xh ]  pV ( g ( xh ),1)  (1  p)V ( b ( xh ),0)   ,
                               x{ xl , xh }
                                                                                                    
                                             1[ x  xl ]V ( ( xl ), p)                           

where 1[.] is the indicator function.3 The first term is current consumption. xh  xl , so consumption
falls if the entrepreneur tries h. The second term is the future value associated with experimenting with

2
  The assumption that the entrepreneur learns his/her type with a single try at technique h is extreme but inconsequential for
the purposes of the arguments below. A richer model would have uncertain profits from technique h for each type, with the
distribution of returns being better for type g. The entrepreneur would gradually learn his or her type with repeated attempts
at technique h.
3
  The assumption that the entrepreneur can neither save nor borrow simplifies the analysis tremendously, but is obviously
extreme. If the entrepreneur can save at a fixed interest rate, little changes in our analysis provided that interest rate is
                                                   1
sufficiently low (specifically, as long as r            ). Saving is only undertaken to smooth expected declines in consumption; it
                                                    
therefore lowers the cost of experimentation, but changes none of the qualitative features of the model below. Permitting
                                        1
borrowing as well (and setting r              ) is a more substantive change to the interpretation of the entrepreneur’s situation,
                                         
but is less realistic. Miao and Wang (2007) provide a related model with both borrowing and lending in a two‐armed bandit

                                                                                                                                       5
h. With probability p the entrepreneur realizes               g ( xh ) and (perhaps more importantly) updates p=1.
But with probability (1‐p) she realizes  ( xl ) and updates p=0. The third term is the value associated
                                                    b


with continuing to choose x  xl .

Consider the situation where the entrepreneur knows she is a `bad’ type:

                                            u ( w  x )                                              
(1)                 V ( w,0)  max                                                                     ,
                               x{ xl , xh }  1( x  x )V ( ( x ),0)  1( x  x )V ( ( x ), 0) 
                                                                                         b
                                                       l        l               h         h       

                                                                                                           1
She chooses x  xl and consumption converges to  ( xl )  xl  cl . V ( ( xl ),0)                          u ( cl ) .
                                                                                                          1

In contrast, if p=1

                                             u ( w  x )                                             
(2)                  V ( w,1)  max                                                                    .
                                x{ xl , xh }  1( x  x )V ( ( x ),1)  1( x  x )V ( ( x ),1) 
                                                                g
                                                        l        h               l         l      

                                                                      1
As long as xh is sufficiently productive, V ( ( xh ),1) 
                                              g
                                                                         u(ch ) , where ch   g ( xh )  xh and the
                                                                     1
entrepreneur who has sufficient capital maintains the more costly, more profitable technique.4
Obviously, V ( w,1)  V ( w,0) .

The nonconvexity in the production technology and financial market imperfection have the standard
implication that a potentially profitable discrete investment may not be made. Uncertainty about the
profitability of that investment helps us to understand additional patterns of behavior.

Comment 1: Sufficiently optimistic entrepreneurs will experiment with the risky, costly technique. We
consider a set of entrepreneurs indexed by i, with varying priors regarding their likelihood of being the
`good’ type pi . Each has wealth  ( xl ) . Entrepreneur i will experiment with the high cost technique if

                                                                                                         
(3) u ( cl )  u ( ( xl )  xh )  pi       u ( ch )  (1  pi )  u ( b ( xh )  xl )      u ( cl )     u ( cl ).
                                         1                                               1           1




model with risk aversion. Many of the qualitative features of their model with no liquidity constraints are similar to our model.
In particular, the entrepreneur may experiment with the high risk technique even when it has negative expected value because
of its option value. They also show (when preferences are CRRA) that even when there are no liquidity constraints, increases in
the wealth of the entrepreneur can induce experimentation with the risky technique. This result has implications for the
interpretation of our findings, so we return to it below.
                                                    
4
    u( g ( xh )  xl )  u( g ( xh )  xh )        u( g ( xh )  xh )  u( ( xl )  xl )    is sufficiently productive.
                                                  1
                                                                                                                                   6
The LHS is the one‐shot cost of trying out the high technique; the RHS is the long‐term gain. The RHS of
(4) is strictly increasing in pi , and if the cost of investing in h is not too high (  ( xl )  xh is not too small)
then there exists a p*<1 such that (4) is satisfied. All entrepreneurs with pi  p * will experiment with
the h technique. The implication is that entrepreneurs using technique l in any dataset will be those
with pi  p * , which will include some fraction of those who have tried h in the past and learned that
they are not type g.

Comment 2: There is an option value to trying the risky, costly technique. Suppose that
    p g  (1  p) b  xh   ( xl )  xl , so that trying the high technique has a negative expected value this
period. The entrepreneur will choose h if and only if

(4)                           V ( w, p)  u( w  xh )   pV ( g ,1)   (1  p)V ( b ,0).

Rearranging (5), the entrepreneur will choose h iff

                     u( w  xl )  u( w  xh )    u(cl )   pu(ch )  (1  p)u( b ( xh )  cl ) 
(5)
                          2
                    p         u(ch )  u(cl )  .
                         1 

The first term on the LHS of the inequality is the immediate cost of the investment, and the second is
the one‐time expected loss because of the likely failure of the attempt.5 The RHS is the option value of
the potential long run gain from the entrepreneur learning that she can manage a large‐scale enterprise.
As  approaches 1, this option value dominates the short term costs and option h is chosen.

Comment 3: Increases in the wealth of an entrepreneur reduce the critical prior belief in the likelihood of
success required for that entrepreneur to experiment with the risky, costly technique. As in comment 1, if
we consider at any given level of wealth w a range of entrepreneurs with prior beliefs pi about the
likelihood that they would be successful at running a larger scale enterprise, there is a p *( w) such that
all entrepreneurs with wealth w and pi  p *( w) choose l and those with higher pi choose h. The LHS
                                           dp * ( w)
of (6) is strictly decreasing in w, so                0 . Increases in w increase the share of entrepreneurs
                                             dw
choosing h. The randomized capital grants will generate investment in the enterprise, even if the
immediate expected return of those investments is negative.

Comment 4: A reduction in xh increases the share of entrepreneurs choosing technique h. The LHS of (6)

is strictly decreasing in xh (because ch   ( xh )  xh ), while the RHS is strictly increasing. So
                                                   g




5
     p g  (1  p) b  xh   ( xl )  xl   implies that   pch  (1  p)( b ( xh )  cl )  c l .   Concavity of u(.) ensures

that   u(cl )   pu(ch )  (1  p)u( b ( xh )  cl )   0 .

                                                                                                                                   7
dp* ( xh )
            0 . The randomized provision of consulting services lowers the cost of adopting the set of
  dxh
techniques associated with operating at a larger scale, so a broader set of entrepreneurs will experiment
with h.


III.    Sample Frame and Experimental Design
The study participants are 160 urban tailors and seamstresses in Accra, Ghana, and were randomly
selected from a census we conducted of tailors and seamstresses in eight neighborhoods in/around
Accra who had five or fewer total employees and apprentices. If two or more tailors were immediate
neighbors, we randomly selected at most one to be in the sample frame.

We chose to work with microenterprises in the same industry because it would allow the consultants to
develop some expertise in that sector, and it would allow us to gather more precise data on business
practices by asking industry‐specific questions in our surveys. We then wanted an industry which was
geographically dispersed across Accra (to minimize possible spillovers to control groups), and also
diverse in size so that there were plausibly different firm sizes that could be sustained in competitive
equilibrium. One‐person tailoring shops are common, but many 10‐person small tailor firms also exist.
We constrained our sample to tailors with 5 or fewer employees at the baseline: 35% or our sample had
zero employees, and 94% had three or fewer employees. Thus, our sample frame includes very small,
urban tailors and seamstresses, most of whom work directly in their shops. Also, 82.5% of our sample
frame had not previously accessed formal credit markets.

We employed a 2x2 experimental design involving a 200 cedi capital grant and/or consulting services
from Ernst & Young. Figure 1 shows a full timeline of the interventions, and data collection. The
consulting treatment began first, and then after eight months the second randomization assigned
individuals to either receive the capital grant or not. More details are below on each treatment.

Five of the tailors passed away over the course of the study, leaving a final sample of 155. We located
149 of the 155 tailors for the final follow‐up in December 2009. Attrition is not correlated with
treatment status.



Table 2 details the sample attrition. We saw no tailors permanently exit the tailoring business by selling
off their machines. We did see tailors temporarily stop sewing, for health or other reasons. These
individuals would be counted as having zero profit or negative profit if they had business expenses but
not income. All businesses operated from the same premise by the same individual were counted in
financial outcomes, so if a respondent diversified out of tailoring and into the selling of goods, income
from selling the goods is counted in our data.

Consulting Treatment


                                                                                                             8
We worked with one partner, a director and four consultants from Ernst & Young in Ghana. The Ernst &
Young consultants typically work on business advisory engagements in a variety of areas including
training, human resources, monitoring and evaluation and project management. Consultant bios and
examples of prior engagements are in Appendix A. The consultants received a two‐day training on
microenterprise coaching from Ghana’s National Bureau of Small Scale Industries, which frequently
provides training to microenterprises in Ghana, on the Bureau’s method for training micro‐
entrepreneurs.

The consultants largely followed an adapted version of this framework (outlined in Appendix A) but
were also encouraged to think creatively, to discuss important business decisions facing the tailors, and
to provide ad hoc advice that they felt would be beneficial. Examples of this ad hoc support can be seen
in the consultants’ notes in Appendix C. The training modules were twelve‐fold: (1) Record Keeping, (2)
Procurement, (3) Operational Activities, (4) Motivation of workers, (5) Value addition, (6) Costing, (7)
Customer service, (8) Security of shop, (9) Sales and marketing, (10) Lifestyle in relation to work/life
balance, (11) Financing of business and savings, and (12) Business growth.

The training took place at the tailors’ shops over the course of one year, from February 2009 to February
2010. It began with lessons on the importance of record keeping, used the new records to help the
tailors calculate their profit margin on each item they sew, then taught how to calculate a monthly
income statement. Lessons on customer service and managing employees were discussed throughout.
For example, if the consultants observed impolite behavior to customers while in the shop, they might
take the opportunity to discuss customer service. The training moved at the pace of the tailors, such
that some never moved past record keeping, while others began preparing cash flow statements and
developing detailed plans to finance expansion.

The training involved simple, targeted lessons like, “keep your business and personal money separate”;
“Buy a second wallet to keep your business money in, so you don’t mix it with personal money”; and “it
is better to finance expansion through savings than through loans.” For those who moved past these
basic lessons, there were more detailed lessons on a variety of topics, like how you should calculate how
much to save to replace aging machines.

The consultants gave the tailors two record books: a standard cash book to record daily transactions;
and a second book they developed to record capital stock, available materials, customer contact
information, revenue, expenses and other items. The emphasis was placed first on simply recording
every transaction in the cash book, then recording in the more complicated book if they were
successfully tracking transactions.

As with other studies on business training, there was a surprising degree of reluctance among some
tailors to make time for the consultants, and the tailors covered fewer modules than expected. The
average total time spent interacting with each tailor was 10 hours over the course of the study (Figure
2). Each available tailor was visited 1‐4 times per month, with each visit lasting 30 minutes to 1 hour.
One of the consultants was unavailable after November 2009 and was replaced by a consultant from the
National Bureau of Small Scale Industries for the final two months – the same consultant who provided


                                                                                                        9
the initial two‐day training for the E&Y team. The randomization into consulting/non‐consulting was
done in January 2009, stratifying only on the community in which the tailors lived.

Capital Grant
The capital grant randomization was done in October 2009, eight months after the consulting began,
and was stratified on existing treatment status and community only. Deceased respondents and
respondents who had permanently moved out of the study area in the first eight months of the study
were excluded from the randomization, leaving 154 respondents eligible for the capital drop
randomization. Of these, 75 were randomly selected to receive capital (37 from the consulting group
and 38 from the no consulting group).

The capital grant was 200 Cedis (approximately US $133) and unconditional. Approximately two weeks
before distributing the capital grants, IPA field workers visited all the respondents to inform them that
we were doing a raffle with various prizes, one of which was 200 Ghana Cedis. The respondents were
given a sealed envelope that had a picture of their prize inside. The runner‐up prizes were an IPA‐
branded keychain, t‐shirt and mug. The field workers then explained that they would return in about
two weeks with the prize. If they won the capital, we asked that they spend the money on their
business, but explained that they would not have to repay the money if they spent it on personal items,
and that no repayment would be required under any circumstances.

We included the two week buffer between notification and deliviery for the consultants to meet with
the winning respondents to help them plan for how to use the money. However, not all consultants and
tailors were available in this two week window, so not every tailor developed a plan before receiving the
money.

The 200 Cedi capital drop is a little more than the average baseline working capital, defined as all cash,
savings and on‐hand money. The capital drop therefore represents, on average, a doubling of the
reported cash available for investment. 200 Cedis is about twice baseline monthly income, about equal
to one month’s business expenses, and about equal to 13% of average fair market value of all baseline
fixed assets (Table 1).


IV.     Data
All surveys were administered using paper/pencil questionnaires, and data entry was done in the
Innovations for Poverty Action offices by Project Associates or locally‐hired data entry operators. All
surveys after the baseline were audited by re‐administering select questions from 5‐10 questionnaires
by each surveyor. Surveyors were hired and monitored by Innovations for Poverty Action.

Baseline survey: (1) December 2008 and (2) January 2009

The baseline survey was conducted in two visits in order to minimize the intrusion to their daily activities
(a particular concern in the first visit because it was conducted in December, during a peak season). The
first, administered in December 2008, focused on financial outcomes, and the second, administered in


                                                                                                          10
January 2009, focused on business processes and attitudes. Each survey took about 40 minutes to one
hour.

The first follow‐up after the consulting began was conducted six months later, in July 2009 (Survey #3),
and primarily included questions on business processes.

In August 2009 (Survey #4), we visited the respondents every other day to record how much money they
received, how much they spent and how many sales they made. The goal of these visits was to get a
measure of profitability that is unaffected by changes in the consulting group’s understanding of how to
calculate profit and ability to recall revenue/expenses.

Then in September 2009 (Survey #5), we recorded the financial outcomes for expenses, revenue and
profit.

We repeated the format from the baseline, and split measures between December 2009 (Survey #6),
focused on financial outcomes, and January 2010 (Survey #7), focused on business process outcomes.

In December 2010 we conducted a long‐term follow‐up focused on financial outcomes and business
processes. This survey occurred 14 months after the capital drop and 11 months after the consulting
stopped.


V.      Estimation Models and Results
The experimental design simplifies analysis. We examine a series of outcomes related to the
interventions: knowledge of business practices in the consulting curriculum, adoption of these practices,
investment and savings behavior, and business income and profits. This series of indicators is collected
over the 8 rounds of data (although no single indicator is available for all 8 of the rounds because the
questionnaires were varied to reduce respondent fatigue). A typical column in the tables that follow
reports the results of a cross‐sectional regression of the form

(7)                                yit  Ti 1   2 yi 0   3 gi  N i  4   it ,

where yit is the outcome for tailor i in round t, Ti is a vector of indicators of the treatment status of
tailor i, yio is the value of the outcome for tailor i in the baseline (either round 1 or round 2, depending
upon the measure), g i is the gender of tailor i and N i is a vector of dummy variables corresponding to
the neighborhood in which i operates. This specification permits a flexible examination of the timing of
responses to the treatments.


Results
We divide the results into four categories: (1) impact on business literacy and business practices; (2)
impact on profitability; (3) impact on investments; and (4) impact on savings and loans.



                                                                                                            11
Impact on business literacy and practices
The consulting treatment apparently succeeded in generating knowledge among treated tailors about
the business practices that were a focus of the curriculum. In column 1 of Table 7 we report the results
of estimating (7) where yit is a measure of business literacy. In this instance, yi 0  0 , because we did
not ask about business literacy until the final survey in December 2010. Eleven months after the end of
the consulting, we find that being assigned to consulting (irrespective of capital treatment status)
increased business literacy knowledge by an average of 0.3 questions on a 4‐question quiz, which is 0.52
standard deviations.

We find that tailors who received the consulting treatment adopted the practices discussed in the
curriculum, at least temporarily. Columns 3‐5 report the results of estimating (7) where yit is an index of
the business practices encouraged by the consultants at three different times after consulting began.
Business practices were measured by self‐reported responses to 35 questions on various practices
advocated by the consultants. Not all of the questions were asked in every round. yit for columns 3
through 5 is generated by standardizing each question that was asked in that round to mean of zero and
standard deviation of one, then taking the average of all questions asked in that round. This index is
then re‐standardized by subtracting the pre‐consulting average and dividing by the pre‐consulting
standard deviation yi 0 is defined as a similar index from the baseline survey.

In the 6 month follow‐up (July 2009), there is a strong impact of 0.41 standard deviations on business
practices, significant at the 1% level. At the one year follow‐up (January 2010), this effect had
diminished to 0.29 standard deviations, although the reduction from the 6 month treatment effect to
the 12 month treatment effect is not statistically significant. At the two‐year follow‐up (December
2010), the treatment effect further diminished, to 0.12 standard deviations (although still not
significantly different from that estimated in the six month follow‐up).

In column 2, we estimate the effect of the consulting treatment on business practices, on average over
all post‐consulting rounds. The index for Column 2 was generated by standardizing each question to
mean of zero and standard deviation of one, taking the average score within each question after the
start of consulting, and then taking the average score across questions. The post‐consulting and pre‐
consulting rounds were then averaged, subtracted by the pre‐consulting mean and divided by the pre‐
consulting standard deviation. As can be expected, the average effect falls within the range described
above for each round and it is statistically significant at the 5% level.

The consultants’ foundational lesson was record keeping. The most tailors received this lesson, and this
lesson was returned to most often. If the tailors learned anything from the consulting, we would expect
it to be record keeping. We do indeed find a strong impact on record keeping, significant at the 1% level,
with the tailors who received consulting being 45% more likely to report keeping records in July 2009
and 23% more likely to keep records in January 2010. By December 2010, however, this point estimate
had decreased to 6.5%, which is statistically distinguishable from the initial 45% impact at the 1% level.




                                                                                                             12
Overall, we conclude that the consulting was successful in changing both business knowledge and
behavior, although the effect on behavior diminished over time such that one year after the consulting
ended there were no statistically significant differences in behavior between the consulting group and
the control group.

Impact on Investment
Table 8 shows estimates of equation (7) when yit is investment over the previous 12 months. Our
preferred investment measure is the amount of investment in the category the tailor stated he or she
would invest in when asked how they would spend an extra 200 Cedis at the baseline, as reported in
Table 6. This measure has the highest power, given that we would not expect everyone to invest in the
same asset class, so any average impact in an asset class would be diluted by those who preferred to
invest in a different type of investment. The variables that make up the “investment in preferred
category” variable are machines, property and expenses on materials.

In column 1, we see that capital grant group invested an average of 178 Cedis more than the control
group by December 2009 (about two months after the grants were made in cash). The point estimate
for the investment response of the consulting plus capital group is lower, only 90 Cedis. These two
estimates are jointly significantly different from zero (they are not significantly different from each
other). However, one year later in December 2010 this additional investment has entirely disappeared.
The point estimates are tiny and insignificantly different from zero.

Columns 3‐10 break the investment results down into one year results (Col 3‐6) and two year results (Col
7‐10), and then within each year into four outcome measures: total investment, machines,
property/shop and inputs. Converting the outcome measure to investment in a particular category,
rather than investment in what each tailor said they would do in the baseline, leads understandably we
believe to a loss of statistical power as more noise is introduced. However, the general pattern persists
and is consistent with columns 1 and 2. The first year results are generally positive, and the second year
results are generally negative, although out of eight specifications only two are significant statistically.

An alternative to investing the capital drop would be saving the money. Table 9 shows our results on
savings and loans. We find no statistically significant impacts on total savings or bank savings when
pooling all rounds, and only find an impact on susu savings in the capital & consulting group, whose
average monthly susu savings is almost twice the baseline value of 18.6 Cedis a month (point estimate
16, standard error 8.4). Looking at the cross‐sectional impacts, we find that total savings was higher in
the capital plus consulting group in the December 2009 follow‐up, about two months after the capital
drop (point estimate 74.5, standard error 35.7). We also find a statistically significant difference in total
savings between the capital only and capital plus consulting groups, with the capital only group having
lower total savings, significant at the 10% level. This might explain the higher point estimate on
investment in goals seen the capital only group – the consultants reported encouraging the capital
winners to top up the capital drop with their own money to make larger purchases, saving to do so if
necessary.



                                                                                                           13
We find an impact on loan taking in the capital group in the months following the capital drop, but no
impact in the long term (Table 10). For most tailors, the busiest time of the year is the Christmas season.
Borrowing in the three months leading up to Christmas was nearly equal to borrowing in the first 6
months of the year in 2009. (Table 3)

Adding together all of the potential uses for the money (investing, saving, replacing loans), except for
dividends, we find no statistically significant impacts, unless we look at investment in their goal
category, savings and loan replacement, in which case we find point estimates similar in magnitude to
total investment, but with much smaller standard errors, leading to statistically significant, positive
impact from receiving any capital in December 2009. These results are shown in Table 10. The point
estimates on capital and capital plus consulting are greater than 200, but are not significantly different
from 200. Total uses for the money one year later in December 2010 are primarily negative and
insignificant.

Impact on Profitability
Our results so far show short run impacts of the consulting and capital grant treatments on behavior:
knowledge and business practices improve in the consulting group and investments are made in the
capital grant group. The tailors do seem to be learning about new types of techniques from the
consultants (or modifying their prior beliefs about the profitability of these techniques). And the tailors
are responding to the capital grant as though they are capital constrained in their business. However, in
both cases we find that these changes in behavior are short‐lived. After a year there is no significant
difference between the capital grant or consulting groups and the control group of tailors.

An examination of profits provides an explanation for why the tailors abandoned these changes in
behavior. Column 1 of Table 12 reports the results of estimating (7) where yit is the tailor’s stated
income from his or her business, and we include individual fixed effects.6 There is no evidence that the
consulting treatment is associated with higher profits. Worse, the capital grant seems to have lowered
profit. The point estimate is that post‐treatment income fell by almost 50 Cedis from a base of 100
Cedis for the capital grant only treatment. There is a smaller (and statistically insignificant) drop of 20
Cedis in income of the consulting plus capital grant group.

The standard errors on profit are large, relative to the means. For example, the standard error on the
consulting treatment is 21.3 Cedis. To have detected an effect at the 5% level, we would have needed to
observe an average change of 1.96*21.3 = 41.7 Cedis, or 37% of the average baseline profit of 112 Cedis.

We find no statistically significant impacts on revenue. Both the consulting and the consulting & capital
groups have positive point estimates, which are large relative to the baseline average revenue, but we
note fairly large standard errors. At the baseline, we asked only for average weekly revenue, weekly

6
  To examine business profit, we asked: After paying all expenses, what was the income of the business (the profits) during [last
month] (GHS)? Consider all expenses, INCLUDING wages of employees but NOT INCLUDING any income you paid yourself or
income you received from renting out land or rooms.



                                                                                                                               14
revenue in a “good” week and weekly revenue in a bad week. In the follow‐ups, we asked for revenue in
the previous month to ensure that we were measuring only post‐treatment outcomes that were
separate from our previous surveys.7

Income is potentially subject to measurement error that is systematically correlated with treatment
because the consultants’ training included modules on how to calculate income. The consultants
anecdotally reported that the tailors were previously not including indirect expenses when calculating
income and were therefore over‐estimating their profit. Income is therefore not an entirely clean
measure of profitability. We therefore also report revenue less expenses in column 4. The point
estimates on revenue less expenses are similar in magnitude and direction to the point estimates on
income, but are not statistically significant, except for the negative impact of receiving consulting and
capital, which is significant at 10%.

Revenue less expenses is an appealing alternative because it does not depend on knowledge of how to
calculate profit. However, we do see an impact on record keeping, meaning that the consulting group
may have better recall, and the amount of revenue and expenses is therefore not a clean measure
either. To address these concerns, we visited the respondents every other day in August 2009 to ask
how much money they received in the previous two days, how much they spent, how many sales they
made and how many hours they worked. In August 2009, we had already seen an impact on record
keeping, and were yet to do the capital drop. However, we saw no indication that for revenue,
expenses, revenue less expense, hours worked, or number of sales, daily visit totals and recall measures
were not more correlated for the consulting group than for the control group. Figure 4 shows the
distributions of the differences between the daily visits and recall totals for revenue, expenses and
revenue less expenses.

We find no evidence of changes in hours worked by the entrepreneur him or herself as a consequence
of any of the treatments (column 5). Nor is there a statistically significant impact on total staff,
apprentice use, or paid employees of any of the treatments (columns 6‐8).

Table 12 examined the average impact of the capital, consulting and combined treatments on post‐
treatment profits and employment. An examination of the time path of the impacts is revealing. Recall
from our earlier examination of business practices that tailors in the consulting group had adopted the
advocated practices by round 3, but that the use of these practices dropped off in round 7 and then
again in round 8. We find in column 1 of Table 13 that by round 3, monthly income in the consulting
group is 25 Cedis lower than in the control group. By round 5, income is (almost) statistically significantly
higher in the consulting group, but in later rounds there is no difference in income between the
consulting group and the control group.

The capital grant and capital plus consulting groups look worse. In round 7, after first post‐grant holiday
season the point estimate is that the capital (capital plus consulting) group has 50 Cedis (15 Cedis) lower

7
 Without a baseline measure of monthly revenue a fixed effect regression was not an option, so we instead pooled all rounds
together in an OLS regression with round dummies and pre‐treatment values and average weekly reported at the baseline as
controls for the post‐treatment rounds (so the capital group has July 2009 revenue as a control for August 2009 revenue, but
the consulting group does not).

                                                                                                                           15
income than the control, but these estimates are not statistically significant. By a year later both groups
have large and statistically‐significant drops in income relative to the control group. Our revenue and
expense measures, reported in columns (6‐11) are too noisy to permit conclusions to be drawn.

These results, unfortunately, are consistent with the model we presented above. Capital‐constrained
tailors respond to the relaxation of their budget constraint upon receipt of the capital grant by investing
more. But why invest in activities that yield on average negative profits? Similarly they respond to the
intensive consulting intervention by attempting a set of new business practices, and again are rewarded
with declines in profits. Were they fooled in both instances? Perhaps, but this pattern is also consistent
with entrepreneurs exploring new techniques and new levels of investment in a tentative manner in
order to learn about the profitability of these innovations for themselves, knowing that on average such
experiments yield a negative immediate return. Nevertheless, the option value of experimentation is
sufficiently high that it is worth taking the risk. On average, as perhaps expected, the experiments
yielded negative results and the innovative techniques were abandoned.


VI.      Supporting Evidence from Other Studies
We started by examining the universe of papers we are aware of that employ a randomized financial
capital infusion (either through a grant or credit) to a microenterprise. This yields seven papers, three
unconditional cash grant experiments and four credit experiments.8 We then examine papers with
experimental infusion of managerial or entrepreneurship training. This yields 11 papers, with a wide
range of intensity of intervention as well as sample frames.

From each of these papers, we test three hypotheses: (a) did the study find an average positive impact
on investment, (b) conditional on finding a positive impact on investment, did the study find an average
negative impact on profits for the firm, and (c) did the study find evidence of a fat right tail, i.e., of
treatment leading to a small set of individuals doing considerably better than the control.

The following table summarizes the results of the above tests for each study:




8
 We excluded two papers which are close, but do not fit as precisely: de Mel et al (2011) which provides grants to
microentrepreneurs conditional on completing formalization process in Sri Lanka (and they do find that this creates positive
outliers), and Karlan and Zinman (2010) which randomly assigned credit to individuals, but with no enterprise targeting
component as with more traditional microcredit.

                                                                                                                               16
Type of study                   Citation                      Change in average       Change in average            Increase in
                                                              investment (if          profits?                     likelihood of
                                                              credit or grant) or                                  extreme positive
                                                              change in business                                   profits?
                                                              practice (if training
                                                              intervention)?

Grant                           de Mel et al (2008)           Increase                Increase                     Yes9

Grant                           Fafchamps et al (2012)        Increase10              Increase11                   Yes12

Grant                           Berge, Bjorvatn,              Increase (n.s.)13       Increase (n.s.)14            Not reported
                                Tungodden (2011)

                                                                                                                      16
Credit                          Karlan and Zinman             No                      Increase (n.s.)              Yes
                                         15
                                (2011)

Credit                          Banerjee et al (2011)         No                      No                           Not reported

Credit                          Attanasio et al (2012)        Increase                Decrease (n.s.)17            Not reported

Credit                          Augsburg et al (2012)         Increase 18             Increase (n.s.)              Not reported

Skills and principles           Karlan and Valdivia           Increase19              Increase (n.s.)20            Yes (n.s.)21
training                        (2011)

Rules of thumb cash             Drexler, Fischer, and         Increase23              Increase (n.s.)24            Not reported
                                              22
management training             Schoar (2011)



9
  Data available online on Chris Woodruff’s website. Any treatment led to an increase in the probability of being in the top 5%
of profits by 1.4% (s.e. 0.88%, p=0.105)
10
   Figure 3 (males) and Figure 4 (females), and Table 5
11
   Table 3, positive and statistically significant effects for in‐kind grants and positive but not statistically significant effects for
cash grants.
12
   Figure 1 (males) and Figure 2 (females)
13
   Table 5A, Column 3
14
   Table 4A, Columns 1‐6
15
   The 2010 working paper version published online as a Yale University Economic Growth Center working paper, and not the
final published version, includes the relevant results for this analysis here.
16
   Supplemental Table 4, available online, provides the result for average increase in profits (6.7%, s.e. 9.7%). In analysis
conducted from the downloaded data, but not reported in the published paper, we find access to credit made individuals 3.2
percentage points (s.e. of 1.6 percentage points) more likely to have log profits above 11, which corresponds to the top 5% of
the sample frame
17
   Table 6, Column 5 shows a negative but not significant impact on profits on average for both group and individual liability,
albeit with very large standard errors
18
   Table 3, Column 1 reports an increase of 5.3 (se=2.0) percentage points likelihood of ownership of inventory
19
   Table 2
20
   Table 1
21
   Not reported in paper. Data available at http://karlan.yale.edu/p/. In analysis conducted from the downloaded data, but not
reported in the published paper, we find training led to an increase of 0.6 percentage points (s.e. 0.9) in the likelihood that
normal week profits are in the top 5% of the sample frame.
22
   http://www.mit.edu/~aschoar/KIS%20DFS%20Jan2011.pdf

                                                                                                                                      17
Principles of accounting         Drexler, Fischer, and          Increase (n.s.)     Decrease (n.s.)               Not reported
                                                25
training                         Schoar (2011)

Eight‐day training session       Giné and Mansuri               Increase27          Decrease (n.s.)28             Not reported
                                        26
on business fundamentals         (2011)
with hands‐on activities.
                                                                           30
Twenty‐one sessions of           Berge, Bjorvatn,               Increase            Increase for males,           Not reported
forty‐five‐minute business       Tungodden (2011)29                                 decrease for females
training classes with case                                                          (n.s.)31
studies and role play.
Six modules on the basics        Bruhn and Zia (2011) 32        Increase33          Decrease (n.s.)34             Not reported
of accounting, investment,
and other business
fundamentals.
Five‐months of free              Bloom et al (2012) 35          Increase36          Increase37                    Not reported
management consulting
to randomly selected
plants of large Indian
textile firms.
Three modules of business        Mano et al (2011) 38           Increase39          Increase40                    Not reported


23
   The rule‐of‐thumb course had significant and positive impacts on business practices; the accounting course had no significant
impact. Table 3, column 5 shows significant impacts (at the 5% level or lower) on the order of 6‐12% for the likelihood of
separating business and personal cash, keeping accounting records, separating business and personal accounts, setting aside
cash for business expenses, and calculating revenues formally for participants in the rule‐of‐thumb course. Additionally, Table
10, column 3 shows a decrease of 9% in financial reporting inconsistencies, significant at the 10% level for the rule‐of‐thumb
treatment group.
24
   Table 3 columns 5 and 3 show that sales increased more than expenses for the rule‐of‐thumb treatment, while expenses
decreased less than sales did for the accounting principles treatment.
25
   http://www.mit.edu/~aschoar/KIS%20DFS%20Jan2011.pdf
26
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEC/Resources/Money_or_Ideas.pdf
27
   Panel A of Table 3 shows significant and positive increase of 0.131 standard deviations in an index of business practices.
28
   Panel A of Table 3 shows negative but not statistically significant impact on average sales and profits (‐0.021 standard
deviations, s.e. 0.054).
26
   http://www.nhh.no/Admin/Public/DWSDownload.aspx?File=%2fFiles%2fFiler%2finstitutter%2fsam%2fDiscussion+papers%2f
2011%2f01.11.pdf
30
   Table 5C columns 1‐3 show that training increased indices of business practices around marketing, commerce and record‐
keeping, (p<0.05). Table 6A column 2 shows that business knowledge increased (p<0.05).
31
   Table 4A, columns 1‐6 show that male participants in business training increased profits by 20‐30% (p<0.05), while female
participants had decreased profits (n.s.).
32
   http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&piPK=64165421&theSitePK=469372&menuPK=642169
26&entityID=000158349_20110427082512
33
   Table 11 column 1 shows a significant decrease of 21% in the likelihood of using a personal account for business.
34
     Table 9 column 1 shows a decrease (n.s.) in net profits.
35
   http://www.stanford.edu/~nbloom/DMM.pdf
36
   Table A1 shows a p‐value below .01 for a positive difference in difference between the treatment and control group
management practices before and after the treatment.
37
   Table A2 shows an estimated impact of $325, 000 on plant profitability for significant improvements in plant performance,
tested in columns 1‐8 of Table 2.
38
   http://www‐
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2011/08/09/000158349_20110809112532/Rendered/PDF/
WPS5755.pdf
39
     Table 6 columns 1‐3 show significant increases in visiting customers, record keeping, and record analysis.

                                                                                                                                 18
training administered over
fifteen days.
Classroom and on‐site         Sonobe and Suzuki41           Increase42             Mixed (n.s.)43              Not reported
business training.            (2011)
Forty‐seven hours of basic    Calderon, Cunha, and          Increase45             Increase (n.s.)46           Not reported
                                            44
business training for         Giorgi (2011)
female entrepreneurs.
One year of weekly            Bruhn, Karlan and Schoar      Increase               Increase                    No (not reported)
consulting services from      (2012)
local consulting firms



The first question, examining changes in either investment or business practice, yields a fairly consistent
answer: capital does get invested, and business advice does get followed. This is true for 15 out of the
17 studies (albeit 2 of the 15 positive results are not statistically significant).

The second question, the impact on average profits, is far less clear. For capital infusions, 2 out of 7 find
positive and statistically significant results, 3 find positive but not statistically significant results, one
finds close to a null result, and one finds negative but not statistically significant results. Clearly this is
more of a muddled pattern, indicating that while there are some cases where positive returns are strong
it is not a systematic result. For training infusions, the variation in the results are much higher than the
capital infusions. Out of 10 experiments, 3 report statistically significant and positive average impacts, 3
report positive but not statistically significant average impacts, and 3 report negative but not statistically
significant average impacts, and one reports mixed impacts.

The third question, the creation of positive outliers, many of the studies do not report. For those that
do, for capital infusion we find positive results for 3 out of 3 studies. For training studies however we are
only able to examine two studies, and in neither study do we observe positive and statistically significant
impacts on creation of positive outliers.


VII.      Conclusion
Canonical theories of development suggest that credit and managerial capital constraints inhibit
investment and thus profits. This misallocation of resources in the economy has important implications
40
   Table 6 column 6 shows positive impacts of training on profits for both fabricators and machinists. The impact is significant
and large for the fabricators but not significant for the machinists.
41
   Note: this study is ongoing and the results presented are preliminary.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEC/Resources/VolumeIVPart2.pdf
42
   Table 3‐7‐6 part 3 shows a positive and significant increase in total KAIZEN practices for both trainings in Tanzania. Table 4‐10
shows a positive and significant impact on KAIZEN practices for both trainings in Ethiopia. Tables 5‐13a & 5‐13b show a positive
and significant impact on the total business practice score for both trainings in Vietnam. Tables 6‐13a and 6‐13b show positive
and significant impact on the total score for management practices for both trainings, also in Vietnam.
43
   Table 3‐8 column 3 shows a decrease (n.s.) in gross profits for both trainings in Tanzania. Further study is required to identify
causal impacts on profits in Ethiopia (p. 324). Table 6‐5 shows an increase in profits in the latest round of surveying for training
groups in Ethiopia.
44
   http://www.stanford.edu/~gabcal/financial_literacy.pdf. Note this study is ongoing and the results are for seven months
only.
45
   Table 3 columns 1 and 2 show positive and significant increases in keeping formal business accounts and positive increases in
knowing daily and weekly profits.
46
   Table 3 columns 1 and 2 show positive, but not significant increases in daily and weekly profits.

                                                                                                                                 19
for growth. Yet in many (but certainly not all) situations we see interventions that infuse capital or
training not seem to work as well for promoting firm or livelihood growth as one may expect, and we
also see many examples of seemingly unprofitable firms, including farms (e.g., see Anagol, Etang and
Karlan (2012), de Mel, McKenzie and Woodruff (2009), Duflo, Kremer and Robinson [AER May P&P
paper], Karlan, Osei, Osei and Udry (2012) and Bauchet, Morduch and Ravi (2012)).

We put forward a simple learning model, with heterogeneous types of enterprises, which helps
illuminate why we may see failure on average, as well as positive outliers. Clearly no one model,
particularly a simple model, accurately captures the complex reality of business operations in developing
countries. Likewise not all of the predictions in our model are borne out consistently in the data of our
experiment reported here, nor of the 18 studies we examined in a small meta‐analysis. However, there
is evidence to suggest this model provides a useful framework for thinking about the dynamics between
micro and small enterprises, and the choice individual enterprise owners make when deciding to
experiment with expansion or diversification.

Critical questions remain, mostly we believe along four dimensions: heterogeneity with respect to type
of entrepreneur and individual, the dynamics and determinants of learning (which includes, e.g.,
differences in program design), market selection for interventions, and general equilibrium effects. We
discuss each briefly.

What are the individual factors that should be incorporated into the model? Most importantly for both
policy and modeling, what are the critical characteristics that help predict what type of individual has
potential to be an outlier? Neither we nor, in our model, entrepreneurs themselves can predict who
profits the most after relaxing a constraint. Are there diagnostics that could substitute for the costly
experimentation otherwise required to distinguish the minority who can flourish at larger scale from
those who will not? For policy, such diagnostics could be used to target more efficiently, which is
particularly critical if the intervention is great for some and bad for others.

Further related questions pertain to the process of learning. Here, we have focused entirely on learning
by doing and learning from formal trainers. Clearly there are many channels for learning: from one’s
own experience, from that of a teacher in a classroom setting, from a paid consultant, from an NGO,
from a mentor with experience in one’s own industry, etc. How do these different channels of learning
differ in effectiveness, and why? For example, are some more credible than others, do some provide
better information, are some more inspirational on a psychological level thus more likely to trigger
behavior change even if the underlying information is the same, etc. Lastly, and critically, how important
is it for people to see results (and how do individual entrepreneurs determine causality from process
changes to outcomes), rather than merely receive information on suggested processes, in order to
change behavior?

Third, markets differ in terms of competitiveness, and such interventions as discussed here should
generate different impacts depending on the competitive landscape. Take the tailor experiment in
Ghana as an example: perhaps the tailor industry is in perfectly competitive equilibrium, but some other
industry is less so in the same geography. Understanding, and then testing, the underlying market


                                                                                                         20
factors that are necessary for success is important both for validating our models and for establishing
diagnostics for policymakers and institutions interested in improving the industrial performance. For
example, markets with potential product differentiation or skilled and available supply of labor may be
ripe for such interventions, but those with fully competitive markets less so or even damaging.

Lastly, few if any studies have satisfactorily tackled the impact of improving one set of firms’
performance on general equilibrium outcomes. The challenge is simple and obvious: if helping one firm
improve its performance greatly yields a smidgeon of negative impacts for 100 other firms, it will be
difficult to have sufficient statistical power to measure the smidgeons. Theory can help, as well as a
focus on collecting data about the mechanisms of changes within the firm and thus the actual changes in
services that customers receive. For example, if the intervention primarily teaches better persuasive
marketing, but not informative marketing, then business is likely simply being shifted from one firm to
another. If, on the other hand, product quality has increased, or costs have been lowered, then general
equilibrium benefits are likely accruing. We believe this is a gaping hole in the entrepreneurship
development literature.


VIII. References

Anagol, Santosh, Alvin Etang and Dean Karlan (2012). “Continued Existence of Cows Disproves Central
   Tenets of Capitalism.” working paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2008). “Do Firms Want to Borrow More: Testing Credit Constraints
   Using a Targeted Lending Program,” BREAD Working Paper No. 005, 2004, revised 2008.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster and Cynthia Kinnan (2009). “The miracle of
   microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation”, MIMEO, MIT.

Bauchet, Jonathan and Jonathan Morduch and Shamika Ravi, (2011), “Impact Assessment of An Asset
   Transfer Program to Ultra Poor Households”, working paper.

Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson and Bilal Zia (2009). “Money or Knowledge? What drives demand for
    financial services in emerging markets?” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 09‐117.

Cole, Shawn and Guari Kartini Shastry (2009). “Smart Money: The Effect of Education, Cognative Ability,
    and Financial Literacy on Financial Market Participation,” Harvard Business School Working Paper
    No. 09‐071.

de Mel, Suresh and David McKenzie and Chris Woodruff (2009). “Measuring Microenterprise Profits:
   Must We Ask How the Sausage Is Made?” Journal of Development Economics, 88(1): 19‐31.

Karlan, Dean and Isaac Osei‐Akoto, Robert Osei and Chris Udry (2012). “Agricultural Decisions after
    Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints”, working paper.



                                                                                                       21
Karlan, Dean and Martin Valdivia (2010). “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact Of Business Training On
    Microfinance Clients and Institutions” Review of Economics and Statistics,93(2):510‐527

Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2011). “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized
    Credit Scoring for Impact Evaluation,” Science, 332(6035):1278‐1284.

McKenzie, David, Suresh de Mel, and Christopher Woodruff (2008). “Returns to Capital: Results from a
   Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(4): 1329‐72, 2008

McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2008). "Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital and
   Access to Finance in Mexico," The World Bank Economic Review 2008 22(3):457‐482.

Udry, Christopher and Santosh Anagol (2006). "The Return to Capital in Ghana," American Economic
   Review Papers & Proceedings, vol. 96(2), pages 388‐393, May.




                                                                                                      22
Figure 1: Timeline

                                                                                                         Rnd 3          Rnd 4               Capital
                                                Rnd 1          Rnd 2                                                                                     Rnd 6        Rnd 7                         Rnd 8
                                                                                                         Survey         Daily              Delivered
                                           2    Survey         Survey                                                             Rnd 5                  Survey       Survey                        Survey
                                                                                                                        Visits    Survey
 Average Hours of Consulting Per Tailor




                                          1.5



                                           1

                                                                          Average Hours of
                                          0.5                             Consulting per
                                                                          Client per Month

                                           0
                                                Nov      Dec     Jan    Feb    Mar     Apr     May     Jun        Jul      Aug      Sep       Oct      Nov    Dec     Jan      Feb      Mar   …      Dec      Jan
                                                2008            2009                                                                                                 2010                                    2011


Survey Modules
All Modules                                                    Rnd 1          Rnd 2                  Rnd 3                Rnd 4            Rnd 5             Rnd 6             Rnd 7          Rnd 8
Income                                                         Income                                Income                                Income            Income            Income         Income
Biz Overview                                                   Biz Overview                          Biz Overview                                            Biz Overview                     Biz Overview
Staff                                                          Staff                                                                                         Staff                            Staff
Assets                                                         Assets                                                                                        Assets                           Assets
Finance                                                        Finance                               Finance                                                 Finance                          Finance
Operations                                                     Operations                            Operations                                                                Operations
Rev/Expense                                                    Rev/Expense                                                                 Rev/Expense       Rev/Expense                      Rev/Expense
Products                                                                      Products               Products                              Products          Products                         Products
Marketing                                                                     Marketing                                                                                        Marketing
Skills/Formality                                                              Skills/Formality                                                                                 Formality
Household                                                                     Household                                                                                        Household
Financial Literacy                                                            Financial Literacy                                                                                              FInancial LIteracy
Attitudes                                                                     Attitudes                                                                                        Attitudes
Social Networks                                                               Social Networks
Games                                                                         Games                                                                                            Games
Bookkeeping                                                                                          Bookkeeping                                                               Bookkeeping    Bookkeeping
Quality of Consulting                                                                                                                                                                         Quality of Consulting
Daily Logs                                                                                                                Daily Logs


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23
Figure 2: Histogram of hours of consulting per tailor

                     15
 Number of Tailors




                     10




                      5




                      0
                          0   5              10               15   20
                                  Total Hours of Consulting




                                                                        24
Figure 3: Mean Income by Month


                                          Mean Income by Month
                           Start of Consulting             Capital Drop
       250
  100 150 200
      Cedis
       50
       0




            Nov 08            June 09             Aug 09      Nov 09        Dec 09   Nov 10

                                                 Control           Consulting
                                                 Capital           Cap + Consult
                95% Confidence Interval Shown




                                                                                              25
Figure 4: Distributions of the Differences between Daily Visit totals and Recall amounts
            .006




                                                                                                    .01
                                                                                Control                                                                                 Control
                                                                                Consulting                                                                              Consulting




                                                                                                    .008
            .004




                                                                                                      .006
                                                                                                Density
  Density




                                                                                             .004
            .002




                                                                                                    .002
                                                                                                    0
            0




                      -500                              0                             500                    -400         -200              0                200              400
                             Difference in Revenue between Daily Visits and Recall                                  Difference in Expenses between Daily Visits and Recall
            .006




                                                                                Control
                                                                                Consulting
            .004
  Density
            .002
            0




               -1000                   -500                   0                      500
                    Difference in Revenue less Expenses between Daily Visits and Recall




                                                                                                                                                                                     26
Table 1: Baseline (December 2008) Financial Metrics in Cedis
                                     Mean      SD     Min    Median       Max      N
Income Last Month                      114     123       0       80       1000    141
Average Monthly Revenue                240     225     12       200       2000    154
Monthly Expenses Excluding Rent        237     261       3      151       1712    160
Working Capital                        184     264       0      100       2000    156
Fair Value of Fixed Assets            1566    1976    110      1140      20230    160
Number of Paid Employees                0.4     0.6    0.0       0.0        4.0   160
Keeps Financial Records                 0.2     0.4    0.0       0.0        1.0   160
Has Ever Taken a Loan                   0.1     0.3    0.0       0.0        1.0   160




Table 2: Attrition
   Round       Deceased     Permanently   Not Found          Found            Total
                              Moved
1) Dec 2008        0            0             0                160            160
2) Jan 2009        0            0             0                160            160
3) July 2009       2            4             4                150            160
4) Aug 2009        2            4             4        150 (at least once)    160
5) Sept 2009       2            4             9                145            160
6) Dec 2009        3            4             0                153            160
7) Jan 2010        3            4             0                153            160
8) Dec 2010        5            6             0                149            160




                                                                                        27
Table 3: Seasonality of Borrowing
                                              Mean            SD       N
Round 1 ‐ Dec 2008
  Owe Money on a Loan Now                         10.6 %      30.9    160
Round 3 ‐ Jul 2009
  Took a loan in previous 6 months                10.0 %     30.1     150
  Amount Taken                                    86.7      390.4     150
  Amount of Formal Loans                           83        389      150
Round 6 ‐ Dec 2009
  Took a loan in previous 3 months                13.7 %     34.5     153
  Amount Taken                                    69.6      264.7     153
  Amount of Formal Loans                           56        260      153
Round 8 ‐ Dec 2010
  Took a loan in previous 12 months            13.4 %        34.2     149
  Amount Taken                                123.5         395.8     149
  Amount of Formal Loans                        89           348      149




Table 4: Respondent Assessment of Consultants
                                                           Cedis Per Hour
                                                           Willing to Pay
                                                           mean        SD     p == EY Amount
EY Consultants to Continue                                  5.9         7.5
Other Consultants Providing the Same Consulting             2.8         5.1         0
Other Training of Their Choice                              4.2         5.4       0.014




                                                                                               28
Table 5: Randomization Check
                                                                 Difference from Mean
                          Baseline                    Consulting     Capital    Capital &        Model
                           Mean          Control        Only          Only     Consulting        F‐Stat   Prob > F
                             1             2              3             4          5               6         7
Male                          0.43        0.00777         ‐0.0166     0.0424         ‐0.0424      0.297     0.880
                                           (0.0549)        (0.0549)   (0.0570)        (0.0586)

Age                          35.29           0.125         ‐1.655      1.816          ‐0.204      1.048     0.385
                                            (1.181)         (1.181)    (1.227)         (1.278)

Married                       0.56           0.120         0.0229      ‐0.115      ‐0.00694       1.148     0.336
                                           (0.0772)        (0.0772)   (0.0802)        (0.0824)

Literate                      1.30           0.101         0.0421     ‐0.0561        ‐0.0708      0.175     0.951
                                            (0.166)         (0.164)    (0.172)         (0.177)

Number of Children            1.24         0.343*          ‐0.120      ‐0.103        ‐0.0420      0.853     0.494
                                            (0.205)         (0.205)    (0.219)         (0.222)

Shop is cement                0.21         0.0620          0.0620     ‐0.0484        ‐0.0951      1.123     0.348
                                           (0.0630)        (0.0630)   (0.0654)        (0.0672)

Stated Income              113.99           ‐22.20          8.924      1.570           17.84      0.511     0.728
                                            (19.94)         (20.75)    (22.01)         (22.74)

Revenue                    240.21            3.392         61.50*      ‐36.21         ‐32.62      1.160     0.331
                                            (35.79)         (35.35)    (38.26)         (38.81)

Expenses                   247.66            33.66         ‐16.56      6.848          ‐19.59      0.258     0.904
                                            (41.63)         (41.63)    (43.24)         (44.42)

Apprentices                   0.86          ‐0.204       0.430**       ‐0.205        ‐0.0292      2.263    0.0649
                                            (0.171)         (0.171)    (0.178)         (0.183)

Employees                     0.35       ‐0.00854         ‐0.0329      0.124         ‐0.1000      0.623     0.647
                                           (0.0984)        (0.0984)    (0.102)         (0.105)

Fixed Assets              1566.01           ‐72.22         ‐125.3      457.0          ‐260.8      0.704     0.590
                                            (312.1)         (312.1)    (324.2)         (333.0)

Current Assets             457.28           ‐8.055         ‐65.10      ‐161.4          278.6      0.842     0.501
                                            (169.4)         (169.4)    (175.9)         (180.8)

Keeps Records                 0.17         ‐0.0224        ‐0.0468     0.0681         0.0257       0.536     0.710
                                           (0.0594)        (0.0594)   (0.0617)        (0.0634)

Registered Business           0.53         0.0297        0.00534      0.0214       ‐0.00347      0.0543     0.994
                                           (0.0788)        (0.0788)   (0.0818)        (0.0841)

Social Network Size           2.81         ‐0.0808         0.0168     ‐0.0757          0.271      0.230     0.922
                                            (0.289)         (0.289)    (0.300)         (0.308)

Digits Backward               3.11         ‐0.0881        ‐0.0637     0.0980         0.0264       0.537     0.709
                                           (0.0997)        (0.0997)    (0.104)         (0.106)
Notes: Standard errors and F‐Stat are from a regression of de‐meaned baseline values against all four
groups with no constant

                                                                                                                     29
Table 6: Stated Uses of Capital


      Hypothetical                 Actual Use for 200 Cedi Grant
      Likely Use for             (self reported after capital drop)
     200 Cedi Grant                                                         Total Baseline
       (at baseline)        Machines      Property    Inputs     Other       Likely Uses
Consulting & Capital
   Machines                      0            0         1          3               4
   Property                      0            2         2          0               5
   Inputs                        7            1         9         12              27
   Other                         0            0         0          0               0
 Total Consult & Capital         7            3         12        15              36
Capital Only
   Machines                      2            2         1             0            5
   Property                      0            1         1             1            3
   Inputs                        5            4         17            7           30
   Other                         0            0         0             0            0
 Total Capital Only              7            7         19            8           38
Overall
   Machines                     2             2         2          3               9
   Property                     0             3         3          1               8
   Inputs                       12            5         26        19              57
   Other                        0             0         0          0               0
 Overall Total                  14           10         31        23              74
Note: Some people split the money into different categories,
 so reported uses are greater than the number baseline likely uses
Other uses includes saving, domestic use and paying down debt
Chi2 that distribution of Consulting & Capital uses = Capital Only uses = 7.5, p = .19




                                                                                             30
Table 7: Business Literacy and Practices
                                               Business
                                               Literacy                           Business Practices                                   Record Keeping
                                                Rnd 8            Pooled           Rnd 3        Rnd 7    Rnd 8         Pooled        Rnd 3         Rnd 7        Rnd 8
                                                Dec‐10                            Jul‐09      Jan‐10    Dec‐10                      Jul‐09       Jan‐10        Dec‐10
                                                  ols                               ols         ols      ols                        probit       probit        probit
                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)      (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)
Consulting                                      0.309**         0.0363* 0.0565***              0.0295   0.00807      0.220***       0.448***     0.227***         0.0663
                                                 (0.120)        (0.0200)  (0.0216)           (0.0211)   (0.0312)      (0.0519)       (0.0786)     (0.0777)      (0.0713)
Test Consulting = Consulting in Rnd 3
 Chi‐sq                                                                                         0.86       1.74                                      3.70           9.12
 p                                                                                             0.355      0.187                                     0.055          0.003
Observations                                        149               749            150         153        149             452          150          153           149
Rounds with Data                                            1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8                                       1, 3, 7, 8
Individuals                                                           154                                                   154
Outcome Mean at Baseline                           None             0.398           0.398      0.398      0.398          0.169         0.169        0.169          0.169
Control for Outcome Value at Baseline                No               Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
Number of items in practices index                                       35            19         20         23
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
All regressions include dummies for which neighborhood the tailors lived in at the baseline.
Consulting in this table includes both individuals assigned to Consulting and individuals assigned to Consulting and Capital
Business literacy is the number of answers correct on a 4 question test of business literacy
Business Practices is the percentage of all practices recommended by the consultants that were adopted in that round. All practices were not measured in all rounds.
Record Keeping is whether the respondent stated that they keep financial records.
Round‐by‐round record keeping regressions are probit models with marginal effects reported
Test Consult = Consult in Rnd 3 reports the result of a Wald test that the coefficient on Consulting in Round I is equal to the coefficient on Consulting in Round 3.




                                                                                                                                                                        31
Table 8: Investment
                                           Actual Investment in                                         Investments Made During Previous Year
                                         Category of Likely Use for                          Dec‐09                                              Dec‐10
                                         200 Cedi Grant at Baseline      Total                   Property/                     Total                 Property/
                                            Dec‐09       Dec‐10       Investment      Machines      Shop        Inputs      Investment Machines         Shop     Inputs
                                              ols           ols           ols           ols          ols          ols           ols          ols         ols       ols
                                               1             2             3             4            5            6             7            8           9        10
Consulting Only                                11.33      ‐72.74              151.6      ‐61.56       211.8       ‐5.396        ‐175.9      ‐32.57      ‐36.55     ‐35.76
                                             (90.89)     (85.75)            (270.8)     (72.66)     (226.5)      (27.49)       (184.5)     (57.09)     (106.1)    (59.94)
Capital Only                                 179.3*       ‐13.70              73.52      ‐85.88       166.8      46.35*        ‐378.3*     ‐106.0*      ‐123.9     ‐21.52
                                             (92.13)     (88.96)            (274.7)     (73.75)     (229.5)      (27.52)        (191.6)     (59.31)    (110.0)    (61.30)
Consulting & Capital                           89.57      ‐64.92              269.0       54.75       199.4        21.12        ‐66.51      ‐13.64       63.45      9.693
                                             (93.34)     (88.00)            (278.7)     (74.66)     (232.8)      (28.16)       (189.7)     (58.62)     (108.9)    (61.37)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting         0.53         0.36              0.38        0.96         0.30         0.75          0.46        0.65        0.89      0.81
  Consulting & Capital with Capital            0.10         0.61              0.47        0.81         0.36         0.16          0.18        0.24        0.75      0.91
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting            0.40         0.93              0.67        0.12         0.96         0.34          0.56        0.74        0.35      0.45
  Consulting & Capital = Capital               0.34         0.57              0.49        0.06         0.89         0.37          0.11        0.13        0.10      0.61
Observations                                      153        149               153         153         153          153            149         149        149        149
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
All variables winsorized at the highest 1%
See table 1 for breakdown of likely investment categories at baseline.
All regressions include baseline asset controls and dummies for community




                                                                                                                                                                      32
                                           Actual Investment in                                                 Asset Stock
                                         Category of Likely Use for                      Dec‐09                                                Dec‐10
                                         200 Cedi Grant at Baseline    Total                 Property/                    Total                    Property/
                                            Dec‐09       Dec‐10        Assets     Machines      Shop      Inventory       Assets         Machines     Shop      Inventory
                                              ols           ols         ols         ols          ols         ols           ols             ols         ols         ols
                                               1             2           3           4            5           6             7               8           9          10

Consulting Only                                11.33      ‐72.74          151.6       ‐61.56      211.8       10.08            ‐175.9       ‐104.5      167.4      ‐116.3
                                             (90.89)     (85.75)        (270.8)      (72.66)    (226.5)     (36.78)           (184.5)      (118.6)    (250.2)     (113.0)

Capital Only                                 179.3*       ‐13.70          73.52       ‐85.88      166.8       39.87           ‐378.3*     ‐206.4*       31.71      ‐151.4
                                             (92.13)     (88.96)        (274.7)      (73.75)    (229.5)     (37.25)            (191.6)     (123.3)    (259.5)     (117.1)

Consulting & Capital                           89.57      ‐64.92          269.0        54.75      199.4     75.24**            ‐66.51        31.11      254.4      ‐117.9
                                             (93.34)     (88.00)        (278.7)      (74.66)    (232.8)      (37.79)          (189.7)      (121.8)    (257.0)     (116.1)

p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting         0.53         0.36           0.38        0.96       0.30         0.19              0.46        0.72       0.34         0.24
  Consulting & Capital with Capital            0.10         0.61           0.47        0.81       0.36         0.08              0.18        0.41       0.52         0.18
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting            0.40         0.93           0.67        0.12       0.96         0.08              0.56        0.26       0.73         0.99
  Consulting & Capital = Capital               0.34         0.57           0.49        0.06       0.89         0.35              0.11        0.06       0.40         0.78

Observations                                    153          149             153         153       153          153               149         149        149         149
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
All variables winsorized at the highest 1%
See table 1 for breakdown of likely investment categories at baseline.
All regressions include dummies for community and baseline asset values in each category




                                                                                                                                                                       33
Table 9: Savings
                                                 Total Savings                                  Bank Savings                                Susu Savings
                                    Rnd 3     Rnd 6        Rnd 8                   Rnd 3      Rnd 6     Rnd 8                  Rnd 3      Rnd 6      Rnd 8
                                    Jul‐09    Dec‐09      Dec‐10     Pooled        Jul‐09     Dec‐09    Dec‐10       Pooled    Jul‐09     Dec‐09    Dec‐10     Pooled
                                      ols      ols          ols        ols           ols       ols        ols          ols       ols        ols        ols       ols
                                      (1)      (3)          (5)        (5)           (1)       (7)        (8)          (8)       (1)       (10)       (11)      (11)
Consulting Only                       8.842      36.61      3.233       10.46        9.592      20.65      7.693       10.83     8.244     16.55*      13.21     8.547
                                    (14.27)    (34.89)    (46.43)     (18.28)      (13.24)    (30.56)    (38.92)     (16.80)   (5.444)     (9.439)   (15.98)   (6.203)
Capital Only                                     11.61      6.639       3.159                   6.999     ‐2.228       0.742                 2.783     10.81     2.158
                                               (31.05)    (42.17)     (29.49)                 (28.81)    (37.37)     (26.45)               (8.368)   (14.48)   (8.081)
Consulting & Capital                          75.13**       8.617       28.96                   47.42     ‐2.079       19.33             28.38***      22.75   16.63*
                                               (35.68)    (47.44)     (21.99)                 (31.31)    (39.83)     (18.31)               (9.649)   (16.34)   (8.448)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting           0.08        0.89        0.24                    0.22         0.94     0.30                  0.01      0.22      0.04
  Consulting & Capital with Capital              0.14        0.84        0.41                    0.29         0.95     0.57                  0.05      0.21      0.16
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting              0.22        0.89        0.42                    0.36         0.79     0.66                  0.16      0.50      0.33
  Consulting & Capital = Capital                 0.06        0.97        0.45                    0.19         1.00     0.52                  0.01      0.44      0.14
Observations                           150        153        149         452          150         153         149       452       150         153       149       452
Outcome Mean at Baseline              79.4       79.4        79.4        79.4         53.3       53.3         53.3     53.3      18.6        18.6      18.6      18.6
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions
Revenue and expenses are winsorized at the highest 1% and income is winsorized at the highest and lowest 1%




                                                                                                                                                                   34
Table 10: Loan Taking and Combined Investment, savings and loans


                                                                Investment in Goal,       Total Investment,
                                                                    Savings, and            Savings, and
                                           Loan Amounts            Avoided Loans           Avoided Loans
                                         Dec‐09    Dec‐10       Dec‐09        Dec‐10     Dec‐09       Dec‐10
                                          ols        ols          ols          ols         ols          ols
                                           1          2            3             4          5            6
Consulting Only                           ‐55.82      ‐31.71       67.35       ‐42.43       211.6     ‐54.14
                                         (55.47)     (88.69)     (113.1)      (113.9)     (286.7)    (149.3)
Capital Only                         ‐135.6**          21.75   326.2***        ‐43.32       191.5     ‐245.6
                                       (55.40)       (90.56)     (114.6)      (118.2)     (290.6)    (154.9)
Consulting & Capital                      ‐85.09       13.12     229.3*        ‐69.13       400.0      17.27
                                         (56.99)     (91.06)     (116.3)      (117.1)     (294.9)    (153.4)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting     0.15        0.91        0.14         0.58        0.23        0.89
  Consulting & Capital with Capital        0.02 **     0.82        0.01 ***     0.58        0.24        0.39
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting        0.60        0.61        0.16         0.82        0.52        0.64
  Consulting & Capital = Capital           0.38        0.93        0.41         0.83        0.48        0.10 *
Observations                               153           149           153       149          153       149
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Columns 1 and 2 winsorized at the highest 1%. Columns 3‐5 winsorized at highest and lowest 1%
See table 1 for breakdown of likely investment categories at baseline.
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions
Columns 3 and 4 are investment in goal category plus savings minus loans taken
Columns 5 and 6 are total investment plus savings minus loans taken




                                                                                                                 35
Table 11: Investment Heterogeneity
                                                                            Dec‐09
                                 Actual Investment in             Investment       Investment
                               Category of Likely Use for           in Goal          in Goal
                               200 Cedi Grant at Baseline             Self         Uncertainty
                                  Dec‐09       Dec‐10            Commitment         Aversion
                                    ols           ols                 ols              ols
                                     1             2                   3                4
Consulting Only                      11.33       ‐72.74                    12.70         3.871
                                   (90.89)      (85.75)                  (85.23)       (160.4)
Capital Only                       179.3*        ‐13.70                  218.7**        ‐57.12
                                   (92.13)      (88.96)                   (85.60)      (148.7)
Consulting & Capital                 89.57       ‐64.92                    82.20         121.2
                                   (93.34)      (88.00)                  (86.61)       (153.9)
Consulting Only*Self Commitment                                            136.3
                                                                         (137.2)
Capital Only*Self Commitment                                        ‐382.6***
                                                                       (133.0)
Consulting & Capital*Self Commitment                                       70.66
                                                                         (136.1)
Consulting Only*Uncertainty Averse                                                       5.030
                                                                                       (53.03)
Capital Only*Uncertainty Averse                                                       103.3**
                                                                                       (49.81)
Consulting & Capital*Uncertainty Averse                                                 ‐9.580
                                                                                       (49.09)
Observations                            153        149                       153           153
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
All variables winsorized at the highest 1%
See table 1 for breakdown of likely investment categories at baseline.
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions
                                                                                                 36
Table 12: Profitability Pooled

                                                                                      Revenue          Hours
                                             Stated                                     less          Worked         Total                         Paid
                                            Income       Revenue       Expenses       Expenses       per Month       Staff         Apprentices   Employees
                                            Pooled        Pooled        Pooled         Pooled          Pooled       Pooled           Pooled       Pooled
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)          (6)              (7)          (8)
Consulting Only                                0.905       ‐33.34         ‐18.24          ‐15.89          2.325      0.0565           0.0687        0.0474
                                             (21.42)      (38.76)        (29.97)         (22.35)        (11.40)      (0.205)          (0.157)       (0.106)
Capital Only                               ‐45.43**         29.24          12.52          ‐23.41          4.284       ‐0.158          0.0166         ‐0.169
                                             (21.99)      (86.31)        (49.82)         (32.50)        (10.89)      (0.205)          (0.146)       (0.112)
Consulting & Capital                          ‐23.23       ‐29.94          7.778         ‐42.33*         ‐12.87     ‐0.0159           ‐0.0376         0.104
                                             (20.06)      (39.43)        (34.36)          (24.07)       (11.63)      (0.192)           (0.155)      (0.117)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Any Consulting                               0.52          0.34           0.85            0.12          0.58          0.91             0.91         0.44
  Any Capital                                  0.06 *        0.99           0.77            0.15          0.65          0.61             0.93         0.74
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting            0.29          0.93           0.42            0.34          0.25          0.73             0.53         0.61
  Consulting & Capital = Capital               0.30          0.49           0.92            0.59          0.17          0.49             0.74         0.02 **
Observations                                    747           445            447            444            452          302              302           302
Rounds with Data                         1,3,5,6,7,8       1,5,6,8        1,5,6,8        1,5,6,8        1,3,6,8        1,6,8            1,6,8         1,6,8
Individuals                                     154           154            154            154            154          153              153           153
Outcome Mean at Baseline                      111.9         235.0          244.9             1.2         243.0           1.3              0.9           0.4
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Revenue, expenses and revenue less expenses all include both baseline revenue and baseline expenses as a control for consistency
Profit, Revenue less expenses and profit per hour are winsorized (capped) at highest and lowest 1%
Revenue, expenses and hours worked are winsorized (capped) at the highest 1%
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions



                                                                                                                                                              37
Table 13: Profitability by Round
                                                         Income                                         Revenue                          Expenses
                                    Rnd 3      Rnd 5      Rnd 6     Rnd 7       Rnd 8        Rnd 5       Rnd 6       Rnd 8     Rnd 5       Rnd 6    Rnd 8
                                    Jul‐09     Sep‐09    Dec‐09     Jan‐10      Dec‐10       Sep‐09      Dec‐09      Dec‐10    Sep‐09     Dec‐09    Dec‐10
                                      ols        ols       ols        ols        ols           ols        ols         ols        ols         ols      ols
                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)     (11)
Consulting Only                     ‐25.83*      25.67     ‐17.04     ‐15.83       11.35        24.25     ‐7.319      ‐131.2     5.541     ‐0.327    ‐68.33
                                     (13.39)   (16.74)    (29.91)    (40.02)     (44.69)      (26.24)    (47.73)     (114.0)   (13.02)    (33.30)   (73.77)
Capital Only                                               ‐29.21     ‐52.62      ‐74.61                  ‐3.283       45.69                52.67    ‐25.61
                                                          (30.31)    (40.58)     (46.28)                 (48.30)     (118.4)              (33.73)   (76.64)
Consulting & Capital                                        6.597     ‐16.06   ‐98.46**                    35.79      ‐143.8                34.62    ‐0.459
                                                          (30.83)    (41.29)     (46.09)                 (48.90)     (116.9)              (34.14)   (75.63)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting                      0.84       0.65        0.27                       0.73     0.17                 0.56      0.59
  Consulting & Capital with Capital                         0.67       0.33        0.03 **                    0.70     0.63                 0.14      0.84
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting                         0.43       1.00        0.02 **                    0.37     0.91                 0.31      0.37
  Consulting & Capital = Capital                            0.24       0.37        0.61                       0.42     0.11                 0.60      0.74
Observations                            149       144        152        153         149          144          151       149       145        153       149
Outcome Mean at Baseline              111.9     111.9      111.9      111.9       111.9        235.0      235.0       235.0     244.9      244.9     244.9
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions
Consulting includes all 80 individuals assigned to the consulting group in rounds 3 and 5
Revenue and expenses include both baseline revenue and baseline expenses as a control for consistency
Revenue and expenses are winsorized at the highest 1% and income is winsorized at the highest and lowest 1%




                                                                                                                                                         38
                                                                        Top 10% of Income                                                         Top 5% of Income
                                                Pooled       Rnd 3      Rnd 5       Rnd 6          Rnd 7      Rnd 8         Pooled      Rnd 3     Rnd 5      Rnd 6       Rnd 7       Rnd 8
                                                             Jul‐09     Sep‐09      Dec‐09         Jan‐10     Dec‐10                   Sep‐09     Dec‐09     Dec‐10      Sep‐09      Dec‐09
                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)             (1)       (6)       (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
Consulting Only                                 0.00275      ‐0.0737      0.0620      ‐0.0491      ‐0.0195      0.0192        0.0161    ‐0.0166     0.0623   ‐0.00323      ‐0.115      0.0821
                                                (0.0515)    (0.0507)    (0.0584)       (0.100)      (0.111)   (0.0999)      (0.0427)   (0.0371)   (0.0429)    (0.0695)   (0.0934)    (0.0783)
Capital Only                                     ‐0.0644                              ‐0.0857      ‐0.0119      ‐0.141       ‐0.0650                          ‐0.0701     ‐0.173*     ‐0.0159
                                                (0.0636)                               (0.102)      (0.112)    (0.103)      (0.0460)                         (0.0704)    (0.0947)    (0.0810)
Consulting & Capital                             ‐0.0659                              0.0324       ‐0.0178 ‐0.295***         ‐0.0337                         0.00947       ‐0.113      ‐0.113
                                                (0.0517)                              (0.103)       (0.114)   (0.103)       (0.0425)                         (0.0716)    (0.0963)    (0.0807)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting              0.47                                    0.92      0.85       0.12          0.80                              0.96       0.17        0.82
  Consulting & Capital with Capital                 0.17                                    0.76      0.88       0.02 **       0.18                              0.62       0.09 *      0.36
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting                 0.22                                    0.42      0.99       0.00 ***      0.31                              0.86       0.98        0.01 **
  Consulting & Capital = Capital                    0.98                                    0.25      0.96       0.14          0.53                              0.26       0.53        0.23
Observations                                         747        149         144             152        153        149           747        149        144         152        153         149
Individuals                                          154                                                                        154
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions
Consulting includes all 80 individuals assigned to the consulting group in rounds 3 and 5




                                                                                                                                                                                              39
Table 14: Operations by Round
                                        Owner Hours per Month                    Staff                Apprentices           Employees
                                    Rnd 3      Rnd 6      Rnd 8           Rnd 6      Rnd 8         Rnd 6      Rnd 8      Rnd 6    Rnd 8
                                    Jul‐09     Dec‐09     Dec‐10          Dec‐09     Dec‐10        Dec‐09    Dec‐10      Dec‐09   Dec‐10
                                      ols       ols         ols            ols        ols            ols        ols        ols      ols
                                      (1)        (3)        (5)             (7)        (8)          (10)       (11)       (10)     (11)
Consulting Only                      ‐18.62       4.146        29.01*    ‐0.00374          0.113   ‐0.0709      0.206      0.136   ‐0.0416
                                    (12.23)     (16.27)        (17.11)     (0.267)       (0.224)    (0.163)   (0.212)    (0.117)    (0.144)
Capital Only                                      11.56          10.96     ‐0.401        0.0630    0.0826     ‐0.0663     ‐0.132    ‐0.200
                                                (16.46)        (17.72)    (0.273)        (0.223)   (0.162)     (0.216)   (0.119)   (0.149)
Consulting & Capital                             ‐3.520         ‐10.09    ‐0.0954        0.0583     ‐0.122    0.0445       0.144   0.0633
                                                (16.69)        (17.53)     (0.270)       (0.226)   (0.165)    (0.214)    (0.121)   (0.148)
p value on tests of joint significance
  Consulting & Capital with Consulting             0.98          0.53        0.83          0.66       0.50       0.50      0.18       0.93
  Consulting & Capital with Capital                0.78          0.98        0.29          0.75       0.89       0.95      0.96       0.59
p value on tests of equality of means
  Consulting & Capital = Consulting                0.64          0.03        0.73          0.81       0.76       0.45      0.95       0.47
  Consulting & Capital = Capital                   0.37          0.24        0.27          0.98       0.22       0.61      0.03       0.09
Observations                           150         153            149         149           153        153        149       153        149
Outcome Mean at Baseline             111.9       243.0          243.0         1.3           1.3        0.9        0.9       0.4        0.4
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Controls for baseline value and community in all regressions




                                                                                                                                              40
Table 15: Recall Test: Sum of Daily Visits versus End‐of‐Month
                                                                                                                            Days
                                    Revenue    Revenue      Expenses     Expenses        Rev less Exp    Rev less Exp      Found in
                                               Squared                   Squared           Dec‐10          Squared        September
                                      ols        ols            ols         ols               ols             ols             ols
                                      (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)               (5)             (6)             (6)
Consulting                            ‐4.081   22895.1**         8.712   9032.5**             ‐2.402             7626.5     ‐1.159*
                                     (29.64)     (9744.0)      (16.09)    (4226.1)           (30.44)          (12405.4)      (0.654)
Observations                            124          124          122         122               126                126          147
*p < . 10, **p < .05, ***p < . 01
Standard errors in parenthesis
Controls for baseline value, community and days with information.
Consulting includes all 80 individuals assigned to the consulting group
Revenue and expenses include both baseline revenue and baseline expenses as a control for consistency
Revenue and expenses are winsorized at the highest 1% and income is winsorized at the highest and lowest 1%
Results are restricted to those individuals that we found at least 20 times in August




                                                                                                                                       41
IX.   Appendix A: Ernst & Young Team

      The four Ernst & Young consultants were supervised by a Director and a Partner at Ernst &
      Young – Ghana, and monitored by field staff at Innovations for Poverty Action ‐ Ghana.

      Consultant A

      Consultant A is an assistant manager in the Business Advisory Service line of Ernst & Young,
      Ghana. He has 6 years of experience in business process reviews, monitoring and evaluation,
      financial re‐engineering, fund management, monitoring and evaluation and internal audit. He
      has been involved in number of Performance Improvement related assignments in both private
      and public sectors. He joined Ernst & Young in 2007 and is currently based in the Accra Office.
      Prior to joining Ernst & Young, Consultant A worked with TOTAL Petroleum Ghana Limited as
      Internal Auditor.

      Consultant A was team leader in the ‘Returns to Business Management Consulting Study’
      engagement undertaken for Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). Consultant A holds a Bachelors
      degree in Administration (Accounting) from the University of Ghana and a MBA in Financial
      Management from the University of Hull. He is a member of the Association of Chartered
      Certified Accountants (UK).

      Consultant B
      Consultant B is a Manager in Advisory Service Line and engaged in the provision of performance
      improvement services, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for clients in the public and
      private sector. Consultant B has over 6 years of experience in diverse areas, including
      Monitoring and Evaluation, Policy Analysis, Project Management, Training, Strategy Planning,
      Communication, Advocacy and Campaigns and Fundraising, Knowledge Management and
      consultancy. He joined Ernst & Young Ghana in 2008 and is based in the Accra office. He has
      work experience in Ghana, Sierra Leone and Liberia before joining Ernst & Young.

      Consultant B holds a Master of Science in Development Policy and Planning and a Bachelor of
      Science in Development Planning. He is a member of Ghana Monitoring and Evaluation forum.

      Consultant C

      Consultant B Mensa is a Manager with Ernst & Young and has experience in Human Resource
      Management. Her areas of focus include HR Reorganization and Management, Training, Human
      Resource Policies and Procedures, Salary Surveys and Performance Management. She has
      highly developed research abilities and has led and supported Capacity Development and
      Institutional Strengthening assignments for clients both in the Public and Private Sectors.



                                                                                                   42
Consultant B has been involved in various roles, from support to managing, in a number of
engagements. She joined Ernst & Young in 2004 and is based in the Accra office.

Consultant D

Consultant D is a Manager with Business Advisory Services within Ernst & Young focusing more
on training and human resource management. She joined Ernst & Young in 2007 and is based in
the Accra office. She has over 18 years work experience and prior to joining Ernst & Young,
Consultant D worked with the World Vision, SNV‐Ghana (Netherlands Development
Organisation), African Centre for Human Development and DANIDA Volta Region Water and
Sanitation Project. She holds a BSc. Administration (Human Resource Management) from the
Central University College, Ghana.




                                                                                            43
X.     Appendix D: Training Modules


     Module                   Description
1    Record Keeping             Gave respondents two books that covered procurement, sales, stock,
                                 cash in/out, wages, assets, etc.
                                Rationale for adopting bookkeeping: tracking revenue and expenses
                                 gives you a clearer picture of your financial situation
                                Remember to track indirect costs. Most were actually earning less
                                 than they thought they were before they started bookkeeping and
                                 including indirect costs
                                Monitored record keeping over the year
                                Took them through a monthly income statement for 1 month then
                                 monitored their own calculations of monthly income
                                Separation of business and personal finances
                                As the entrepreneur, you are both the owner of the business and an
                                 employee of the business. You are therefore entitled to both a share
                                 of the profits and a wage (wage is determined through costing)

2    Procurement                Initially just‐in‐time buyers, purchasing what they need for each job
                                Advised to buy weekly stock to get bulk discounts and reduce time
                                 spent on travel
                                Also pay particular attention to the quality of bulk purchases – look
                                 out for high quality inputs
3    Operational Activities   Very specific to the circumstances of each business. Some examples:
                                Keeping your shop tidy can make customers more comfortable and
                                 more willing to pay a higher price if they can see that you are serious
                                 about the business
                                Need to assure consistent supply of electricity by applying pressure to
                                 the service providers
                                Try to charge advance every time, especially if the client is new,
                                 although it can be waived for reliable clients. (If business was slow,
                                 they were reluctant to charge advance)
                                Get insurance for both business and person (SSNIT)
                                Arrange your production process for efficiency: when should you do
                                 cutting? Who should do what?
                                Quality control: Monitoring of worker and apprentices
                                Where should you outsource knitting or other activities? Or is it better
                                 to save for a knitting machine yourself?

4    Motivation of workers     How do you motivate your workers to get the best out of them?
                               Need to make their workers feel like they are part of the team
                               Reward them adequately: they have their own financial issues, just as
                                you do
                               If there are any apprentices that you really want to keep, tip them
                                some money regularly


                                                                                                      44
                        Apprentices should be trained in customer service and should see
                         themselves as more than just students
                        If your workers work particularly hard on something, give them
                         something extra
                        Give workers training and teach them what you know so they can
                         handle things when you are out of the shop
                        Advised to formalize agreements with employees

5   Value Addition      Accept feedback and apply recommendations
                        Good finishing can be a source of sales, especially in conjunction w/
                         labels
                        Diversify from core business: add selling fabrics, selling inputs, buy
                         knitting machine and take subcontracted jobs
                        Keep in touch w/ new designs, learn new skills and/or develop your
                         own designs. You can then take subcontracted jobs as well if the
                         knowledge/technique isn’t common

6   Time management     Planning for the business: set a time that you should be able to reach
                         your investment goals (Eg, I will get a new container by April)
                        Having a consistent schedule is important so that customers know
                         when they can stop by
                        Set realistic deadlines w/ customers that you can actually meet
                        Give an allowance when calculating customer deadlines in case there
                         is a power outage. If timing is a consistent issue, leave one day a week
                         open to handle emergencies
                        If you know you can’t deliver on time, call the client in advance to let
                         them know
                        If a customer is pushing for a tight deadline, charge a higher rate to
                         compensate for you overtime

7   Costing            A major exercise after bookkeeping was introduced.
                         Took them through calculating the cost of making each product
                          including indirect expenses, taxes & wages to determine how much
                          they should charge for each one.
                         Many were undercharging, but found it difficult to raise the price if all
                          the other tailors in the area are also undercharging
                         Introduced the need to account for their own time by asking how
                          much they should charge for their own time (if you were to get
                          someone like you to do this job, how much would you pay them? That
                          is what you can set as your wage)
                         Need to add indirect costs such as rent and electricity (How many do
                          you sew in a month? Divide the monthly rent/indirect cost by that
                          number to get the cost per unit)
                         Need to add some profit as well

8   Customer Service    How to receive customers: greeting them, saying thank you,
                         accommodating their concerns with workmanship

                                                                                                  45
                                 Doing something different that will cause your customer to always
                                  come to you: give something over Christmas like a handkerchief w/
                                  your business name printed on it, or dash them a dress if you are
                                  sewing plenty.
                                 Know the individual customers and what they like
                                 Create a database w/ customer names, phone numbers & where they
                                  live so you can call ones you haven’t seen in a long time
                                 Closely related to time management
                                 Sewing well isn’t enough: need to also meet deadlines, treat them
                                  nicely, make alterations for free, and so on
                                 Be patient if the customers treat you w/ disrespect
                                 Customer service is the key to building a base of loyal customers
                                 Package things nicely for customers and use labels

9    Security of shop            Have someone sleep in the store at night for security
                                 Change the locks/buy more secure padlocks.
                                 Keep valuables at home if possible.
                                 If they have a wooden kiosk, can they save for a container?
10   Sales and Marketing        Most viewed time spent marketing as competing with time spent sewing
                                 Market your products through labels, finishing, customer service,
                                  displaying sewn items
                                 Buy fabrics so you can do sew & sell or let the customer buy their
                                  fabric right from your shop.
                                 Help your customers to understand why you charge the prices you do
                                  if they think that the price is high
                                 Go to offices/businesses/schools to let them know about your
                                  product
                                 Tell people around about your abilities
                                 Call customers that haven’t visited in a while
                                 Register business as this can be necessary for large contracts
                                 When you get the contract, formalize terms of payment and
                                  deliverables
                                 Get a signboard if you don’t already have one.
                                 Making sure you kiosk isn’t an eyesore: look presentable!

11   Lifestyle in relation to    How do you balance child rearing/other household responsibilities
     work/life                    and business? Do you need to work early or late or work from home
                                  sometimes?
                                 Need to rest to maintain stamina
                                 Dress professionally as if you come to work, not casually as if you’re at
                                  home
                                 Have a serious mind for work
                                 See a doctor regularly and check your blood pressure

12   Financing of                If you want to be able to grow, the best source for cash is retained
     business/savings             profits. Identify how much you can save through your bookkeeping


                                                                                                         46
                        Advised against getting a loan unless they have a concrete goal and
                         plan to repay the principal and interest.
                         o If you do to take a loan, top it up with savings to keep the amount
                              borrowed low.
                         o Pay particular attention to how much interest you will be paying.
                              Ask them to calculate the amount of cash you will actually pay as
                              interest instead of talking about it as a percentage
                        If you don’t have a bank account, open one. If you don’t have a
                         separate business account, open one.
                        Don’t dip hands into business money
                        Buy treasury bills for savings

13   Business Growth    Identify concrete goals for expansion
                         o How much will it cost to reach your goal?
                         o How much would you have to save every week to get that much
                              money?
                         o If the savings goal is realistic, no need to take a loan
                         o If the savings goal is unrealistic, a loan + savings might be
                              worthwhile
                        If you consider a new location, be sure that the land rights are secure
                         o Is a new location necessary or could your problems be solved
                              through better marketing?
                        If you know that there is a weakness in your skills set, take a course
                         with a fashion school or association
                        Objective setting; short term, medium term and long term
                        Apart from sewing, what else can you do? Add on other businesses to
                         protect against the seasonality of sewing
                        Sell the raw materials you use
                        How will your grow your customer base?
                         o As your customer base is growing, how do you keep meeting your
                              deadlines? Additional workers? Better machines?
                        Model: build customer base, hire more workers, buy faster machines
                         with savings
                        If you have a specific need that requires investments to meet your
                         customer demands, you can go in for a loan




                                                                                              47
XI.        Appendix C: Examples of Mentorship
  Client                                              Consultant’s Notes
819          Introduced bookkeeping and she adopted it and maintained records consistently. Wants to
             be a designer so advised her to seek a training course. Starting doing some more marketing
             but she is near the limit of her capacity so they developed plans to increase capacity by
             hiring a worker. Has expanded her shop a lot and took on an apprentice. Got connected to
             electricity and keeps a very clean shop. Adopted labels and sales of materials. Aims at a
             higher end customer. Responded to questions; client really embraced the consultancy.
810          Covered all models but he wasn't very interested in actually adopting new ideas. Wants to
             relocate his shop. Sews uniforms for school sports teams. Thinks that since he's approaching
             retirement it's not necessary to be aggressive about expanding and he wants to move his
             shop. Advised to do aggressive marketing for schools & use calling cards
402          Was suspicious of consultancy at first but really caught on. Registered her business, buys in
             bulk, keeps records, started using labels, dashes customers toffees. Developed plan to get a
             new apprentice. Wants to relocate to a place on the main road and discussed issues
             involved in moving. Will often ask questions about the decisions she's facing.
415          Has a second job sewing for industrial sewing shop so he's often not in the shop. Even when
             he's around he is not open regularly. Met him late in the year & didn't spend much time
             together.
304          Sews under a tree. Started well w/ bookkeeping although stopped along the line.
             Opened a bank account and was saving through account, also bought t‐bills. No employees.
             Raised prices a bit before Christmas. Sews well & has good customer relations. Started
             insisting on advance.
309          Was big on record keeping before she feel sick. Very disciplined w/ finances. Help provide
             structure for her saving, separating business & personal expenses, paying self wage. Was
             sick, lost her mother, then got sick again, so we didn't have as much time together. Went
             through costing & value addition but doesn't have employees. Didn't cover sales/marketing.
             Already had good customer service. Lifestyle was an important topic. Started insisting on
             advance.
709          Initially difficult to convince of the value of consulting but became more receptive over
             time. Discussed diversifying away from sewing only suits. Tried sewing shirts and was
             overwhelmed by their popularity. Has a huge potential if he can diversify his products and
             do enough marketing. Discussed bookkeeping but he stopped along the line, although he
             has a good memory. Discussed savings. Wants to move to a new place (w/ help in financing
             from one of his customers). Procurement: started buying enough for ~5 suits at once.
             Interested in labels for suits and branding on bags. Was sick for a month so discussed health
             issues.
713          Very unreceptive at the start but warmed up eventually. Started insisting on advance and
             changed prices based on costing. Had a special interest in selling raw materials and used the
             capital drop for this after some discussion. Is moving shops. Opened a bank account for the
             first time with the money from the money games (the 6 Cedis). Has also started saving.
             Didn't really take up bookkeeping at all (may be only semi‐literate). Talked about value
             addition but she didn't implement it. Didn't really cover marketing at all.
509          Didn't spend much time on record keeping because she was already keeping records on a
             computer. Has several other businesses in addition to sewing. Discussed strategies to get
             more retailers to sew for and open up her own retail shop. Is taking a professional course in
             marketing.

                                                                                                       48
515   Is considering taking a loan of GHc 1000 to buy knitting and babylocking machines so they
      discussed financing in detail. Covered all 13 modules. Learned a new sewing technique that
      she now does for other seamstresses. Advised to learn to sew men’s clothes to expand
      market, which she did. Has a market stall in addition to shop that she isn't using so advised
      her to work from both locations at once.
217   Went beyond basic record keeping to the preparation of monthly income statement. She
      focuses on higher‐end market and discussed where she can find workers who meet her
      quality standards. Decided to hire someone who just graduated polytechnic. Discussed
      using savings to purchase quality machines. Discussed her plans to return to school to study
      business, and developed plans to start taking on apprentices w/ an SSS education who want
      to become designers, almost as an academy.
209   Wants to buy an industrial machine w/ IPA grant so they worked on saving to top up the
      price and arranging her space so she can fit it. Her location is small so they worked on
      finding a second place (and leaving a worker at the current one). Expansion limited by the
      space that she had available
111   Is semi‐literate so they covered bookkeeping using symbols. Main problem is w/ an
      unreliable worker. Consultant spoke with the worker about her dedication & advised owner
      to try to find another worker. Has a school next door who would give him a larger contract if
      he had more reliable help. Discussed banking, retirement and customer service. Wants to
      get a good worker who can manage the business so he can farm and stop sewing.
119   Sews in his house & doesn't have a signboard so his market is small. Discussed getting a
      signboard and focusing on getting larger contracts to anchor his business while his wife
      conducts marketing for him to try to grow individual customer base. Will complete tasks
      outside of meetings.
608   Implements advise very quickly! She made handkerchiefs for X‐Mas and gave them out to
      customers. Started using dress labels. Got business registration forms but is yet to fill them
      out. Started offering customers minerals for free but then charges them a little bit extra for
      the sewing to cover the minerals cost. Hired a worker. Advised to get a computer for record
      keeping/customer database because she is growing very quickly
618   Got a contract recently that the consultant helped negotiate/review the details on. Semi‐
      literate so he asked a brother to keep records for him, although the consultant also advised
      him to try to use symbols to write the way he understands. Focused on utilizing his bank
      account for savings. Also discussed labels. His brother will help him sew but isn't reliable so
      needs a worker. Used to sell shirts and the consultant advised him to restart this and do sew
      and sell.




                                                                                                  49
XII.    Appendix D: Examples of Tailors


A tailor who shares his small wooden shop with another tailor




A tailor operating out of a crowded market stall, with several apprentices.




                                                                              50
A tailor working out of a kiosk.




A tailor who owns rents space in a concrete building.




                                                        51
A tailor who shares a kiosk.




A seamstress who owns a converted shipping container




                                                       52
A tailor in his wooden shop.




                               53
