                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LEAD POLICY AND ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE:
                           INSIGHTS FROM MASSACHUSETTS

                                         Jessica Wolpaw Reyes

                                         Working Paper 18327
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18327


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




The author would like to thank many people for valuable advice and comments: Sarah Carleton, Carrie
Conaway, Chris Foote, Paul Hunter, Jun Ishii, Robert Knorr, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Alicia Sasser Modestino,
Sarah Neslund, René Reyes, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Jeffrey Zabel, Bo Zhao, and seminar participants
at the New England Public Policy Center, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Bureau of Environmental
Health of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, and the Healthy Homes Lead Poisoning
Prevention Branch of The Centers for the Disease Control and Prevention. Research staff at the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education
provided invaluable support with data acquisition and processing. Christopher Morrison provided
outstanding research assistance. Any remaining errors are the author’s own. This research was generously
supported by the New England Public Policy Center of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jessica Wolpaw Reyes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Lead Policy and Academic Performance: Insights from Massachusetts
Jessica Wolpaw Reyes
NBER Working Paper No. 18327
August 2012
JEL No. I18,I29,J13,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

Childhood exposure to even low levels of lead can adversely affect neurodevelopment, behavior, and
cognitive performance. This paper investigates the link between lead exposure and student achievement
in Massachusetts. Panel data analysis is conducted at the school-cohort level for children born between
1991 and 2000 and attending 3rd and 4th grades between 2000 and 2009 at more than 1,000 public
elementary schools in the state. Massachusetts is well-suited for this analysis both because it has been
a leader in the reduction of childhood lead levels and also because it has mandated standardized achievement
tests in public elementary schools for almost two decades. The paper finds that elevated levels of
blood lead in early childhood adversely impact standardized test performance, even when controlling
for community and school characteristics. The results imply that public health policy that reduced
childhood lead levels in the 1990s was responsible for modest but statistically significant improvements
in test performance in the 2000s, lowering the share of children scoring unsatisfactory on standardized
tests by 1 to 2 percentage points. Public health policy targeting lead thus has clear potential to improve
academic performance, with particular promise for children in low income communities.


Jessica Wolpaw Reyes
Department of Economics
Amherst College
Amherst, MA 01002
and NBER
jwreyes@amherst.edu
I. Introduction
Children in modern society are exposed to numerous environmental toxins, and the effects of

these toxins on psychological and cognitive development are plausibly substantial. This paper

investigates one such pathway by which an environmental exposure may affect childhood

development and academic performance. Using data from Massachusetts in the 1990s and

2000s, I investigate the link between lead exposure in early childhood and student test scores in

the elementary school years. Massachusetts has been a leader in the prevention of childhood

lead poisoning and the reduction of childhood lead exposure. While great strides have been

made in reducing blood lead levels among children in the state, we do not have a good sense of

how these improvements have benefitted society. This paper quantifies the societal impact of

these reductions in childhood lead exposure.

       There is strong evidence that lead exposure adversely affects children’s development,

and consequently that reducing childrenʹs lead exposure has substantial benefits. However, it

has proven more difficult to characterize the significance of these impacts at the societal level:

Exactly what effects does lead have at the societal level? Put bluntly, we know lead is bad, but

what does lead policy accomplish, if anything? This paper aims to contribute to the literature

by assessing whether and to what extent reductions in lead exposure have been responsible for

improved academic performance of Massachusetts children. While this paper looks to the past

for answers, this question is not merely of historical interest: children in many areas of the

world, both in the United States and abroad, are still exposed to moderate and high levels of

lead.1 In the Spring of 2012, motivated by clear evidence that low and moderate exposures can

have substantial adverse effects and that a not insignificant number of children are so exposed,

the U.S. Centers for Disease Control lowered the “level of concern” by half (from 10 mcg/dl to 5

mcg/dl). This is not an issue of the past, but one that is of active policy interest for the present

and future.



1
  For discussion of the continuing impact of lead on U.S. children, see, Mielke, Gonzales, and Mielke
(2011) and Mielke, Laidlaw, and Gonzales (2010).
        Understanding the impact of aggressive lead policy has potentially wider implications.

If lead policy improves health and childhood outcomes in substantial ways, it becomes more

than public health policy and broadens to serve as effective social policy.2                      Issues of

environmental justice are also in play – by understanding how environmental factors may be

responsible for socioeconomic achievement gaps, we can gain insight into the ways public

policy that reduces inequities in exposure may be able to narrow those achievement gaps. And,

lastly, lead is not merely of domestic concern: for developing countries around the world, an

appreciation for the importance of lead policy in improving outcomes can make the case for

incorporating lead policy as a key element in efforts to improve educational outcomes.

        Thus, by looking in detail at the societal level effects of Massachusetts’ lead reduction

policies, this paper aims to characterize the broad significance of aggressive lead policy. There

are several reasons why Massachusetts is a good choice for this analysis. First, individual level

lead data is available for nearly all children born in Massachusetts since the early 1990s. The

Massachusetts Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program (CLPPP) of the Massachusetts

Department of Public Health manages an extensive monitoring program, screening 80‐90% of

children under the age of 6 in the state. Second, individual level test score data is available for

all children in public schools in Massachusetts since the year 2001.                  The Massachusetts

Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DOE) collects and disseminates data on

performance on state standardized tests of children in public schools, comprising 95% of school‐

age children in the state. Third, strong and aggressively‐implemented public health policy in

Massachusetts has produced substantial reductions in lead exposure, providing variation that

can be used to identify a relationship between lead exposure and academic performance.

Fourth, with data on the approximately 700,000 children born between 1991 and 2000 and

attending the approximately 1,200 public elementary schools in Massachusetts, this analysis has

the potential to identify effects that might be elusive when using a smaller sample size or

different research design.




2
 Anyon (2005) makes a similar argument that policymakers should think broadly and creatively about how policy
can influence educational outcomes.

                                                     2
       However, it is important to acknowledge one significant limitation when using

Massachusetts for this analysis: confidentiality restrictions prevent linking of the lead data to

the test score data at the individual level. Instead, it is possible to link small groups of children

(defined by school and birth year) and perform analysis relating various moments of the within‐

group lead and test score distributions. As will be discussed in detail below, using moments of

the distributions – rather than just means – takes some (but not all) of the sting out of this

limitation.

       Previewing the results, the paper provides support for the hypothesis that childhood

lead exposure adversely affects academic performance. A preliminary investigation reveals a

strong cross‐sectional relationship between early childhood lead levels and elementary‐school

test scores.    This is then confirmed with a differences‐in‐differences analysis: schools with

bigger lead declines displayed larger performance improvements.            The primary regression

analysis is a panel data analysis on groups of children identified by school and birth year. When

looking only at group means (a rough measure of group lead and performance), this analysis

yields substantial but not robust results. When investigating other moments of the within‐

group distributions, in particular the tails of the distributions, I find a significant and robust

relationship between the share of children with high lead and the share of children with low

test scores.    Further analysis indicates that this result has potentially significant policy

implications.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II motivates the project and reviews the relevant

literature on lead, educational outcomes, and public policy. Section III sets out a theoretical

framework by which lead may affect academic performance.                 Section IV discusses and

summarizes the data and Section V outlines the empirical approach that is employed to link

childhood lead levels to educational outcomes.         Section VI presents the empirical results,

Section VII assesses their implications, and Section VIII concludes.




                                                 3
II. Background

2.1 Lead

          While lead is an extremely useful metal, it has also proved to be a dangerous toxin.

Exposure to lead is particularly damaging for young children, who not only absorb lead more

efficiently than adults but are also at a sensitive stage of their neurobehavioral development.3

Historically, the primary environmental sources of lead exposure for the average child have

been lead‐based paint, leaded gasoline, and lead water pipes. This paper studies effects of

exposure to lead from any of these sources, although it is likely that most exposure in

Massachusetts in the 1990s arose from exposure to deteriorating lead‐based paint in older

housing and deposition of lead in soil from leaded gasoline. With no leaded gasoline or leaded

paint in general use since the mid 1980s, these were the primary dangers in the 1990s and

2000s.4

          Lead was added to paint to improve its performance, both as a pigment and as a way to

improve function, appearance, and durability. In the United States, lead levels in paint peaked

in the early 1900s and declined smoothly from 1920 onwards, with breaks in 1950 when lead‐

based paint was banned for interior use and in 1978 when it was banned for all residential uses.

With no lead paint currently in general residential use, the primary danger since the 1980s

stems from older housing with deteriorating paint: children absorb lead from paint directly

when they ingest paint chips or indirectly when they come in contact with lead dust from

deteriorating paint.

          Likewise, lead was added to gasoline to improve performance, specifically to reduce

engine knock and increase octane and thereby engine power.               In the United States, lead

emissions from gasoline sources rose markedly from the 1920s through the 1960s, then declined

drastically from 1974 to 1985 as a result of the Clean Air Act’s mandate to remove lead from




3 Hammond (1988) reports that children absorb up to 50% of lead they ingest, compared with 8% for
adults. Bellinger (2004) reviews the differences in lead absorption between children and adults.
4 See, e.g., Mielke, Gonzales, and Mielke (2011) and Mielke, Laidlaw, and Gonzales (2010).




                                                  4
gasoline.5 With no leaded gasoline currently in general use, the primary danger since the mid

1980s stems from deposition in the soil: children can absorb lead indirectly from contact with

lead deposits that accumulated in soil from vehicular traffic in the years prior to the removal of

lead from gasoline.6

         The importance of water mains and pipes as a source of lead exposure is becoming more

evident, but there are few easily‐observed changes and consequently diminished opportunities

for identification of these effects.7

         Whatever the source, exposure to lead results in the absorption of lead into the human

body. A blood lead level (BLL), the measured used in this paper, is a good measure of recent

and current exposure. It is the concentration of lead in blood circulating in the body, and is

usually measured in micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (μg/dL).8 Since taking a blood

sample is relatively simple, blood lead measures are the most commonly available.                      As

discussed below, this investigation uses blood lead measures collected between 1990 and 2008

by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for more than 800,000 children born in the

1990s.




5 In 1974, under the authorization of the Clean Air Act, the EPA mandated a timetable for the reduction of
lead in gasoline, requiring petroleum companies to meet certain targets of maximum grams of lead per
gallon of gasoline. Ultimately, the phase‐out was a success, and both gasoline lead emissions and blood
lead levels declined drastically between 1975 and 1990. Between 1975 and 1990, all measures of lead
exposure (on‐road vehicle emissions, other emissions, air lead, gasoline lead, and blood lead) declined
drastically and in concert with one another. Between 1975 and 1990, total lead emissions declined by 97%
and gasoline lead went from the dominant source of lead (80% of emissions) to a minor source (8% of
emissions). (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1998).) The reduction in lead emissions was closely
associated with corresponding large reductions in the blood lead levels of Americans in all demographic
groups. The entire distribution shifted downward, and the national mean dropped from 16 μg/dL in
1976 to 3 μg/dL in 1991. Analysis on data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES); U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1991); Brody, et al. (1994).
6 During the years when gasoline contained high levels of lead, gasoline represented “the most

ubiquitous source of lead found in the air, dust, and dirt in urban areas” (U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (1973).) During that time period, blood lead levels were highly correlated with recent gasoline
lead consumption (Schwartz and Pitcher (1989)).
7 For information on dangers from lead in water pipes and mains, see Troesken (2006).

8 Dentine and bone lead levels reflect the concentration of lead in teeth and bone, respectively, and are

regarded as good indicators of cumulative past exposure.

                                                    5
       Since blood lead levels are central to this analysis, it is important to understand their

meaning and significance.      Until recently, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

(CDC) identified 10 μg/dL as the “level of concern” for children, indicating that levels below 10

μg/dL should not arouse any concern for a child’s health. However, with mounting evidence

that lead is harmful even at lower levels, the CDC decided to lower this “level of concern” to 5

μg/dL.9 At the same time, we should clarify the distinction between lead exposure and lead

poisoning. Lead exposure is simply exposure to some level of lead, as indicated by a non‐zero

blood lead level. In contrast, lead poisoning encompasses a certain set of symptoms and occurs

at particularly high levels of exposure (usually blood lead levels in excess of 20 μg/dL),

although this term is sometimes also applied to blood lead above the “level of concern.” This

paper is primarily concerned with investigating the broad effects of common but more

moderate lead exposure, rather than the more focused effects of rare but severe lead poisoning.


2.2 Academic Performance

Characteristics such as the ability to learn well, to listen, to cooperate, and to be respectful of

others are established early in life and are foundational elements of human capital. On the

other hand, characteristics such as easy distractability, short temper, and reduced cognitive

capacity may interfere with the development of human capital. Thus, investigating factors that

influence development and cognitive performance early in life can help us understand how

those factors, and policy intended to impact them, might affect the accumulation of human

capital and with it later life social behavior and labor market performance.

       Academic performance in childhood is therefore a useful place to start when

understanding human capital accumulation. A growing body of literature makes the argument

that labor economics and the economics of education should cast a wider lens by looking back

at formative early life experiences and environments as determinants of later life outcomes.

Almond and Currie (2010), for example, cite abundant results showing that events in early



9For example, see Bellinger (2008), Gilbert and Weiss (2006), and CDC (2010). Data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999–2002 indicate that at that time only 1.7% of
children in the United States exhibited blood lead levels above the 10 μg/dL “level of concern.”

                                                  6
childhood can have long‐lasting impacts on adult outcomes, and argue that understanding such

influences is an important piece of understanding adult behavior and outcomes.10


2.3 Lead Exposure and Academic Performance

Children are exposed to numerous environmental toxicants that may adversely affect their

neurodevelopment, cognitive capacity, and behavior. Lead is one of these toxicants: it is a

hazardous neurotoxicant with a wide range of adverse effects on human health and behavior.

Extensive evidence indicates that childhood exposure to lead reduces intelligence quotient (IQ),

impairs behavior, impairs academic performance, and increases learning disabilities.11

        Moreover, these effects on children’s cognitive performance are long‐lasting; that is,

exposure to lead in early childhood can affect cognitive performance later in childhood and

beyond. Additionally, these effects on children’s cognitive performance occur at very low levels

of lead exposure.12 In contrast with the earlier belief that levels below 10 μg/dL were safe,

mounting evidence indicates that any level of lead can be harmful. Reviewing the literature,

Bellinger (2008) reports that lead levels below 10 μg/dL are associated with reduced IQ,

academic deficits, and neuropsychiatric disorders, and that marginal effects may even be

greater at the lowest lead levels. Bellinger concludes that “no level of lead exposure appears to

be ʹsafeʹ and even the current ʹlowʹ levels of exposure in children are associated with

neurodevelopmental deficits.”            Thus, while lead and academic performance are each of

independent interest, the link between the two is plausibly strong, practically relevant, and

certainly of interest.


2.4 Lead Policy in Massachusetts

Massachusetts has been at the forefront of the prevention of childhood lead poisoning and the

reduction of childhood lead exposure. Since 1971, Massachusetts law has required the removal

or covering of lead paint hazards in homes where any children under six reside and has

mandated a program for the prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment of lead


10 See also Case and Paxson (2010).
11 See, e.g., Lanphear et al (2005), Canfield et al (2003), Miranda et al (2009).
12
   Canfield et al (2003).

                                                         7
poisoning.13 Massachusetts’ lead laws are among the strongest and most comprehensive of the

states, and the Massachusetts Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program (CLPPP) is

viewed as a pioneering program that has been effective in reducing lead poisoning and

exposure. The CLPPP oversees the mandatory lead screening of all children under the age of 6,

the provision of appropriate medical and environmental services to affected individuals and

their families, and the development and implementation of policies aimed at eliminating

sources of lead exposure. To those ends, CLPPP also engages in a wide slate of research,

educational, and clinical activities. These efforts in Massachusetts have been quite successful in

substantially reducing lead levels and lead poisoning rates. As of 2010, only 0.078% of screened

Massachusetts children had lead levels above 20 μg/dL.


2.5 Education Policy in Massachusetts

The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education oversees the public

education system for Massachusetts.          In any given year, approximately 1,200 elementary

schools serve approximately 400,000 students in Kindergarten through Grade 6. These schools

are distributed across the 351 municipalities of Massachusetts, and organized into

approximately 300 local or regional school districts.

        In 1993, the Massachusetts Education Reform Act (MERA) instituted fundamental

changes to public education in Massachusetts. One element of MERA was a new framework

allocating state aid as the difference between a foundation budget (a basic level required to fund

an adequate education) and a community’s ability to contribute its own funds. Downes, Zabel,

and Ansel (2009) find that between 1993 and 2000 MERA significantly reduced funding gaps,

thereby stemming increases in achievement gaps that would have occurred otherwise.14

However, they caution that MERA was not entirely successful reducing within‐state inequality:

large within‐state disparities remain, associated with the increasing concentration of low‐




13 MA CLPPP Act of 1971 (MGLc.111, ss 189A‐199B). Appendix A explains the relevant lead laws in
Massachusetts in greater detail.
14
   This result for Massachusetts aligns with the more general conclusion of Card and Payne (2002) that
equalization of education spending in various states reduced gaps in test scores.

                                                    8
income and limited English proficiency students in certain localities and with an unchanged

gap in spending between the top spending quartile and the other three spending quartiles.15

        A second major component of MERA was the institution of the Massachusetts

Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) tests. MCAS tests are administered each April for

specific subjects in particular grades, and are required of all students educated in the public

schools in Massachusetts. The goals of the MCAS are to monitor student, school, and district

performance, and thereby to inform curricular and instructional policy. Appendix B explains

the administration and scoring of the MCAS tests in greater detail.

        Because MCAS testing was already in place, the federal No Child Left Behind Act of

2001 (NCLB) did not initiate a new testing framework, but rather expanded the existing

framework of statewide testing in Massachusetts.                NCLB requires states to administer

assessments in basic skills and to use the results of those assessments to inform education

reform; it also links federal funding to performance improvements. This framework is similar

to what was already in place from MERA, though arguably more extensive and more

burdensome in its link between scores and funding.


2.6 Lead and Academic Performance in Massachusetts

The established relationship between childhood lead exposure and adverse neurobehavioral

effects renders it likely that the moderate to low levels of lead (below 15 μg/dL) that were

common in Massachusetts children born in the 1990s could plausibly have impaired cognitive

performance of those children.        In addition, public policy in Massachusetts greatly reduced

lead levels of children in that time period. Consequently, it is reasonable to expect lead and

lead policy to have had measurable effects on academic performance in Massachusetts as those

children grew up. The plan for this analysis is to study the effects of early childhood lead on

academic achievement of cohorts of children born in Massachusetts during the 1990s.




15
  For this analysis, it is important to note that nearly all of the impact of MERA on relative spending
occurred in the 1990s, and so was complete by the 2000s (when this paper’s analysis begins.)

                                                     9
III. Theory
As just stated, the goal of this paper is to study a putative causal link between childhood lead

exposure and impaired academic performance.                     While the details of the underlying

physiological mechanism by which lead impairs cognitive function are beyond the scope of this

paper, the broad outlines of that mechanism are reasonably simple and can be expressed within

the framework of the standard economic model of behavior.

          First, we write the performance outcome P as a function of characteristics, environment,

and inputs:

          P = p(A,B,X,F,C,S) .                                                             (1)

The variables A and B represent cognitive and behavioral ability, respectively. The variables X,

F, C, and S respectively represent vectors of individual, family, community, and school

characteristics. It is assumed that these characteristics will have direct, indirect, and interactive

effects on P. For example, a family characteristic such as poverty would enter directly as a

family characteristic but might also influence community characteristics, school characteristics,

or even ability itself. An environmental factor might play a similarly complex role in affecting

performance.

          Lead exposure is modeled as a function of family and community characteristics, and is

also influenced by government policy G and any protective behavior H undertaken by the

family:

          L = l(F,C,G,H) .                                                                 (2)

Lead exposure would, in turn, affect both types of ability directly:

          A = a(L,X,F,C,S)         and     B = b(L,X,F,C,S).                               (3)

The inclusion of the various characteristics indicates that those characteristics can modify both

the lead level resulting from a given exposure and the effect of that lead level on ability.

Ultimately, performance is a complicated function of characteristics, behaviors, and policies:

          P       = p(A,B,X,F,C,S)                                                         (4)

                  = p ( a(L,X,F,C,S) , b(L,X,F,C,S) , X , F , C , S )

                  = p ( a(l(F,C,G,H),X,F,C,S), b(l(F,C,G,H),X,F,C,S) , X , F , C , S ) .



                                                       10
Obviously the precise structure of these relationships is far too complex to be determined via a

simplified reduced‐form model of this type. However, we can state several simple qualitative

hypotheses that are likely to be true:

       ∂P/∂A > 0       Higher ability causes higher performance

       ∂A/∂L < 0       Higher lead level causes lower ability

       ∂P/∂L < 0       Higher lead level causes lower performance
                       (follows via the chain rule from ∂A/∂L < 0 and ∂P/∂A < 0).

       ∂P/∂G > 0       Government policy that reduces lead improves performance
                       (follows via the chain rule from ∂L/∂G < 0 and ∂P/∂L < 0).

The last two are the main hypotheses that will be tested by this paper. I ask whether higher

lead impairs academic performance and whether government policy that reduces lead thereby

improves academic performance.

       We can also remark upon other characteristics of the performance function which are

theoretically more ambiguous:

       ∂2P / ∂L2 > 0            Marginal effect of lead declines with lead

       |∂P/∂L|DIS > |∂P/∂L| ADV Marginal effect of lead is larger for disadvantaged
                                children (due to interaction with other characteristics).

These characteristics would be suggested by the existing literature: a declining marginal effect

of lead on IQ was established by Canfield et al (2003), the literature on self‐protective behavior

would indicate that lower income and otherwise disadvantaged families have fewer ways to

reduce lead’s effects and more factors that may exacerbate them.

       The foregoing theory is written to describe the effects of an individual child’s lead on

that individual child’s performance outcome. It is also possible that there may be spillover

effects of lead through peer effects. One child’s inattention or disruptive behavior can interfere

with his classmates’ learning or reduce his teacher’s effectiveness. If lead reduces attentiveness

or increases disruptive behavior, it could adversely affect the performance of other children in

the same classroom. Such a pathway would serve to amplify any effects of lead.




                                                11
IV. Data

4.1 Data Structure

The ideal data for this analysis would be comprised of individual‐level observations that

include lead level in early childhood, test scores in elementary school, and other individual,

family, community, and school characteristics.          However, at the present time data

confidentiality restrictions have made it infeasible to link data on lead and test scores for each

individual child.    Instead, the data for this analysis is a panel comprised of groups of

Massachusetts school children. This structure for the data creates a number of challenges that

will be discussed below in Section 5.2.

       The dataset will be constructed from data for all children born between 1991 and 2000 in

Massachusetts and attending 3rd and 4th grades between 2000 and 2009 at public elementary

schools in Massachusetts, and taking MCAS tests between April 2001 and April 2009. Each

group of children is identified by the year in which the children were born and the elementary

school the children attend. For example, one group might be children who were born in 1994

and attend Leverett Elementary: this group would attend 3rd grade at Leverett Elementary in

the school year 2002‐2003 and take the 3rd grade MCAS test towards the end of the school year

in April 2003. For each group of children, elementary school academic achievement measures

are constructed from MCAS data and early childhood lead levels are constructed from CLPPP

data. The set of cohorts used in the analysis is described in Appendix Table 1.


4.2 Lead Data

Data on childhood lead levels come from the screening and monitoring program operated by

the Massachusetts Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program (CLPPP) of the

Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH). As discussed above, Massachusetts law

mandates lead screening of all children under the age of 6. The blood lead levels measured by

these mandatory screenings are entered into a database used by CLPPP to monitor lead levels

and lead poisoning, and it is this database that is employed.




                                               12
        A single child may be screened for lead multiple times in his or her young life – either in

separate years or possibly multiple times in the same year. All of these measures are entered

into the database, along with the geographic location of the child’s residence, some limited

details about the method of each lead screening (venous or capillary), and very limited and

sparsely reported demographics.              The dataset allows the linking over time of lead

measurements for an individual child. Overall, of children attending public elementary school

in Massachusetts, approximately 80‐90% have at least one early childhood lead measure in the

CLPPP database.16 To represent a child’s early childhood lead level, I use the second highest

lead measured for that child between the ages of 0 and 6. Results are generally robust to

alternate methods of measuring each child’s lead level.17

        Table 1 summarizes the data for the entire sample and for subsamples broken out by

cohort (early vs. late)18 and income (bottom quartile or “low” vs. top quartile or “high”).19 We




16 Note that this does not mean that 90% of children who later attend public school are screened for lead
in every year, but rather that 90% of those children are screened at least once between the ages of 0 and 6.
CLPPP data indicates that approximately 50% of children age 0 to 6 are screened in any given year.
Compared to the full population of children in Massachusetts, between 80% and 90% are screened at
some point between the ages of 0 and 6. For more detail, consult “Screening and Incidence Statistics by
Community” produced by the CLPPP for fiscal years 1998 to 2010.
17 There are several possible ways to calculate a representative lead measure for a child with more than

one lead measurement. The CLPPP data provided to the author included one measure for each child in
each year: the most reliable (based on screening method) and highest measure. Note that the number of
measures for a child is endogenous: once a high lead measurement is found for a particular child, CLPPP
offers the family treatment and services to lower the lead level and endeavors to re‐test the child until the
lead level drops to a safe level. Hence, averaging all lead measures for a particular child would bias the
calculated lead level downward, particularly for children with high lead. As a way of avoiding both
downward bias from averaging and upward bias from erroneously high measures, the analysis in this
paper has been conducted using the second highest reliable measure available (as long as that is not also
the lowest measure available; for children with two or fewer measures, the highest measure is used). It is
important to note that the analysis and conclusions are robust to using the highest reliable measure
available.
18 Early cohorts are the 1991 and 1992 birth‐year cohorts; late cohorts are the 1999 and 2000 birth‐year

cohorts. For 3rd grade test scores, the earliest cohort in the data is the 1992 cohort and the latest is the
2000 cohort. For 4th grade test scores, the earliest cohort in the data is the 1991 cohort and the latest is the
1999 cohort.
19 Income categories are based on the town’s (or city’s) per‐capita income in the year 2000. ʺLow Incomeʺ

includes towns with income in the bottom quartile (<~$20,000), ʺMiddle Incomeʺ includes towns in the
middle two quartiles (~$20,000‐30,000), and ʺHigh Incomeʺ includes towns in the top quartile (>~$30,000).

                                                      13
see that the average lead level in the sample was 4.2 μg/dL, and that lead levels dropped

substantially over the 1990s, falling from 5.2 to 3.1 μg/dL. The table also shows that lead levels

were significantly higher in low income towns relative to high income towns (5.4 vs. 4.1), but

that this income‐related gap closed somewhat over time (to 3.2 vs 2.2). Turning our attention to

the share of children with elevated blood lead, we see a similar pattern but a more significant

income gap and closing thereof. In the early cohorts, the average share with blood lead above

10 μg/dL was 11%; for the late cohorts that drops to 3%. This reduction is particularly intense in

low income towns where the share drops from 12% to 3%, compared with high income towns

which saw a decline from 5% to 1%.

        To get a better sense of these temporal movements, Figure 1a displays the rate of

elevated BLL (above 10 μg/dL) for cohorts born in the years 1990 to 2008. The figure shows that

the share of children with lead levels above 10 μg/dL declined significantly in the 1990s and

more modestly in the subsequent decade.            For children born in 1991, 7% had lead levels

exceeding 10 μg/dL; that share drops to 1% for the 2000 birth cohort and 0.3% for the 2008 birth

cohort. Figure 1b shows similarly striking declines in the share of children with lead levels

above 5 μg/dL, from more than one third of the 1991 birth cohort to approximately one‐

twentieth of the 2008 birth cohort. What is also evident is that lower income communities

started the 1990s with much higher rates of elevated blood lead, but that this gap closed

substantially over time. In other words, lead went down across the board, but even moreso for

low income children.


4.3 Test Score Data

Data on academic achievement come from the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment

System (MCAS) tests administered by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and

Secondary Education (DOE). As discussed above, Massachusetts and Federal laws mandate

regular standardized testing of all children in public schools in the Commonwealth. The MCAS

scores from these tests are entered into a database used by DOE to monitor student, school, and



These cutoffs are very close to the actual quartile cutoffs, and hence are employed as convenient markers
for cutting the sample into subsamples.

                                                   14
district performance.    While limited demographics are provided with publicly‐available

statewide MCAS score summaries, they are not provided with the individual‐level MCAS score

data that is broken out by school and used in this paper.

       The test scores used in this analysis are the third and fourth grade MCAS scores for

English Language Arts and Mathematics.20 These scores are available for the test years 2001 to

2009, except the 3rd grade Math scores which are not available for 2001 to 2005. Numeric scores

are reported as the number of items answered correctly, and these are rescaled to the

percentage correct (simply by dividing by the total number of items on the test). Numeric

scores are also translated into qualitative categories of “Advanced”/“Above Proficient,”

“Proficient,” “Needs Improvement,” and “Warning”/“Failing.”21 Scoring “Proficient” or above

is deemed “satisfactory” by the DOE; scoring “Needs Improvement” or below is deemed

“unsatisfactory.” Both the quantitative (percent correct) and qualitative (categorical) measures

will be used in this paper.

       Table 1 summarizes the 3rd and 4th grade MCAS scores for the sample period. The

average percentage correct hovers around two‐thirds to three‐quarters: 76% for 3rd grade

English, 75% for 3rd grade Math, 70% for 4th grade English, and 66% for 4th grade Math. The

average share scoring satisfactory is relatively low, ranging from 37% to 64% depending on the

grade and subject. The table also shows large and persistent income gaps in performance: the

satisfactory rate is approximately 30 percentage points lower in low income towns, and this gap

persists to the end of the sample period. For example, while 71% of 4th graders in the early

cohorts in high income towns display satisfactory performance in English, only 36% of 4th

graders in low income towns do so; the gap is almost identical for the late cohorts. Considering

trends over the sample period, we see that 3rd grade English scores declined, 4th grade English

scores held steady, and 4th grade Math scores improved. These changes had little effect on

income gaps, however, with only the 4th grade Math gap closing slightly, by 3 percentage points

in the percent correct and 4 percentage points in the share scoring satisfactory. However,


20 For convenience, this paper will refer to English Language Arts scores as “English” scores and
Mathematics scores as “Math” scores.
21 Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, “Massachusetts Comprehensive

Assessment System Overview,” available at http://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/overview.html.

                                                15
because the MCAS tests and their scoring may be modified from time to time, we must be

cautious about concluding too much from time trends.


4.4 Community and School Data

Data on the characteristics of communities and schools are drawn from various sources.

Massachusetts contains 351 municipalities (towns or cities), and these are assumed to represent

the “community” in which the school is located and the child lives.                      Characteristics of

municipalities include population density, poverty rate, per‐capita income and its square, share

of adults with less than a high school education, and share of adults with a bachelor’s degree or

beyond. Data on population, population density, and educational attainment are from the

Decennial U.S. Census for the year 2000 and subsequent estimates created by the U.S. Bureau of

the Census for the years 2001‐2009. Data on income are from the Massachusetts Department of

Revenue.22

           Characteristics of schools and school districts include school spending per pupil, the

share of students who are low income, and the shares of students that are Black or Hispanic.

These data are from the Massachusetts DOE, which uses school and district reporting, together

with analysis of Census data, to create these measures by school and/or school district.

           Table 1 summarizes these variables. We see that these characteristics of towns and

schools showed much less movement over time than either lead or test scores. The most

notable exceptions are the relative increases in the shares of low‐income and Hispanic students

in schools located in low‐income municipalities, as discussed in Downes, Zabel, and Ansel

(2009).


V. Empirical Approach

5.1 Empirical Strategy

The central empirical strategy of this paper is to use regression analysis to link blood lead levels

in early childhood to educational outcomes in the elementary school years. As described above,


22
     All dollar values are adjusted for inflation by the CPI‐U into year‐2000 dollars.

                                                        16
this analysis is performed on cohorts of Massachusetts schoolchildren, where each observation

is a group of children identified by the elementary school the children attend and by the year in

which the children were born. Panel data analysis is conducted for cohorts of children born

between 1991 and 2000 and attending 3rd and 4th grades between 2000 and 2009 at the more than

1,000 public elementary schools in the Massachusetts. The idea is to assess the impact of

Massachusetts’ lead policy, and the effect of lead on academic performance, by investigating the

relationship between lead and achievement for the cohorts most affected by the policy.

       The primary regression equation is

       MCAS Score g(s,b) y = 0 + 1 Lead Level g(s,b) + Cc(s) y 1 + Ss y 2 +  y +  g(c,b) y   (5)

where the subscripts represent group g, school s, community c, birth year b, and year of MCAS

test y. Note that the group g is defined by the school s and the birth year b, and hence is

denoted g(s,b). Similarly, the community c is the community in which the school is located and

is denoted c(s).      The variable MCAS Score represents a measure of the group’s MCAS

performance, either the group’s average percentage correct or the share of the group achieving

a certain qualitative performance standard (such as “satisfactory”). The variable Lead Level

represents a measure of the group’s childhood lead levels, either the average of the individual

lead levels or the share of the group with lead levels in a certain range (such as above 10 μg/dL).

The coefficient 1 indicates the effect of lead on achievement, and hence is the main coefficient

of interest. The vector C is a set of community characteristics: population density, poverty rate,

per‐capita income and its square, share of adults in the town with less than a high school

education, and share of adults in the town with a bachelor’s degree or beyond. The vector S is a

set of school‐ or district‐level characteristics: school spending per pupil in the district, share of

students at the school who are low income, and the shares of students that are Black or

Hispanic. Fixed effects for year are included as  y to account for statewide time trends. When

both grade‐levels are pooled into a single regression, a dummy variable for fourth grade is also

included in order to allow for different scoring and/or performance in the two grades. The

regression is run as ordinary least squares, with weights representing group size (to reflect the

number of individual children reflected in a group’s observation) and Huber‐White robust

standard errors clustered on school. Because of the inclusion of controls and fixed effects,

                                                         17
identification derives primarily from the variation in lead and test scores within each school

over time.


5.2 Challenges of Group‐Level Analysis

Although, by necessity, this paper uses groups of children as the level of observation, it is

instructive to consider what an analysis would look like if it were performed using individual

children as the level of observation as would usually be the case.                     In an individual‐level

analysis, the regression equation would be

       MCAS score i y = 0 + 1 Lead Level i + X i0 + Cc(i) y 1 + Ss(i) y 2 +  y +  iy .   (6)

The subscripts represent individual i, school s, community c, and year of MCAS test y. The

variable MCAS Score is a measure of the individual’s MCAS performance, either the percentage

correct or an indicator of whether the individual achieved a certain qualitative performance

standard (in which case a probit would be employed). The variable Lead Level is a measure of

the individual’s childhood lead level. The vectors C, S, and X include community, school, and

individual characteristics. In equation 6, as in equation 5, the coefficient 1 indicates the effect

of lead on performance. Given the evidence indicating nonlinear effects of lead, it would be

advisable to test other functional forms such as log, spline, or quadratic; with individual‐level

data (with individual‐linked lead and performance), such tests would be possible.                        The

estimated elasticity of performance with respect to lead could be calculated in the standard

manner.

       The question then becomes how to move between individual‐level and group‐level

analyses. A number of papers address this question of inferring individual‐level relationships

when only group‐level data is available. Firebaugh (1978) shows that the group‐level coefficient

will be unbiased relative to the individual‐level coefficient only when the group average

independent variable does not directly affect the group average dependent variable. However,

with the possibility of peer effects by which group lead may affect individual test scores, the

latter is likely not true in the present case. More recently, a number of authors have presented a

variety of creative approaches to these issues, highlighting the complexity of the econometrics,




                                                       18
the necessity for care in estimation, and the possibilities for bias when moving between group

and individual analyses.23

           For this particular situation, comparing the estimation procedure, coefficients, and

elasticities for the individual‐level analysis to those of the group‐level analysis can shed some

light on the challenges of this group‐level analysis. First, there is less variation with which to

identify the coefficient of interest. Group means by definition are less variable than individual

values, and high or low values will be “smoothed out” by the averaging.                    With less useful

variation, there will be a lower signal‐to‐noise ratio and possibly attenuation bias.24 Second, to

the extent that the more important effects are among those with high lead and low scores, this

averaging will bias elasticity estimates downward. This occurs because the ratio of Lead to

MCAS (the factor by which the coefficient is multiplied to get an elasticity) is smaller for the

group ( Lead       g   / MCAS   g   ) than for the individual (Lead i / MCAS i ).25 Third, to the extent that

the effects of lead vary with lead level, averaging will make it difficult to identify those changes

in marginal effects. Group means will rarely show a mean lead of 15 μg/dL or a mean MCAS

score of 30% correct, but this may be where the relationship is strongest. With “observations”

pulled towards the middle of the distributions, the tails are unreachable by analysis.

           There are, however, ways to address these issues. The most obvious solution to the first

and third issues, short of using individual‐level data, is to use other moments of the lead and

test score distributions: medians, percentiles, or shares of the group above or below certain

thresholds for lead and test scores. This would make better use of the within‐group variation

and distributions of both lead and test scores, positioning the analysis more effectively between

the infeasible but detailed individual level analysis and the feasible but overly simplified group

23
  For example, see Berhane et al (2004).
24One way to understand this is to consider a mean‐preserving spread of the Lead and MCAS
distributions. Such a transformation would provide no new useful information in a regression of group
means on group means. However, if indeed Lead and MCAS exhibit a significant covariance, such a
transformation could provide substantial new useful information in a regression of individual values on
individual values. This follows as a direct consequence of the fact that the regression coefficient is the
ratio of the sample covariance of Lead and MCAS to the sample variance of Lead. The covariances and
variances of group means are necessarily smaller, reducing the valuable signal for identifying a
regression coefficient.
25
     Elasticities are defined as Y wrt X = %Y/%X = (Y/X)×(X/Y) =  1 × (X/Y).

                                                         19
mean analysis. Thus, if a higher share of children in a group has lead above the “level of

concern” of 10 μg/dL, perhaps a higher share of children in that group will have test scores that

are below the “satisfactory” level defined by the DOE. This still leaves a lower signal‐to‐noise

ratio and possible attenuation bias if most of the action is happening in only a small portion of

the sample population near the tails, but it gets closer to matching the empirical reality.

        A solution to the second issue is to be careful when interpreting coefficients and

calculating elasticities, so that we do not mistakenly elide the distinctions between group‐ and

individual‐level analyses.     The implied effect of an individual’s lead on that individual’s

performance is not necessarily equal to the estimated effect of a group’s average lead on that

group’s average performance. We are well aware that elasticity of y with respect to x varies

along a straight line – at any point the elasticity is calculated as the slope of the line times the

ratio of x to y. For an individual with above‐average lead and below‐average performance, the

ratio of lead to performance is larger than the ratio of group average lead to group average

performance; it follows that the coefficient needs to be scaled up by a larger factor in order to

get the appropriate elasticity. For example, for a child with lead of 15 μg/dL and MCAS score of

40% correct in a group whose mean lead is 6 μg/dL and mean MCAS score is 70%, the ratio for

the individual is 4‐5 times higher than the ratio of group averages. If indeed the analyses of

shares described in the previous paragraph suggest that the action is at these high‐lead/low‐

performance locations, then estimated elasticities should be calculated with the appropriate

adjustments. Alternately, we can use methods other than elasticity calculations to assess the

practical significance of the effects.

        These strategies may be at least partially effective in addressing the shortcomings of the

group‐level analysis, but we should not rush to the conclusion that they solve all of the

problems. It remains the case that this analysis will depend on movements in distributions over

time. After controlling for community and school characteristics, there will most certainly be

much less movement in distributions of lead and scores than there would be in individual

values. The analysis will endeavor to make the best possible use of these movements, but we

should be cognizant of the fact that estimated coefficients may be substantially attenuated.



                                                20
5.3 Other Empirical Issues

Several other empirical issues merit attention. Because the analysis uses groups without being

able to link the individuals, issues arise in the process of assigning individuals to groups. First,

the town of residence for a child in the lead data is set equal to the most recent town of

residence in the lead data. Second, the school for that child is determined from DOE data on

what schools draw students from what towns, and what towns send students to what schools.26

If a child could attend several different schools, his or her lead data is included in all possible

schools.27 Third, the birth date for a child is compared with the kindergarten entry dates for the

appropriate school districts to determine the appropriate school cohort for the child. Most

schools allow children to enter Kindergarten if they are 5 by September 1st, but some set this

date later in the fall.

        The above procedures necessarily result in some misallocation. Children who switch

towns in the years between the time of their last lead test and third grade will be misallocated.

Children who attend private schools or charter schools are in the lead data but not in the MCAS

data, but we can’t tell who those children are so they cannot be excluded from the lead data.

Children who do not continue to attend school with their birth cohort, either by starting late or

skipping a grade, will be misallocated. Children who leave the state altogether will be in the

lead data but not in the MCAS data, and children who move to the state after age 6 may be in

the MCAS data but not in the lead data. It is difficult to assess or correct for these assignment

issues, but the available evidence suggests that each of these reasons for misallocation would

pertain to less than 5% of children in the sample.        Overall, since the misalloaction is not

systematic in a direction that would bias our results upward, the most likely effect would be

some attenuation of estimated effects.

        Lastly, the use of group data raises the question of whether and how to weight the

observations in a regression. The “group size” is an obvious choice, so I use the average of the


26
   The boundaries of towns and municipalities are generally coincident with the boundaries of school
districts, and the DOE maintains detailed records on adjustments to school assignments. Consequently,
this matching is relatively straightforward at the elementary‐school level.
27
   Charter schools are excluded from the MCAS data because they draw students from wide and varying
geographic areas.

                                                 21
MCAS group size and the lead group size. In this way, the weights represent the number of

children whose data went into the creation of the group distribution. I exclude groups if fewer

than 10 children are present in either the MCAS group or the lead group, and cap the weight at

a maximum of 100 children to avoid giving undue weight to exceptionally large schools, towns,

or cities.28


VI. Results


Before embarking on the regression analysis just described, it is worthwhile to take a

preliminary look at the covariation between MCAS test scores and childhood lead levels in the

cross‐section, and also the co‐movement of MCAS tests scores and childhood lead levels (using

a differences‐in‐differences analysis). Section 6.1 does the former, and Section 6.2 does the

latter. In Sections 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5 we turn to the full group‐level regression analysis.


6.1 Cross‐Sectional Variation

We first consider covariation between MCAS test scores and childhood lead levels. Figure 2

graphs the group average fourth grade MCAS score (percent correct) against the group average

childhood lead level (μg/dL) for all of the groups in the sample at the beginning (born in 1992,

in 4th grade in 2001‐2002) and end (born in 1999, in 4th grade in 2008‐2009) of the sample period.

From this first look, it is clear that higher lead levels are associated with lower test scores. It is

also apparent that this effect is stronger for Math than for English, and that it is stronger in the

early cohort than in the later cohort. Lastly, we see that, as lead levels declined, test scores also

rose, and that the entire distribution moved towards markedly lower lead and somewhat higher

scores.    The nature of this relationship, and whether this is in fact causal, remains to be

determined.




28If weights were not capped, the empirical results would be dominated by high‐population areas like
Worcester, Springfield, or Boston. Analysis of group sizes leads to the selection of 100 as a reasonable cap
that allows appropriately balanced representation of cities and towns in Massachusetts.

                                                    22
6.2 Differences in Differences

One way to understand the variation in lead and test scores across communities and over time

is to use a differences‐in‐differences analysis. Such an analysis compares how MCAS outcomes

changed differentially over time in schools that experienced larger changes in lead levels as

compared with schools that experienced smaller changes in lead levels. If lead does reduce

academic performance, then we would expect the schools that experienced larger lead changes

in early childhood in the 1990s to show relatively larger increases (or smaller declines) in

academic performance in elementary schools in the subsequent decade.

        To do this comparison, I include only schools for which MCAS data are available at both

the start (2002) and end (2009) of the sample (this leaves 898 schools). I calculate the “lead

change” for each school as the change, from the early cohort (born in 1992) to the late cohort

(born in 1999), in the share of children with lead above 10 μg/dL. The mean “lead change” in

this time period is a decline of 0.044, or 4.4 percentage points fewer children with lead above 10

μg/dL. Schools are classified as “high lead change” (treatment) or “low lead change” (control)

based on the size of their lead decline. This classification is done in two ways. The first

classification, shown in DD1, classifies schools as “high lead change” if their decline was larger

than the mean decline and “low lead change” if their decline was smaller than the mean decline.

The second classification, shown in DD2, classifies schools as “high lead change” if their decline

was in the top quartile of declines (down more than 0.086) and “low lead change” if their

decline was in the bottom quartile of declines (down less than 0.027).29

        Table 2 shows the differences‐in‐differences for various combinations of grade, subject,

and outcome measure (the individual difference‐in‐difference tables are not shown). We see

that schools experiencing relatively larger lead declines exhibited relatively larger increases in

mean percent correct score on the MCAS.               These schools also exhibited relatively larger

decreases in the share scoring unsatisfactory on the MCAS.                The estimated differences‐in‐

differences are right‐signed in all cases and significant in most cases.                Furthermore, the


29The average changes in share of children with blood lead above 10 μg/dL in the treatment and control
groups were: ‐0.089 for treatment group 1, ‐0.025 for control group 1; ‐0.126 for treatment group 2, ‐0.013
for control group 2.

                                                    23
differences‐in‐differences are larger and more significant when comparing the top quartile to

the bottom quartile (DD2) than when comparing the top half to the bottom half (DD1), as one

would expect. For example, the share of children scoring unsatisfactory on the 4th grade Math

MCAS declined by 4.7 percentage points more in schools with above‐average lead declines

(relative to schools with below‐average lead declines), and 6.5 percentage points more in

schools with top‐quartile lead declines (relative to schools with bottom‐quartile lead declines.)

Overall, this differences‐in‐differences analysis provides some support for the hypothesis that

early childhood lead adversely affects academic performance on standardized tests. For the

most part, schools whose student population experienced larger decreases in lead exposure in

the 1990s appear to have experienced larger increases in MCAS scores in the 2000s.


6.3 Regression of Average Test Scores on Average Lead

I now turn to panel regression analysis on various moments of the within group‐distributions.

Our earlier discussion of group‐level analysis makes the point that we very well may not find

substantial relationships between group means (average lead and average test scores); we

understand that much of the action may take place at the tails (high lead and low test scores).

However, it still seems reasonable to begin the regression analysis by investigating the

relationship between a group’s average lead and that group’s average test scores. Tables 3 and

4 do this. Both tables show highly significant coefficients on lead in all specifications except the

fully controlled specification. In Table 3, we see that, in the baseline unweighted regression

with no controls, the mean lead for the group has a statistically significant effect of ‐0.0258 on

the mean test score for the group. This means that an increase of 1.0 μg/dL in average blood

lead for a group is associated with a decline of 2.6 percentage points in the average percentage

answered correctly by the group on the English MCAS.            This effect is unchanged by the

inclusion of weights for group size, and is doubled when year fixed effects are included. The

coefficient is diminished by approximately a factor of 5 with the inclusion of either town or

school characteristics, and drops drastically to an insignificant ‐0.0012 with the inclusion of both

sets of characteristics.




                                                24
       The coefficients for the control variables are generally of the expected sign, with

population density, poverty, and share low income students decreasing test scores, and town

income per capita, educational attainment, and school expenditures increasing test scores.

Some of these signs are reversed in the full specification, but further investigation indicates that

this is due to multicollinearity between particular variables (i.e. town income and school

expenditures, and town poverty rate and school share low income students).

       Tables 4 shows the corresponding results for a group’s average lead and that group’s

average Math test scores. The Math results are qualitatively similar to the English results,

although the uncontrolled specification yields a coefficient on lead more than twice as large. In

this case, an increase of 1.0 μg/dL in average blood lead is associated with a decline of 6.1

percentage points in average percentage correct on the Math MCAS. After including year fixed

effects and all of the control variables, the coefficient is reduced to a statistically insignificant ‐

0.0013, almost identical to that for the English scores.


6.4 Relationships between Other Moments of the Distributions

The literature would suggest that lead’s effects are non‐linear and also likely to be modified by

other factors. As discussed above, because data confidentiality restrictions require that the

present analysis be conducted at the group level, this analysis cannot precisely account for those

factors at the individual level. However, beyond just using group means, the within‐group

detail makes it possible to ascertain whether there are significant relationships between other

moments of the two distributions. To do this, Table 5 investigates the relationship between the

share of a group with elevated blood lead levels and the share of that group scoring

unsatisfactory on the MCAS. The table shows results from three different sets of regressions

run for English and Math, using different lead variables: set A uses share with lead above 10

μg/dL, set B uses share with lead above 20 μg/dL, and set C uses both the share with lead

between 10 and 20 μg/dL and share with lead above 20 μg/dL simultaneously. Only the

coefficients on the lead variables are shown in the table.

       In nearly all specifications, the share of a group with elevated blood lead has a

statistically significant positive effect on the share of that group scoring unsatisfactory on the


                                                  25
MCAS in both subjects. The specifications that do not control for town or school characteristics

yield large effects: a 1 percentage point increase in the share with lead above 10 μg/dL is

associated with a 2 to 4 percentage point increase in the share scoring unsatisfactory on the

MCAS, while a 1 percentage point increase in the share with lead above 20 μg/dL is associated

with 10 to 18 percentage point increase in the share scoring unsatisfactory. These effects decline

substantially with the inclusion of control variables, but remain significant and do not

disappear. In the fully controlled specification, a 1 percentage point increase in the share with

lead above 10 μg/dL is associated with an increase of 0.2 percentage points in the share of that

group scoring unsatisfactory. For higher lead levels, the effects are larger: a 1 percentage point

increase in the share with lead above 20 μg/dL is associated with a 1 percentage point increase

in the share of that group scoring unsatisfactory. Put another way: in a group of 100 children,

the movement of 1 child’s lead level past the 20 μg/dL mark causes 1 child’s performance level

to fall below the satisfactory mark. Of course, in the group analysis we cannot say whether this

is the same child.     However, assuming no spillover effects, this one‐to‐one result seems

reasonable: one child experiences a higher lead level, and one child does poorly on the MCAS

test. This also suggests that the town and school characteristics may effectively address the

upward bias caused by cross‐sectional variation in lead and scores, yielding a believable

coefficient in the final fully‐controlled specification.

        The final rows of Table 5 show results from a variant of a spline, in which both the share

of the group with lead between 10 and 20 μg/dL and the share of the group with lead above 20

μg/dL are used in the same regression as measures of the group’s lead. This analysis confirms

that any lead above 10 μg/dL reduces test scores and that lead above 20 μg/dL is more

detrimental to scores. Note that it does not imply that the marginal effect of lead is increasing

with lead (in fact it appears to be declining), but rather that the total effect of lead is increasing

with lead. If the lead level for 10 children in a group of 100 goes above 10 μg/dL, approximately

2 children’s scores will slip below satisfactory; if the lead level for those 10 children goes above

20 μg/dL, 4 more children’s scores will fall below that mark.




                                                  26
6.5 The Role of Income

As already discussed, low‐income children consistently exhibit higher childhood lead levels; in

the current data the correlation between town per‐capita income and the share of children with

elevated blood lead is ‐0.31. While the inclusion of town per‐capita income, its square, and

other control variables addresses this concern to some extent, it might be desirable to

investigate the role of income further. Table 6 facilitates such an assessment, showing results

from regressions of the share scoring unsatisfactory on the share with lead above 10 μg/dL, but

allowing the coefficient on the lead variable to vary by town income category (low, medium,

and high as defined earlier). This allows us to assess to what extent estimated effects of lead are

driven by cross‐sectional income differences, whether lead has a significant effect on scores

within income categories, and whether the effect of lead varies by income category.

        Table 6 provides strong support for a relationship between lead and test scores that is

not driven by income alone, but also provides new information about the role income does play.

For English scores, the uncontrolled specification yields significant effects of lead in all three

income categories. The first piece of news here is that the amplification of the effect in the

uncontrolled specification (seen in Table 5) is not driven by variation within the high income

towns: in column 1, the interaction of lead with high income (0.58) is statistically significant but

much smaller than the interactions of lead with the other income categories (3.54 and 3.68

respectively). The second piece of news is that lead is not merely proxying for income: with the

introduction of town and school characteristics as controls, the effect of lead is statistically

significant for all three income categories, and larger in the middle‐ and high‐income towns. In

those towns, a 1 percentage point increase in the share with elevated blood lead is associated

with a 0.4 percentage point increase in the share scoring unsatisfactory, an effect twice as large

as that estimated when the lead coefficients were restricted to be equal across income categories

(as in Table 5).

        For Math scores, the uncontrolled specification yields significant effects of lead in only

the low‐ and middle‐income categories.           With the introduction of town and school

characteristics, we see that the effect of lead on Math scores is driven entirely by the middle‐

income towns. In those towns, a 1 percentage point increase in the share with elevated blood

                                                27
lead is associated with a 0.5 percentage point increase in the share scoring unsatisfactory, an

effect more than twice as large as that estimated when the lead coefficients were restricted to be

equal across income categories. It is worth recalling that 3rd grade Math MCAS tests were not

administered in the years 2001 to 2005, so the number of observations is about 25% smaller for

Math than for English.

       In the end, we can conclude from Table 6 that the effects of elevated blood lead on

unsatisfactory performance shown in Table 5 are not entirely driven by cross‐sectional income

differences. The effects are, to a great degree, still apparent within income categories. The

results are not unaffected, however. Lead’s effects on English scores are significant and sizable

within all three income categories, but larger in the middle‐ and high‐income categories. Lead’s

effects on Math scores are significant only within the middle income category, and it appears

the Math results are largely driven by the variation within this one category.


VII. Implications
In the 1990s, public health policy achieved large reductions in the childhood lead levels of

Massachusetts children.       Having established a relationship between lead and academic

performance, we are now in a position to assess the full impact this lead reduction may have

had on academic performance.         When doing so, it is important to acknowledge that the

foregoing analyses are not able to establish causality beyond any doubt, and consequently these

assessments will necessarily push the paper’s results at least slightly beyond the empirical

domain in which they were established. With this in mind, we can consider several ways to

assess the impacts of lead policy.

       Applying the main results from Section 6.4, the 8.2 percentage point decline in the share

of Massachusetts children with blood lead above 10 μg/dL would produce a decline of 1.7

percentage points in the share of children scoring unsatisfactory on the MCAS.30                   This

improvement, when compared to the base rate of 30‐35 percent of children scoring

30
  Coefficients are from the fully controlled regressions of share scoring unsatisfactory on share with
blood lead above 10 μg/dL, as shown in Table 5 and Appendix Tables 2 and 3. Because the coefficients on
lead are nearly identical between the English and Math regressions, values quoted in the text are based
on the average of the two for convenience.

                                                  28
unsatisfactory, amounts to an approximate 5% reduction in unsatisfactory performance

statewide.

       A second way to assess the practical significance of lead policy is to investigate the

extent to which reductions in lead gaps between high‐ and low‐income communities yielded

reductions in achievement gaps between those communities. Comparing by income and over

time, I calculate that declines in the 1990s in the lead gap (measured as share of children with

lead above 10 μg/dL) reduced the achievement gap (measured as share of children scoring

unsatisfactory) by 1.0 percentage point in the 2000s. This suggests that the benefits of lead

reduction disproportionately benefited low income children, thereby slightly reducing

inequality in academic outcomes.

       A third way to understand these results is to compare the effects of lead policy with the

effects of tax or spending policy that increases family income.            Consider low income

communities – what income increase would they need to be given to provide them as much

performance improvement as they received from the lead decrease? (This is basically a version

of equivalent variation.)    Over the sample period, the share of children in low income

communities with lead above 10 μg/dL dropped by 9.2 percentage points, from 11.9% to 2.7%.

Applying the regression results, this decline in lead would cause a drop of 1.9 percentage points

in the share scoring unsatisfactory. To achieve this same improvement via a shift of the income

profile of low income communities towards the income profile of middle income communities,

that shift would have to close 22% of the gap between the low and middle income communities.

Specifically, low income communities would need to experience an increase of $2200 of per‐

capita income, a decrease of 1.3 percentage points in poverty rate, and a decrease of 5.4

percentage points in the share of students who are low income. Accordingly, to get, without the

decline in lead, the same test score performance that was seen at the end of the period, per‐capita

income would have had to go up by 15% for low income communities.

       How significant are these effects in a practical sense?       All of these assessments of

benefits can be considered relative to government spending on lead policy, which in




                                                29
Massachusetts is currently less than $5 million.31 Since this is several orders of magnitude

smaller than education spending in Massachusetts, it would appear that spending on lead

policy provides a comparatively high return. While a more extensive cost‐benefit analysis is

merited and will be done in future work, these initial calculations suggest that public health

policy has slightly improved academic outcomes and reduced inequality. Indeed, given that

the literature provides substantial evidence for larger marginal effects of lead below 10 μg/dL,

and that this paper’s group‐level analysis has difficulty identifying such effects, as well as the

fact that other benefits such as reduced special education dollars are not yet accounted for, it is

likely that the benefit‐cost analysis is quite favorable relative to other policy interventions.32


VIII. Conclusion
Using comprehensive data on lead levels in the 1990s and test scores in the 2000s, this paper has

investigated whether childhood lead levels are linked to academic performance in childhood.

One motivation for this study was to assess any measurable societal‐level effects of

Massachusetts’ strong public health policy.          Another motivation was to seek additional

evidence on the more general question of whether and how lead may affect children’s

development and life outcomes, and what that means for society.

        The paper has shown a strong cross‐sectional relationship between early childhood lead

level and elementary‐school test scores. Groups of children with higher childhood lead levels

perform substantially worse on standardized tests in third and fourth grades. These results are

greatly diminished with the introduction of controls for community and school characteristics,

and results for group average lead levels and group average test scores are not robust to the

inclusion of these controls for confounding characteristics. Analyses on other moments of the

distributions, in particular the share of children with elevated blood lead and the share of



31 In Fiscal Year 2011, spending of all government agencies in Massachusetts on lead reduction efforts
totaled approximately $4 million. Source: author’s personal communication in May 2011 with Paul
Hunter, Director of the Massachusetts Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, Department of
Environmental Health, Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
32 See Muennig (2009) and Gould (2009) for comprehensive benefit‐cost analyses of societal reductions in

childhood lead levels to as low as a population average below 1 μg/dL.

                                                   30
children scoring unsatisfactory on the MCAS test, yield more substantial, significant, and robust

results. Over the time period under consideration, reductions in lead have yielded a drop of 1

to 2 percentage points in the share of children scoring unsatisfactory on the MCAS test, a

change equivalent to what would have resulted from a $1000‐$2000 increase in income per

capita. Continuing research will employ individual‐level data to better identify these effects

and will extend the analysis with a more comprehensive benefit‐cost analysis of lead policy in

the context of broader social policy.

       In conclusion, by studying lead and academic performance in Massachusetts – a state

that made great strides in reducing children’s blood lead levels – this paper has confirmed not

only that lead does adversely affect academic performance but also that the aggregate societal

impact of aggressive public health policy to reduce lead can be sizeable. Indeed, this work

suggests that dollars spent on public health policy have a high return relative to dollars spent

on education policy.      Consequently, policymakers concerned with improving academic

outcomes may want to broaden their view, looking beyond traditional education policies to

consider other environmental and public health policies that can have considerable impacts on

children’s cognitive and social development. These policies and their impacts are certainly of

historical interest, but it would be a mistake to think they exist only in the past. Rather, they

continue to provide compelling potential opportunities to leverage public health policy in ways

that could provide substantial societal benefits in the future.




                                                 31
References

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2010). “Human Capital Development before Age Five.”
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15827.
Anyon, Jean (2005). “What ‘Counts’ as Educational Policy? Notes toward a New Paradigm.”
      Harvard Educational Review 75(1): 65‐88.
Bellinger David C. (2008). “Very Low Lead Exposures and Childrenʹs Neurodevelopment.”
       Current Opinions in Pediatrics 20(2): 172‐177. Available at
       http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18332714.
Berger, Noah and Jeff McLynch (2006). “Public School Funding in Massachusetts: Where We
       Are, What Has Changed, and Options Ahead.” Massachusetts Budget and Policy Center,
       November 2006.
Berhane, Kiros, W. James Gauderman, Daniel O. Stram, Duncan C. Thomas (2004). “Statistical
      Issues in Studies of the Long‐Term Effects of Air Pollution: The Southern California
      Childrenʹs Health Study.” Statistical Science, 19(3): 414‐434.
Canfield, R. L., C.R. Henderson, D. Cory‐Slechta, C. Cox, T. Jusko, and B. Lanphear (2003).
       “Intellectual impairment in children with blood lead concentrations below 10 μg per
       deciliter.” New England Journal of Medicine 348: 1517‐1526.
Card, David and A. Abigail Payne (2002). “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
       Spending, and the Distribution of Student Test Scores.” Journal of Public Economics 83(1):
       49‐82.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson (2010). “Causes and Consequences of Early Life Health.”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15637.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Environmental Health (2010).
       “Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Recommends a Work
       Group to Investigate Lowering Limits on Elevated Blood Lead Levels.” Available at
       http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/lower_blood_levels.htm.
Chandramouli K, CD Steer, M Ellis, and AM Emond (2009). “Effects of Early Childhood Lead
      Exposure on Academic Performance and Behaviour of School Age Children.” Archives of
      Disease in Childhood 94(11): 844‐848.
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, Massachusetts Department of Public Health
      (2004). “Massachusetts Strategic Plan to End Lead Poisoning by 2010.”
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, Massachusetts Department of Public Health
      (various years). “Screening and Incidence Statistics by Community.”




                                               32
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, Massachusetts Department of Public Health
      (2011). “Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program Overview.” Available at
      http://www.mass.gov/dph/clppp.
Downes, Thomas, Jeffrey Zabel, and Dana Ansel (2009). “Incomplete Grade: Massachusetts
     Education Reform at 15.” MassINC Research Report.
Firebaugh, Glenn (1978). “A Rule for Inferring Individual‐Level Relationships from Aggregate
       Data.” American Sociological Review, 43(4): 557‐572.
Gilbert, Steven G. and Bernard Weiss (2006). “A Rationale for Lowering the Blood Lead Action
        Level from 10 to 2 μg/dL.” Neurotoxicology 27: 693‐701.
Gould, Elise (2009). “Childhood Lead Poisoning: Conservative Estimates of the Social and
       Economic Benefits of Lead Hazard Control.” Environmental Health Perspectives 117(7):
       1162‐1167.
Hoxby, Caroline M. (2001). “All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1189‐1231.
Lanphear, Bruce, R. Hornung, et al. (2005). “Low‐level environmental lead exposure and
      childrenʹs intellectual function: an international pooled analysis.” Environmental Health
      Perspectives 113: 894‐899.
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (2011). “Massachusetts
      Comprehensive Assessment System Overview.” Available at
      http://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/overview.html.
Mielke, Howard W., C.R. Gonzales, PW Mielke (2011). “The Continuing Impact of Lead Dust
       on Children’s Blood Lead.” Environmental Research 111(8): 1164‐72.
Mielke, Howard W., M.A. Laidlaw, C.R. Gonzales (2010). “Lead (Pb) Legacy from Vehicle
       Traffic in Eight California Urbanized Areas.” Science of the Total Environment 408(19):
       3965‐75.
Miranda, M. L., Dohyeong Kim, Jerome Reiter, M. Alicia Overstreet Galeano and Pamela
      Maxson (2009). “Environmental Contributors to the Achievement Gap.” NeuroToxicology
      30: 1019‐1024.
Miranda, Marie Lynn, Dohyeong Kim, Claire Osgood, and Douglas Hastings (2011). “The
      Impact of Early Childhood Lead Exposure on Educational Test Performance among
      Connecticut Schoolchildren, Phase 1 Report.” Children’s Environmental Health Initiative
      Research Report. Available at
      http://www.nicholas.duke.edu/cehi/about/news/leadct.htm.
Muennig, Peter (2009). “The Social Costs of Childhood Lead Exposure in the Post–Lead
     Regulation Era.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 163(9): 844‐849.
Murray, Sheila E., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab (1998). “Education Finance
      Reform and the Distribution of Education Resources.” American Economic Review
      88(4): 789‐812.

                                                33
Reyes, Jessica W. (2007). “Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood Lead
       Exposure on Crime,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Contributions) , 7:1.
Schnaas, L., S. Rothenberg, M. Flores, S. Martinez, C. Hernandez, E. Osorio, et al. (2006).
      “Reduced intellectual development in children with prenatal lead exposure.”
      Environmental Health Perspectives 114: 791‐797.




                                                34
35
                                                                   Figure 2a. MCAS English Score vs. Childhood Lead
                                                                                         For Fourth Grade, by Birth Year
                                                                                        1992                                            1999
                     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
MCAS English Score




                                                                   0    1   2   3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10   0   1   2   3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10

                                                                                                       Childhood Lead
     Notes: Author's calculations as described in text.
     MCAS Score is the group average percent correct.
     Childhood Lead is the group average in mcg/dl.




                                                                       Figure 2b. MCAS Math Score vs. Childhood Lead
                                                                                         For Fourth Grade, by Birth Year
                                                                                        1992                                            1999
                     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
MCAS Math Score




                                                                   0    1   2   3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10   0   1   2   3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10

                                                                                                       Childhood Lead
     Notes: Author's calculations as described in text.
     MCAS Score is the group average percent correct.
     Childhood Lead is the group average in mcg/dl.




                                                                                                               36
Table 1. Summary of Data.

                                                        Full Sample                 Early Cohortsa (Born 1991-1992)                           Late Cohortsa (Born 1999-2000)
                                                                                                     Low              High                                  Low              High
                                                                                    All                                                     All
                                                                                                   Incomeb          Incomeb                               Incomeb          Incomeb
Lead Measures
   Mean childhood lead (g/dl)                             4.23 (1.00)           5.20 (0.62)       5.42 (0.59)      4.10 (0.63)         3.14 (0.54)       3.24 (0.55)      2.25 (0.53)
   Share childhood lead 5-10 g/dL                         0.28 (0.09)           0.36 (0.05)       0.37 (0.04)      0.28 (0.06)         0.17 (0.04)       0.19 (0.04)      0.10 (0.04)
   Share childhood lead > 10 g/dL                         0.07 (0.04)           0.11 (0.03)       0.12 (0.04)      0.05 (0.03)         0.03 (0.01)       0.03 (0.01)      0.01 (0.01)
dm Share childhood lead > 20 g/dL                        0.006 (0.00)          0.010 (0.00)      0.011 (0.00)     0.004 (0.00)        0.002 (0.00)      0.002 (0.00)     0.001 (0.00)
MCAS Scores: 3rd grade
   English - average percentage correct                    0.76   (0.09)         0.76 (0.09)       0.70 (0.08)      0.83 (0.04)         0.72   (0.08)     0.66   (0.08)    0.79   (0.04)
   English - share satisfactory                            0.61   (0.19)         0.64 (0.20)       0.50 (0.18)      0.81 (0.10)         0.57   (0.19)     0.43   (0.17)    0.74   (0.10)
   Math - average percentage correct                       0.75   (0.09)                                                                0.75   (0.09)     0.69   (0.09)    0.82   (0.05)
   Math - share satisfactory                               0.58   (0.19)                                                                0.61   (0.19)     0.48   (0.18)    0.76   (0.11)
MCAS Scores: 4th grade
   English - percentage correct                            0.70   (0.07)         0.69   (0.08)     0.63   (0.06)    0.75   (0.05)       0.70   (0.07)     0.64   (0.07)    0.76   (0.04)
   English - share satisfactory                            0.53   (0.21)         0.52   (0.21)     0.36   (0.16)    0.71   (0.13)       0.51   (0.21)     0.35   (0.16)    0.70   (0.13)
   Math - percentage correct                               0.66   (0.10)         0.59   (0.10)     0.52   (0.08)    0.68   (0.07)       0.69   (0.09)     0.63   (0.08)    0.77   (0.05)
   Math - share satisfactory                               0.43   (0.20)         0.37   (0.20)     0.23   (0.14)    0.56   (0.15)       0.49   (0.19)     0.37   (0.16)    0.66   (0.13)
Town Characteristics
   Population density (thousands per sq mile)             3.78     (4.11)       3.83     (4.13)    4.05   (3.36)    3.01    (3.80)      3.87    (4.28)    4.11   (3.49)    2.93    (3.72)
   Poverty rate                                           0.09     (0.07)       0.08     (0.06)    0.13   (0.05)    0.03    (0.02)      0.10    (0.08)    0.17   (0.07)    0.04    (0.03)
   Income per capita ($k year 2000)                      27.00    (17.71)      28.12    (19.47)   14.96   (2.98)   51.96   (26.81)     27.96   (18.27)   14.92   (3.33)   50.32   (23.57)
   Share with < high school education                     0.16     (0.10)       0.16     (0.10)    0.26   (0.09)    0.06    (0.02)      0.15    (0.10)    0.26   (0.09)    0.06    (0.02)
   Share with BA or beyond                                0.33     (0.17)       0.33     (0.17)    0.17   (0.07)    0.56    (0.11)      0.33    (0.17)    0.17   (0.07)    0.57    (0.11)
School Characteristics
   Share of students that are low income                   0.32   (0.30)         0.31   (0.29)     0.53   (0.25)    0.07   (0.12)       0.34   (0.30)     0.60   (0.25)    0.08   (0.11)
   Expenditures per pupil ($k year 2000)                   8.87   (2.10)         7.50   (1.33)     7.30   (0.78)    7.85   (1.75)      10.26   (2.10)    10.02   (0.98)   10.44   (2.74)
   Share of students that are Black                        0.09   (0.15)         0.10   (0.16)     0.11   (0.12)    0.05   (0.10)       0.09   (0.14)     0.10   (0.12)    0.05   (0.09)
   Share of students that are Hispanic                     0.14   (0.20)         0.12   (0.18)     0.22   (0.23)    0.02   (0.04)       0.16   (0.21)     0.30   (0.26)    0.04   (0.05)
Sample sizes
   Number of groups                                     18,342                 4,263              1,447             997               3,927              1,271             951
   Average group size                                    68.38 (24.20)         68.63 (24.03) 61.87 (25.46) 73.22 (20.01)               66.80 (24.03) 65.85 (25.90) 67.67 (20.32)

Notes. Means are shown, with standard deviations in parentheses. Each observation is a school/town-cohort-birthyear group. Data sources as described in text: lead data from the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, test score data from the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.
a
  Early cohorts are the 1991 and 1992 birth-year cohorts; late cohorts are the 1999 and 2000 birth-year cohorts. For 3rd grade test scores, the earliest cohort in the data is the 1992
cohort and the latest is the 2000 cohort. For 4th grade test scores, the earliest cohort in the data is the 1991 cohort and the latest is the 1999 cohort.
b
  Income categories are based on town per-capita income in the year 2000. "Low Income" includes towns with income in the bottom quartile (<$20,000), "Middle Income" (not shown)
includes towns in the middle two quartiles ($20,000-30,000), and "High Income" includes towns in the top quartile (>$30,000).


                                                                                                   37
Table 2. Differences-in-Differences.
                                               a,b                           a,c
Outcome Measure                         DD1                           DD2
Mean score on MCAS
 3rd grade English            0.016 ** (0.007)                    0.029 ** (0.010)
 4th grade English            0.009    (0.006)                    0.010    (0.009)
 4th grade Math               0.031 ** (0.008)                    0.045 ** (0.124)
Share Unsatisfactory on MCAS
 3rd grade English           -0.022    (0.016)                   -0.052 ** (0.022)
 4th grade English           -0.025    (0.017)                   -0.038    (0.027)
 4th grade Math              -0.047 ** (0.016)                   -0.065 ** (0.027)

a
  The sample is broken into Treatment and Control based on 1992-1999 changes in
the share of the group with lead above 10 g/dl.
b
  For DD1 : treatment groups are those with above-average changes, control groups
are those with below-average changes.
c
 For DD2 : treatment groups are those with top-quartile changes, control groups are
those with bottom-quartile changes.

Notes. Difference-in-difference estimates and standard errors calculated from
means and standard errors of each group (before/after, control/treatment).
Significance is indicated by * for a p-value < 0.10 and ** for a p-value < 0.05.




                                                38
Table 3. Regression of Group Average MCAS English Scores on Group Average Childhood Lead.

                                                        (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
                                                                                                 Include        Include
                                                                                   Include
                                                       Base        Weighted                       Town          School           Full
                                                                                  Year F.E.
                                                                                                  Chars          Chars

Childhood Lead Measures
Mean Childhood Lead (g/dL)                         -0.0258*** -0.0275*** -0.0551*** -0.0070*** -0.0059***                     -0.0012
                                                      (0.0011)      (0.0011)       (0.0021)      (0.0018)       (0.0015)       (0.0015)
Town Characteristics
Town population density                                                                        -0.0038***                      0.0007
                                                                                                 (0.0005)                      (0.0005)
Town poverty rate                                                                              -0.4646***                    0.1472***
                                                                                                 (0.0474)                      (0.0443)
Town income per capita ($k)                                                                      0.0004*                     0.0007***
                                                                                                 (0.0002)                      (0.0002)
Town income per capita squared                                                                   -0.0000*                    -0.0000***
                                                                                                 (0.0000)                      (0.0000)
Share of town with < high school education                                                        0.0005                       -0.0054
                                                                                                 (0.0320)                      (0.0234)
Share of town with BA or beyond                                                                 0.0980***                    0.0599***
                                                                                                 (0.0181)                      (0.0132)
School Characteristics
School expenditures per pupil ($k)                                                                            0.0026***      -0.0029***
                                                                                                                (0.0007)       (0.0007)
Share of students that are low income                                                                         -0.1621***     -0.1370***
                                                                                                                (0.0084)       (0.0105)
Share of students that are Black                                                                              -0.0528***     -0.0842***
                                                                                                                (0.0114)       (0.0121)
Share of students that are Hispanic                                                                           -0.0614***     -0.0908***
                                                                                                                (0.0117)       (0.0127)
Constant                                            0.8432***      0.8480***     0.9870***      0.7842***     0.8132***      0.7800***
                                                      (0.0038)      (0.0038)       (0.0088)      (0.0101)       (0.0076)       (0.0084)


Year Fixed Effects                                      No             No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Test
scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second highest lead measured in childhood by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken included where shown. Observations are weighted by
weights derived from number of children in the data group (truncated below at 10 and above at 100). Standard errors are Huber-White robust
and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                        39
Table 4. Regression of Group Average MCAS Math Scores on Group Average Childhood Lead.

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                                               Include       Include
                                                                                 Include
                                                      Base        Weighted                      Town         School          Full
                                                                                Year F.E.
                                                                                                Chars         Chars

Childhood Lead Measures
Mean Childhood Lead (g/dL)                        -0.0605*** -0.0627*** -0.0650*** -0.0098*** -0.0087***                  -0.0013
                                                    (0.0016)       (0.0015)      (0.0025)      (0.0026)      (0.0023)      (0.0022)
Town Characteristics
Town population density                                                                      -0.0039***                    0.0017**
                                                                                               (0.0007)                    (0.0007)
Town poverty rate                                                                            -0.4380***                   0.2120***
                                                                                               (0.0557)                    (0.0547)
Town income per capita ($k)                                                                   0.0010***                   0.0012***
                                                                                               (0.0003)                    (0.0002)
Town income per capita squared                                                               -0.0000***                   -0.0000***
                                                                                               (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Share of town with < high school education                                                     -0.0143                     -0.0348
                                                                                               (0.0393)                    (0.0319)
Share of town with BA or beyond                                                               0.1119***                   0.0766***
                                                                                               (0.0235)                    (0.0193)
School Characteristics
School expenditures per pupil ($k)                                                                          0.0038***     -0.0044***
                                                                                                             (0.0009)      (0.0010)
Share of students that are low income                                                                      -0.1864*** -0.1418***
                                                                                                             (0.0125)      (0.0150)
Share of students that are Black                                                                           -0.0619*** -0.1162***
                                                                                                             (0.0157)      (0.0170)
Share of students that are Hispanic                                                                        -0.0532*** -0.1021***
                                                                                                             (0.0170)      (0.0172)
Constant                                           0.9168***     0.9209***     0.9221***      0.6824***     0.7271***     0.6797***
                                                    (0.0044)       (0.0043)      (0.0106)      (0.0129)      (0.0107)      (0.0115)


Year Fixed Effects                                     No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Test
scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second highest lead measured in childhood by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken included where shown. Observations are weighted by
weights derived from number of children in the data group (truncated below at 10 and above at 100). Standard errors are Huber-White
robust and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                       40
Table 5. Regression of Share Unsatisfactory MCAS on Share Lead in Certain Ranges.

                                                     (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                                     Include           Include          Include
Childhood Lead Measure(s)         Subject           Base           Weighted                                                                 Full
                                                                                    Year F.E.        Town Chars       School Chars

A. Share Lead > 10 g/dL          English           2.174 ***        2.345 ***         3.536 ***        0.788 ***         0.413 ***        0.210 ***
                                                   (0.087)          (0.085)           (0.132)          (0.096)           (0.078)          (0.077)

   Share Lead > 10 g/dL          Math              2.890 ***        3.067 ***         3.317 ***        0.773 ***         0.441 ***        0.203 **
                                                   (0.097)          (0.092)           (0.132)          (0.108)           (0.096)          (0.092)


B. Share Lead > 20 g/dL          English         10.569 ***        15.369 ***        13.542 ***        3.619 ***         1.700 ***        1.024 ***
                                                   (1.329)          (0.876)           (1.847)          (0.413)           (0.343)          (0.301)

   Share Lead > 20 g/dL          Math            12.940 ***        18.682 ***        12.170 ***        3.383 ***         1.616 ***        0.946 **
                                                   (1.610)          (0.975)           (1.721)          (0.480)           (0.441)          (0.391)


C. Share Lead 10-20 g/dL         English           2.207 ***        2.237 ***         3.765 ***        0.734 ***         0.429 ***        0.198 **
                                                   (0.112)          (0.108)           (0.156)          (0.117)           (0.094)          (0.094)
   Share Lead > 20 g/dL          English           3.010 ***        4.746 ***         4.035 ***        2.063 ***         0.782 **         0.645 **
                                                   (0.721)          (0.645)           (0.883)          (0.365)           (0.320)          (0.297)

   Share Lead 10-20 g/dL         Math              3.048 ***        3.116 ***         3.553 ***        0.732 ***         0.478 ***        0.193 **
                                                   (0.125)          (0.118)           (0.160)          (0.126)           (0.111)          (0.107)
   Share Lead > 20 g/dL          Math              3.123 ***        4.521 ***         3.497 ***        1.753 ***         0.561            0.558
                                                   (0.735)          (0.589)           (0.811)          (0.399)           (0.395)          (0.360)


Year Fixed Effects                                 No               No               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Town Characteristics                               No               No                No               Yes               No               Yes
School Characteristics                             No               No                No               No               Yes               Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Only coefficients on
lead measures are shown. Test scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second highest lead measured in
childhood by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken included where shown. Observations are
weighted as described in the text. Standard errors are Huber-White robust and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for
p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                         41
Table 6. Regression with Income Interactions of Share Unsatisfactory on Share Elevated Blood Lead.

                                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                                                      English             English              Math                Math

                                                                     without              with               without              with
                                                                  Town & School       Town & School       Town & School       Town & School
                                                                     Chars               Chars               Chars               Chars


Childhood Lead Measures
Share Lead > 10 g/dL × Low Income Municipality                     3.5432***             0.1462*           3.2726***             0.1217
                                                                      (0.1222)            (0.0810)            (0.1223)            (0.0931)
Share Lead > 10 g/dL × Middle Income Municipality                  3.6805***           0.4136***           3.4379***           0.5162***
                                                                      (0.1721)            (0.1052)            (0.1661)            (0.1260)
Share Lead > 10g/dL × High Income Municipality                      0.5818*           0.4048***             -0.1373             0.1600
                                                                      (0.3467)            (0.1469)            (0.4056)            (0.2091)
Town Characteristics
Town population density                                                                  -0.0023**                              -0.0033***
                                                                                          (0.0010)                                (0.0013)
Town poverty rate                                                                       -0.4031***                              -0.4395***
                                                                                          (0.1012)                                (0.1041)
Town income per capita ($k)                                                             -0.0022***                              -0.0027***
                                                                                          (0.0004)                                (0.0005)
Town income per capita squared                                                          0.0000***                               0.0000***
                                                                                          (0.0000)                                (0.0000)
Share of town with < high school education                                                0.0781                                  0.0512
                                                                                          (0.0611)                                (0.0627)
Share of town with BA or beyond                                                         -0.1845***                              -0.2615***
                                                                                          (0.0335)                                (0.0420)
School Characteristics
School expenditures per pupil ($k)                                                      0.0092***                               0.0126***
                                                                                          (0.0017)                                (0.0020)
Share of students that are low income                                                   0.3811***                               0.3022***
                                                                                          (0.0234)                                (0.0278)
Share of students that are Black                                                        0.1542***                               0.1530***
                                                                                          (0.0266)                                (0.0309)
Share of students that are Hispanic                                                     0.1397***                               0.1145***
                                                                                          (0.0244)                                (0.0284)
Constant                                                            0.1832***           0.3102***           0.3367***           0.4934***
                                                                      (0.0083)            (0.0164)            (0.0100)            (0.0187)


Year Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Town Characteristics                                                    No                  Yes                  No                 Yes
School Characteristics                                                  No                  Yes                  No                 Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Income
categories are based on municipality per-capita income in the year 2000: "Low Income" includes municipalities with income in the bottom
quartile (<~$20,000), "Middle Income" includes municipalities in the middle two quartiles (~$20,000-30,000), and "High Income" includes
municipalities in the top quartile (>~$30,000). Test scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second
highest lead measured in childhood by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken are included in all
specifications. Observations are weighted by weights derived from number of children in the data group (truncated below at 10 and above at 100).
Standard errors are Huber-White robust and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                         42
Appendix Table 1. Summary of Data Availability by Cohort .

Cohort     Year will    Born….                 Lead Measured MCAS Taken Number of Children
called     grad HS      After      By          After     By        3rd gr 4th gr 7Lead Data     MCAS Data Births
                                                                                 t
1991       2009         9/1/90     9/1/91      1991      1998      2000   2001     77,456       79,362        88,176
1992       2010         9/1/91     9/1/92      1992      1999      2001   2002     75,991       77,870        87,202
1993       2011         9/1/92     9/1/93      1993      2000      2002   2003     73,341       75,996        84,627
1994       2012         9/1/93     9/1/94      1994      2001      2003   2004     67,347       74,122        83,758
1995       2013         9/1/94     9/1/95      1995      2002      2004   2005     66,519       73,381        81,562
1996       2014         9/1/95     9/1/96      1996      2003      2005   2006     67,126       71,620        80,501
1997       2015         9/1/96     9/1/97      1997      2004      2006   2007     66,780       71,023        80,321
1998       2016         9/1/97     9/1/98      1998      2005      2007   2008     64,675       71,754        81,404
1999       2017         9/1/98     9/1/99      1999      2006      2008   2009     63,258       70,942        80,864
2000       2018         9/1/99     9/1/00      2000      2007      2009   2010     63,148       71,109        81,582

Notes. Data as described in the text. If year MCAS was taken is shown, that indicates that MCAS data is available for
that cohort in that test year. The colors indicate availability of specific MCAS tests: blue indicates English Language
Arts MCAS scores available; green indicates both English Language Arts and Mathematics MCAS scores available.
Birth counts are from the Massachusetts Registry of Births.




                                                              43
Appendix Table 2. Regression of Group Share Unsatisfactory MCAS English Score
                  on Group Share Childhood Lead above 10 g/dL.

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                                               Include       Include
                                                                                 Include
                                                      Base        Weighted                      Town         School          Full
                                                                                Year F.E.
                                                                                                Chars         Chars

Childhood Lead Measures
Share Childhood Lead > 10 g/dL                    2.1739***     2.3454***     3.5361***      0.7881***     0.4134***     0.2096***
                                                    (0.0873)       (0.0846)      (0.1320)      (0.0964)      (0.0781)      (0.0774)
Town Characteristics
Town population density                                                                       0.0093***                    -0.0016
                                                                                               (0.0012)                    (0.0010)
Town poverty rate                                                                             1.0078***                   -0.4217***
                                                                                               (0.1011)                    (0.1016)
Town income per capita ($k)                                                                  -0.0018***                   -0.0021***
                                                                                               (0.0005)                    (0.0004)
Town income per capita squared                                                                0.0000***                   0.0000***
                                                                                               (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Share of town with < high school education                                                     0.0180                       0.0416
                                                                                               (0.0788)                    (0.0581)
Share of town with BA or beyond                                                              -0.2712***                   -0.1921***
                                                                                               (0.0438)                    (0.0332)
School Characteristics
School expenditures per pupil ($k)                                                                         -0.0067***     0.0095***
                                                                                                             (0.0017)      (0.0017)
Share of students that are low income                                                                       0.4946***     0.3804***
                                                                                                             (0.0180)      (0.0232)
Share of students that are Black                                                                            0.0577**      0.1637***
                                                                                                             (0.0250)      (0.0265)
Share of students that are Hispanic                                                                          0.0413*      0.1402***
                                                                                                             (0.0232)      (0.0244)
Constant                                           0.3170***     0.3116***     0.1582***      0.3595***     0.2598***     0.3183***
                                                    (0.0052)       (0.0053)      (0.0085)      (0.0165)      (0.0133)      (0.0154)


Year Fixed Effects                                     No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Test
scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second highest lead measured in childhood by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken included where shown. Observations are weighted by
weights derived from number of children in the data group (truncated below at 10 and above at 100). Standard errors are Huber-White
robust and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                       44
Appendix Table 3. Regression of Group Share Unsatisfactory MCAS Math Score
                  on Group Share Childhood Lead above 10 g/dL.

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                                               Include       Include
                                                                                 Include
                                                      Base        Weighted                      Town         School          Full
                                                                                Year F.E.
                                                                                                Chars         Chars

Childhood Lead Measures
Share Childhood Lead > 10 g/dL                    2.8899***     3.0666***     3.3172***      0.7732***     0.4407***      0.2030**
                                                    (0.0973)       (0.0923)      (0.1316)      (0.1082)      (0.0958)      (0.0918)
Town Characteristics
Town population density                                                                       0.0081***                    -0.0024*
                                                                                               (0.0013)                    (0.0012)
Town poverty rate                                                                             0.7127***                   -0.4627***
                                                                                               (0.0948)                    (0.1041)
Town income per capita ($k)                                                                  -0.0025***                   -0.0026***
                                                                                               (0.0006)                    (0.0005)
Town income per capita squared                                                                0.0000***                   0.0000***
                                                                                               (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Share of town with < high school education                                                     -0.0429                      0.0001
                                                                                               (0.0758)                    (0.0623)
Share of town with BA or beyond                                                              -0.3229***                   -0.2809***
                                                                                               (0.0477)                    (0.0421)
School Characteristics
School expenditures per pupil ($k)                                                                         -0.0080***     0.0128***
                                                                                                             (0.0020)      (0.0020)
Share of students that are low income                                                                       0.4644***     0.3024***
                                                                                                             (0.0222)      (0.0276)
Share of students that are Black                                                                              0.0306      0.1675***
                                                                                                             (0.0283)      (0.0305)
Share of students that are Hispanic                                                                          -0.0184      0.1156***
                                                                                                             (0.0281)      (0.0282)
Constant                                           0.3782***     0.3744***     0.3049***      0.5649***     0.4193***     0.5078***
                                                    (0.0054)       (0.0055)      (0.0101)      (0.0174)      (0.0159)      (0.0178)


Year Fixed Effects                                     No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes

Notes. Regression on groups of 3rd and 4th grade students in Massachusetts, where groups are defined by school and birth cohort. Test
scores from MCAS tests taken from 2001 to 2009. Lead distributions based on second highest lead measured in childhood by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Year dummies for year MCAS is taken included where shown. Observations are weighted by
weights derived from number of children in the data group (truncated below at 10 and above at 100). Standard errors are Huber-White
robust and clustered by school. Significance is indicated by *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05, and * for p<0.10.




                                                                       45
Appendix A: Massachusetts General Laws Regarding Lead
Exposure, Lead Poisoning, and Lead Screening
Available thru WestLaw, LexisNexis, or at http://www.lawlib.state.ma.us/subject/about/lead.html

MGL 111 s. 189A‐199B Lead Poisoning Prevention & Control
        Excerpts are below.

MGL 111 s. 192 Educational and Publicity Program
        Section 192. The director shall institute an educational and publicity program, in
order to inform the general public, and particularly parents of children residing in areas
of significant exposure to sources of lead poisoning; teachers, social workers and other
human service personnel; owners of residential property, particularly property
constructed previous to the year nineteen hundred and forty‐five; and health services
personnel, and particularly interns, residents and other intake personnel at major
hospitals, of the dangers, frequency, and sources of lead poisoning, and the methods of
preventing such poisoning.

MGL 111 s. 193 Early Identification Program; Examination and Reports
        Section 193. The director shall establish a program for early identification of cases
of lead poisoning. Such program shall systematically screen all children under six years
of age for the presence of lead poisoning. The director shall, after consultation with
recognized professional medical groups and such other sources as he deems
appropriate, promulgate regulations establishing (1) the means by which and the
intervals at which children under six years of age shall be screened for lead poisoning
and (2) guidelines for the medical follow‐up of children found to be lead poisoned. The
director may also prescribe a screening schedule for pregnant women, children six years
of age and older including such children who exhibit pica, and persons whose cognitive
development is delayed or retarded if he finds such additional screening to be medically
warranted. Such program shall employ, to the extent possible, residents of the areas in
which screening and examinations are conducted, which residents shall not be subject to
the provisions of chapter thirty‐one, unless required as a condition for receipt of federal
funds, or section nine A of chapter thirty.
        Such identification program shall, to the extent that all children residing in the
commonwealth are not systematically screened, give priority in screenings to children
residing, or who have recently resided, in areas where significant numbers of lead
poisoning cases have recently been reported or where other reliable evidence indicates
that significant numbers of lead poisoning cases may be found.
       When the director is informed of a case of lead poisoning pursuant to section one
hundred and ninety‐one, or otherwise, he shall cause to have screened all other children
under six years of age, and such other children as he may find advisable to screen,
residing or recently residing in the household of the victim, unless the parents of such

                                              46
child object to said screening because it conflicts with their religious beliefs and
practices. The results of such screenings shall be reported to the director, to the person
or agency reporting the original case pursuant to section one hundred and ninety‐one,
and to such other persons or agencies as the director deems advisable.
       The director shall maintain comprehensive records of all screenings conducted
pursuant to this section. Such records shall be geographically indexed in order to
determine the location of areas of relatively high incidence of lead poisoning. Such
records shall be public records, subject to the provision of section one hundred and
ninety‐one relating to the names of screened individuals. A summary of the results of all
screenings conducted pursuant to this section shall be released quarterly, or more
frequently if the director so determines, to all interested parties.
        All cases or probable cases of lead poisoning, as defined by regulation by the
director, found in the course of screenings conducted pursuant to this section shall be
reported immediately to the affected individual, to his parent or legal guardian if he is a
minor, and to the director. The director shall inform such persons or agencies as he
deems advisable of the existence of such case or probable case, subject to the provision
of section one hundred and ninety‐one relating to the names of individuals.

MGL 111 s. 197 (a) Duty of residential premises owners; interim control measures; removal or
cover of offending paint, soil, or material.
        Section 197. (a) Whenever a child under six years of age resides in any premises
in which any paint, plaster or other accessible structural material contains dangerous
levels of lead, the owner shall abate or contain said paint, plaster or other accessible
structural materials in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b) or (c). Except
as provided in section one hundred and ninety‐seven D, whenever any such premises
containing said dangerous levels of lead undergoes a change of ownership and as a
result a child under six years of age will become or will continue to be a resident therein,
the new owner shall have ninety days to contain or abate said paint, plaster or other
accessible structural material as required by this section, so as to make the premises in
compliance with the provisions of sections one hundred and eighty‐nine A to one
hundred and ninety‐nine B, inclusive.

MGL 112 s. 12BB Mandatory Screening by Physicians of Preschool Children
       Section 12BB. Each physician duly registered under the provisions of section two,
two A, nine, nine A, or nine B shall screen patients for lead poisoning at the intervals
and using the methods specified in the regulations adopted pursuant to section one
hundred and ninety‐three of chapter one hundred and eleven. Each licensed, registered
or approved health care facility serving children under six years of age, including but
not limited to hospitals and clinics licensed under the provisions of section fifty‐one of
chapter one hundred and eleven and health maintenance organizations approved under
the provisions of chapter one hundred and seventy‐six G, shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that their patients receive such lead poisoning screening.


                                            47
Appendix B: Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System
Performance Level Definitions
Reproduced from: “Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System Overview,”
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.
Available at http://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/overview.html.

Student results on MCAS tests are reported according to the following performance
levels:

    Grade 3 tests:      Above Proficient, Proficient, Needs Improvement, Warning
    Grades 4‐8 tests:   Advanced, Proficient, Needs Improvement, Warning
    Grade 10 tests:     Advanced, Proficient, Needs Improvement, Failing

The performance level definitions below, which apply across subject areas and grade
levels, are used as a basis for determining the minimum score for each of the
performance levels on each of the MCAS tests. … The general and content‐specific
definitions are meant to help teachers, students, parents, and others understand the
meaning of the MCAS results.

General Performance Level Definitions

      Advanced (Grades 4‐10): Students at this level demonstrate a comprehensive
       and in‐depth understanding of rigorous subject matter, and provide
       sophisticated solutions to complex problems.
      Above Proficient (Grade 3): Students at this level demonstrate mastery of
       challenging subject matter and construct solutions to challenging problems.
      Proficient (Grades 3‐10):      Students at this level demonstrate a solid
       understanding of challenging subject matter and solve a wide variety of
       problems.
      Needs Improvement (Grades 3‐10): Students at this level demonstrate a partial
       understanding of subject matter and solve some simple problems.
      Warning (Grades 3‐8)/Failing (Grade 10): Students at this level demonstrate a
       minimal understanding of subject matter and do not solve simple problems.




                                         48
