                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE OUTPUT EFFECT OF FISCAL CONSOLIDATIONS

                                           Alberto Alesina
                                            Carlo Favero
                                         Francesco Giavazzi

                                        Working Paper 18336
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18336


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We thank Silvia Ardagna, Olivier Blanchard, Giancarlo Corsetti, Marco Del Negro, Daniel Leigh,
Roberto Perotti, Andrea Pescatori, David Romer, Christopher Sims, Guido Tabellini and participants
in seminars at ECB, Bank of Italy, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, LBS, Northwestern, NYU Stern, Bocconi, and the NBER conferences on Sovereign
Debt and Financial Crises and The European Crises. Diana Morales, Madina Karamysheva, Omar
Barbiero, Armando Miano, Matteo Paradisi and Andrea Passalacqua provided outstanding research
assistance. This paper was initially funded as part of the Growth and Sustainability Policies for Europe
project (GRASP #244725) by the European Commission’s 7th Framework Programme. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Alberto Alesina, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Output Effect of Fiscal Consolidations
Alberto Alesina, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi
NBER Working Paper No. 18336
August 2012, Revised March 2014
JEL No. E62,H60

                                              ABSTRACT

The present paper argues that the correct experiment to evaluate the effects of a fiscal adjustment is
the simulation of fiscal plans rather than of individual fiscal shocks. The simulation of the fiscal plans
adopted by 16 OECD countries over a 30-year period supports the hypothesis that the effects of consolidations
depend on their design. Fiscal adjustments based upon spending cuts are much less costly, in terms
of output losses, than tax-based ones. Fiscal adjustments have especially low output costs when they
consist of permanent rather than stop and go. The difference cannot be explained by accompanying
policies, including monetary policy, and appears to be mainly due to the different response of business
confidence and private investment.


Alberto Alesina                                       Francesco Giavazzi
Department of Economics                               Universita' Bocconi and IGIER
Harvard University                                    Via Guglielmo Röntgen, 1
Littauer Center 210                                   Milan 20136
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   ITALY
and IGIER                                             and NBER
and also NBER                                         francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it
aalesina@harvard.edu

Carlo Favero
Department of Finance
Bocconi University and IGIER
Via Röntgen, 1
20136 Milano, ITALY
carlo.favero@unibocconi.it
1     Introduction
Do sharp reductions of deficits and government debts (labeled fiscal adjust-
ments or fiscal consolidations) cause large output losses? This paper argues
that the correct methodology to answer this question requires studying fiscal
plans, rather than individual fiscal shocks as it is normally done in the litera-
ture. Large fiscal consolidations are typically multi-year processes in which a
government announces and then implements deficit reduction policies. Often
these plans are revised and adjusted over the course of their implementation
generating a complex interaction of expected and unexpected policy actions
which we can account for. We argue that simulating shocks, i.e. the eﬀect
of isolated shifts in government revenues or in spending (as it is typically
done in the literature) is not the right kind of experiment when the focus
of interest is to gather evidence on the response of the economy to fiscal
actions. The empirical analysis of the eﬀects of fiscal policy, especially of
major fiscal adjustments which never occur in a single year, should be based
on the analysis of multi-period plans 1 .
    Fiscal shocks are typically used in the modern approach to policy analysis
because they allow to select, from the empirical evidence, the facts that
should be matched by the relevant theoretical Dynamic Sthocastic General
Equilibrum Models (DSGE) model–which is the tool that should be used to
address policy questions. Because the solution of a DSGE model can be well
approximated by a Vector AutoRegressive model (VAR), empirical models
have become the natural tool for selecting among diﬀerent DSGE models,
based on their ability to replicate the reduced form-based evidence. Such
reduced form evidence, however, should be produced in the context of valid
experiments, which means (i) identify exogenous policy actions that can be
simulated keeping the parameters of the estimated empirical model constant,
(ii) simulate experiments that do not change the correlation in the data used
to estimate the parameters in the empirical model. Orthogonalized shocks
obtained imposing restrictions on a VAR, satisfy these two conditions and
their simulation is commonly considered the correct experiment2 . We argue
that this is not the case when analyzing fiscal policy.
    This paper argues that the correct experiment for assessing the output
eﬀects of a fiscal consolidation–and establish the stylized facts that a the-
   1
     Drautzburg and Uhlig (2013) take a first step in the direction of the identification of
plans by allowing VAR-identified shocks to be correlated.
   2
     This is the strategy used in traditional fiscal VAR, such as Blanchard-Perotti (2002).


                                             2
oretical model should match–consists in simulating plans, not individual
fiscal shocks. In fact fiscal consoldiations are indeed multi year plans in the
intentions of the polciymakers and in the eyes of individuals.
    The problem that arises when analyzing fiscal plans (as clearly illustrated
by Leeper et al 2008, Leeper 2010) is that fiscal foresight–the fact that agents
are aware of future, but not yet realized, fiscal adjustments–causes a mis-
alignment between the information set used by the econometrician in a VAR
and that available to the economic agents (see Lippi and Reichlin, 1994).
The consequence is that the exogenous combination of unanticipated and
announced fiscal corrections that characterizes a plan cannot be uniquely
recovered from VAR innovations. The solution is to adopt the "narrative"
approach introduced by Romer and Romer (2010) which does not suﬀer from
this problem because exogenous shifts in fiscal policy are not reconstructed
via the inversion of the moving average representation of a VAR, but directly
observed using oﬃcial documents to identify the size, timing, and motivation
for the fiscal actions taken or announced by the government. This approach
obviously relies on an accurate reading of policymakers’ intentions. We use
narratively identified fiscal adjustments to build exogenous plans. Plans con-
sist of the announcement of a sequence of fiscal actions, some to be imple-
mented the same year of the announcement (unanticipated) and some to be
implemented in following years (announced). If a plan starts in period t we
define policy changes in that period as unanticipated. The announcements
for future periods are taken as a measure of anticipated policy changes. In
principle even a plan which is announced and starts in period t could have
been anticipated before t: our narrative measure does not allow for this pos-
sibility. However, the main focus of our analysis is the composition of fiscal
adjustments. This is often the result of a complex political game, which
makes predicting the composition of an adjustment very diﬃcult.
    Importantly, the design of plans generates inter-temporal and intra-temporal
correlations among fiscal variables. The inter-temporal correlation is the one
between the announced (future) and unanticipated (current) components of a
plan. The intra-temporal correlation is that between the changes in revenues
and spending that determines the composition of a plan–-what we shall call
the "style" of a plan. As argued by Ramey (2011a, b) distinguishing be-
tween announced and unanticipated shifts in fiscal policy, and allowing them
to have diﬀerent eﬀects on macroeconomic variables, is crucial for evaluating
fiscal multipliers. The literature, however (see, for example, Mertens and
Ravn 2011) has so far studied the diﬀerent eﬀects of anticipated and unan-

                                      3
ticipated shocks assuming that they are orthogonal. This is not the case
in our sample where the correlation between anticipated and unanticipated
shocks reflects the style of a fiscal plan. Thus an experiment designed to
study, via a dynamic simulation, the eﬀects of announced and unanticipated
shocks should not violate the correlation between the two.
    We build our data set upon the international database of narratively
identified fiscal adjustments constructed at the IMF by Devries et al (2011)
(D&al) which covers 17 OECD countries between 1978 and 2009.. Among all
stabilization episodes these authors have selected those that were designed
to reduce a budget deficit and to put the public debt on a sustainable path.
This should guarantee their "exogeneity" since such fiscal actions represent a
response to past decisions and economic conditions rather than to prospective
conditions. As a result, they are unlikely to be systematically correlated with
other developments aﬀecting output in the short term, and are thus valid for
estimating the short-term eﬀects of fiscal consolidation on economic activity.
The D&al dataset, however, only reports year by year fiscal shocks without
distinguishing between announced an unanticipated policy shifts. We extend
the dataset by clustering individual shifts in taxes or spending into multi-
year fiscal plans consisting of announced and unanticipated exogenous fiscal
shocks. We build such plans using the information — either found within
D&al or using the original sources thereby indicated — about the dates in
which each policy shift is approved and then implemented3 . This allows us
to distinguish between unanticipated and announced (up to 3-years ahead)
shocks. The sum of the two components is always equal to the original shock
coded in D&al except for seven cases in which, after careful examination of
the original sources used to construct the dataset, we have decided to change
their coding because it appeared to be incorrect.4 . .
    Countries adopt diﬀerent styles for their fiscal consolidations. The degree
of correlation between the unanticipated and announced part of a plan varies
from being very strong and positive, to being negative. We have "reversal
plans", where, for example, a fiscal tightening in the year a plan is first
introduced, is accompanied by the announcement of looser fiscal policy in
subsequent years. On the contrary, in "persistent plans" unanticipated and
   3
     We test for exogeneity and we find that most of these plans, with one exception, which
we drop, are indeed uncorrelated with past realizations of output.
   4
     Our results are not driven by these seven changes and are robust if the (D&al) original
coding is used. Detailed reasons for each change to the dataset are explained in the
Appendix labelled Description of the Dataset.

                                             4
announced fiscal actions go in the same direction.
    Having identified exogenous fiscal plans we classify them in tax-based
(TB) and expenditure-based (EB) on the basis of the relative importance of
tax increases and spending cuts in each plan. This allows us to capture the
intra-temporal correlation between tax hikes and expenditure cuts. Allowing
tax hikes and expenditure cuts to be correlated is crucial for evaluating fiscal
multipliers–for the same reason that it is crucial to allow for anticipated and
unanticipated shocks to be correlated. Think of regressing output growth
on distributed lags of exogenous changes in taxes and in expenditures and
then using the estimated coeﬃcients (for instance on taxes) to dynamically
simulate the eﬀect of a change in taxes keeping expenditures constant. This is
not a valid experiment when changes in taxes and expenditure are correlated.
The reason is that the estimated coeﬃcients reflect the correlation between
the two variables. If this is diﬀerent from zero, then the coeﬃcients cannot
be used to run an experiment that instead assumes that the two variables
are orthogonal.5
    To analyze the impact of fiscal plans on macroeconomic variables we adopt
the truncated MA representation that is normally used (see, for example,
Romer and Romer 2010) when narrative shocks are identified. If we were
to study the output eﬀects of fiscal consolidations using plans for only one
country we would have too few observations. This is why, in order to obtain
more precise estimates, we pool together fiscal adjustments from diﬀerent
countries. Pooling, however, is problematic in the presence of heterogeneity
(see, for example, Favero, Giavazzi and Perego 2011). We thus estimate a
quasi-panel model pooling the international evidence but allowing for two
sources of heterogeneity: (i) diﬀerent styles of fiscal consolidations across
countries and (ii) diﬀerent eﬀects of TB and EB plans.
    The empirical evidence suggests that the eﬀects of fiscal consolidations
depend on their design and in particular on two characteristics: their com-
position (tax hikes vs. spending cuts) and their consistency over time (i.e.
whether spending cuts are permanent or transitory). Spending-based adjust-
ments have been associated on average with mild and short-lived recessions,
in many cases with no recession at all. Instead, tax-based adjustments have
been followed by prolonged and deep recessions. It is worth emphasizing
   5
     Note that this problem is relevant for narrative shocks but does not arise in the case
of fiscal shocks identified imposing restrictions on VAR residuals, since such shocks are
orthogonalized to one another.



                                            5
that these are averages of several plans: so an average of small or zero re-
cession can be the result of some bigger recessionary episodes and even some
case of expansionary fiscal adjustments. We find evidence which hints to the
fact that adjustments may be associated with especially low output costs
when they are permanent rather than stop and go. The diﬀerence between
spending-based and tax-based adjustments is remarkable in its size and can-
not be explained by diﬀerent monetary policy responses. The diﬀerence in
the output eﬀects of the two types of fiscal adjustment is mainly due to the
response of private investment, rather than that of consumption growth.6
Interestingly, the responses of business and consumers’ confidence to diﬀer-
ent types of fiscal adjustment show the same asymmetry as investment and
consumption: business confidence (unlike consumer confidence) picks up im-
mediately after the start of an expenditure-based adjustment.
    The result that spending-based fiscal adjustments are, on average, non-
recessionary or only very mildly recessionary, brings support to a vast lit-
erature started by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) and recently extended and
summarized by Alesina and Ardagna (2010, 2012). This literature, using
simple data analysis and case studies, suggested that indeed spending-based
fiscal adjustments–diﬀerently from tax-based ones–can have very small or
no output costs at all.7 Those results, as indeed ours, were obtained study-
ing periods during which nominal interest rates had not fallen to zero and
therefore the central bank could accompany the fiscal contraction with a mon-
etary expansion. To rule out the possibility that our results are determined
by an heterogenous endogenous response of monetary policy to tax-based
and spending-based adjustments, we split our sample in two groups of obser-
vations: euro area countries from 1999 onwards, and non-euro area countries
pooled with euro area countries before 1999. In euro area countries from 1999
onwards the response of monetary policy is constrained, in that the ECB sets
its policy by looking at general euro area conditions and should not respond
   6
     This result is consistent with Alesina et al (2002).
   7
     Alesina and Ardagna (2010) and the literature which they summarize identified sta-
bilization episodes using measures of large changes in cyclically adjusted budget deficits.
Large reductions in this variable were assumed exogenous to output fluctuations, and thus
an indication of active policies to reduce deficits. This, admittedly imperfect, approach was
criticized by Guajardo et al.(2011) who then set out to build their dataset. Interestingly,
while Guajardo et al.(2011) were critical of the possibility of costless fiscal adjustments,
the results of the present paper show that a careful analysis using their own data leads to
a picture which is remarkably similar to that of the previous literature reviewed by Alesina
and Ardagna (2010).


                                             6
to macroeconomic events idiosyncratic to member countries. The empirical
evidence of heterogeneity between tax-based and expenditure-based adjust-
ments is robust when the output response to fiscal policy is allowed to be
diﬀerent between EMU and non-EMU countries. To investigate the role of
monetary policy we also run a counter-factual experiment. We shut down the
response of innovations in monetary policy to exogenous fiscal contractions,
thus investigating what the output response to a fiscal contraction would
be in the case of no reaction of monetary policy to fiscal adjustments. We
find that the diﬀerences are minor and that spending-based adjustments are
less costly than tax-based ones even when monetary policy is not allowed to
react to the adjustment. Finally, we also show that the diﬀerence between
tax-based and expenditure-based adjustments is not driven by their timing
relative to the business cycle.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly reviews the
theory and the empirical evidence on fiscal adjustments Section 3 describes
the data and illustrates our strategy for the construction of the fiscal plans.
Section 4 illustrates and discusses our estimation strategy. Section 5 reports
our results. Section 6 discusses a number of robustness checks. The last
section concludes.


2    Tax-based and spending-based stabilizations:
     theory and empirical evidence
Gathering empirical evidence on the eﬀect on output of a fiscal stabilization is
particularly relevant given that alternative theories have diﬀerent predictions
on this eﬀect. Wealth eﬀects, intertemporal substitution and distortions de-
termine the eﬀect of fiscal policy on output in neoclassical models (see Baxter
and King,1993). These three channels operate diﬀerently in the case of tax
increases or expenditure cuts. With lump sum taxes, and when agents de-
rive no benefits from public spending, a reduction in government spending
raises private wealth because future expected taxes fall. Private consump-
tion increases and (if leisure and consumption are normal goods) labor supply
falls. Because in this model labor demand does not change when government
spending changes, hours worked decrease, the real wage increases and out-
put falls. For output to increase following a reduction in wasteful government
spending, taxes need to be distortionary and the intertemporal substitution


                                       7
elasticity suﬃciently high. Intuitively this happens because, when the in-
tertemporal substitution elasticity is high, the wealth eﬀect produced by a
cut in government spending is small relative to the substitution eﬀect gener-
ated by the reduction in distortionary taxes, that increases the net return to
investments and/or labor.
    The literature considering the eﬀects of fiscal policy on the components
of aggregate demand has typically focused on consumption. An exception is
the paper by Alesina et al. (2002) which analyzes (theoretically and empir-
ically) the diﬀerential eﬀects of spending cuts and tax increases on private
investment. These authors show that lower government spending may imply
lower taxes on capital, higher investment and possibly higher output. The
size of these eﬀects will depend upon the transitory or permanent nature of
the change in expenditure (Corsetti and Meier 2009). An increase in tax-
ation will instead have an unambiguous contractionary eﬀect on output as
the negative wealth eﬀect on the demand side (both on consumption and on
investment) is combined with the negative eﬀect of increased distortions on
the supply side. A reduction in government employment could instead be
expansionary. Consider first a competitive labour market: the reduction in
government employment generates a positive wealth eﬀect. If both leisure
and consumption are normal goods, consumption and leisure will increase
and labour supply will decrease, but not enough to completely oﬀset the
lower demand for government employment. Hence, we should observe a re-
duction in real wages: the resulting increase in profits will raise investment,
both during the transition and in steady state. When wages are bargained
between firms and unions, a reduction in government employment may aﬀect
real wages both in the public and in the private sector. In a similar vein,
Alesina and Perotti (1997) show how, in unionized economies, increases in
income taxes translate into higher wage demand by unions, higher unit labor
costs and a loss of competitiveness for domestic firms.
    Confidence and uncertainty may also influence output fluctuations (Bloom
2009, Dixit and Pindyck 1994). Fluctuations in the degree of uncertainty
produce rapid drops and rebounds in aggregate output and employment as
higher uncertainty causes firms to temporarily pause their investment and
hiring; productivity growth also falls as this pause in activity freezes reallo-
cation across units. Again, for virtually all the channels discussed above it
should matter a lot whether the spending cuts are perceived as permanent
or transitory. Wealth eﬀects will be larger for permanent spending cuts.
    Textbook Keynesian models and new Keynesian models with less than

                                       8
perfectly flexible prices, predict that spending cuts are always recessionary
(see e.g. De Long and Summers 2012, Galì, Lopez-Salido and Valles 2007)
and the multiplier for government spending should be larger in theory than
that for taxes. Recent research has pointed out this type of results might
reemerge also in diﬀerent context when nominal monetary policy rate are
close to their lower bound.
    Christiano et al. (2011) calculate that when the zero lower bound is
binding, the spending multiplier turns positive (spending cuts reduce output)
and, in their calibration, as large as 3.7. The channel through which this can
happen is the expectation of future deflation. If prices are sticky, consumers
expect prices to fall, when firms will be able to adjust them. This raises the
real interest rate inducing them to postpone consumption. Eggerston (2010)
similarly, and through the same mechanism, finds that the multiplier for a
cut in labor taxes flips sign at the ZLB. In his calibration a 1% cut in labor
taxes switches from being positive to negative, at -1.02. Our episodes do not
include periods of ZLB, but we show that our results, regarding the lower
costs of expenditure based adjustments verus tax based ones should survive at
zero lower bound, since they do not depend on diﬀerent repsonses of monetary
policy to the two types of adjustments. The accumulation of data on these
recent episodes will allow progress on this specific issue. The empirically
literature based on identified shocks suggests that tax multipliers are larger
than spending multipliers (see Ramey 2013 for a survey). Multipliers are
also found to be larger during recessions (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012,
Giavazzi and McMahon 2013, Ramey 2013).
    Finally, a diﬀerent strand of the literature emphasizes the role of ac-
companying policies. One, as we already discussed, is of course monetary
policy Guajardo et al.(2011), Alesina and Ardagna (1998, 2012) and Perotti
(2013) show that certain supply-side polices, such as labor market and prod-
uct market liberalization, wage agreements with the unions and reduction
in unionization level, can help reduce or even eliminate the output losses
associated with spending cuts.


3    Identification of exogenous fiscal plans
We construct multi-year exogenous fiscal plans re-classifying the fiscal policy
shocks identified by D&al using the narrative method on a sample of OECD
countries. For each episode of fiscal stabilization the narrative approach al-

                                      9
lows us to identify the unanticipated and the anticipated components of a
plan. The data suggest that stabilizations come in diﬀerent styles, depend-
ing on the persistence of the shifts in fiscal policy. Permanent shifts in fiscal
policy occur when we observe a positive (or zero) correlation between the
unanticipated corrections introduced when a plan is announced and those
announced for the following years. When instead this correlation is nega-
tive, the fiscal measures are stop-and-go, i.e. temporary because the fiscal
corrections introduced upon the announcement of a plan are at least par-
tially reversed in the following years. As observed in the introduction, the
literature so far (see e.g. Mertens and Ravn 2011), has studied the diﬀerent
eﬀects of anticipated and unanticipated shocks assuming that the two are
orthogonal. This is not the case in our sample where the correlation between
anticipated and unanticipated shocks reflects the "style" of a fiscal plan.
    If a plan starts in period t we define policy changes in that period as unan-
ticipated. The announcements for future periods are taken as a measure of
anticipated policy changes. In principle even a plan which is announced and
starts in period t could have been anticipated: we have no way of measuring
this possibility. We think however that this occurrence is unlikely since the
composition of fiscal adjustments is often the result of a complex political
game, which is quite hard to anticipate with a reasonable amount of certainty
until the plan is announced and approved.

3.1    The data
We use the fiscal consolidation episodes identified in D&al for 17 OECD
countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. The frequency of the data is an-
nual and the sample runs from 1978 to 2009.8 D&al use the records available
in oﬃcial documents to identify the size, timing and principal motivation
for the fiscal actions taken by each country. In particular, they examine
policymakers’ intentions and actions as described in contemporaneous policy
documents, that represent a response to past decisions and economic con-
ditions rather than to current or prospective conditions. They emphasize
that "If a consolidation is motivated primarily by restraining domestic de-
  8
    The      dataset      is      available      on     the       IMF     website
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=24892.0).



                                        10
mand, we do not include it in our database". The historical sources examined
include Budget Reports, Budget Speeches, Central Bank Reports, Conver-
gence and Stability Programs submitted by EU governments to the European
Commission, IMF Reports and OECD Economic Surveys. In addition, they
examine country specific sources, such as, among other, various reports by
the Congressional Budget Oﬃce and the Economic Reports of the President
for the United States, the Journal Oﬃciel de la Republique Francaise for
France. Two examples of such exogenous fiscal plans are the U.S. 1993 Om-
nibus Budget Reconciliation Act, which involved raising taxes and cutting
spending "not to reduce the risk of economic overheating, but because policy-
makers saw it as a prudent policy change with potential long-term benefits"
and the European plans adopted in the second part of the 1990s to meet
the Maastricht criteria and join the euro. For most countries the concept of
government adopted is the "general government", which includes both the
central State administration and all levels of local governments. For three
federal countries (Canada, Australia and the United States) the data only
refer to the central government (e.g. the Federal government for the US).
This would aﬀect the results if local government systematically moved their
budget, for instance to oﬀset the eﬀect of changes in the central budget.
    The shifts in fiscal policy recorded in this data include, as the Romer and
Romer (2010) dataset, both unanticipated and anticipated policy shifts, that
is tax increases or spending cuts announced in year t, to be implemented in
year t + i. A few measures that were announced but for which "the histor-
ical record shows that they were not implemented at all" are dropped from
the D&al database and cannot easily be recovered. Fortunately there are
only five instances in our sample in which this happened–that is individual
announcements were not recorded because never implemented–one each in
Japan, Italy, Germany, the UK and the Netherlands (a case which is irrel-
evant for us since, as we discuss below, we drop this country). All other
announcements are assumed to be credible and thus recorded.
    This identification strategy applies to a panel of countries the idea orig-
inally proposed by Romer and Romer (2010) for the U.S. to identify major
tax policy changes not dictated by business cycle fluctuations. In the D&al
data tax increases are measured, as in Romer and Romer, by the expected
revenue eﬀect of each change in the tax code, as a percent of GDP. Spending
cuts (also measured as percent of GDP ) are changes in expenditure relative
to the level that was expected absent the policy shift, not relative to the
previous year. Thus a spending cut for year t + 1 does not necessarily imply

                                      11
a reduction in government spending relative to year t, but only relative to
what would have happened in year t + 1 absent the policy shift.9 This is the
correct way to measure spending cuts if we want to capture the eﬀect of new
information.
    However, the criteria used by D&al to identify the relevant shocks diﬀer
from those adopted by Romer and Romer (2010) in two important dimen-
sions. The latter focus only on revenue shocks and identify two main types
of legislated exogenous tax changes: those driven by long-run motives, such
as to foster long-run growth, and those aiming to deal with budget deficits.
D&al, instead, consider both expenditure and revenue shocks and focus only
on fiscal actions motivated by the primary objective of reducing the budget
deficit10 . This means that the identified shocks do not have zero mean: only
shocks which have a negative impact on the deficit are recorded, that is only
tax increases and expenditure cuts. Having a series of adjustments that oc-
cur always in the same direction (we do not consider fiscal expansions) raises
naturally the possibility that the series is truncated. However, given the au-
thors’ identification criteria, these truncated shocks should correspond to tax
cuts or increases in expenditure engineered because the deficit was perceived
as too low or the surplus too high. These cases are quite unlikely11 .
    Finally we run a simple check to assess whether the adjustments identified
by D&al are indeed exogenous, by regressing them on a distributed lag of
output growth. A shift in spending or taxes is exogenous for the estimation
of our parameters of interest if it cannot not be predicted by past variables.
The only country for which the narrative identified fiscal adjustments can be
   9
     This way to measure spending cuts is the one that was used in the United States in
2013 to measure the eﬀect of the so-called "Sequester".
  10
     In fact, if fiscal consolidation is oﬀset by fiscal actions not primarily motivated by
cyclical fluctuations, they compute the sum of the two measures (deficit-driven and long-
run growth) and conclude that consolidation occurred if the overall change in policy yields
budgetary savings.
  11
     Although we cannot check for truncation for all the countries in our sample, we can for
the U.S., comparing the Devries et al with the Romer and Romer shocks. The latter include
both positive and negative observations, and are constructed aggregating tax shocks that
are deficit-driven and tax shocks driven by a long-run growth motive. Deficit-driven fiscal
expansions never occur in the Romer and Romer sample because all tax shocks driven by
the long-run motive are expansionary (i.e. negative tax shocks), and all the deficit-driven
tax shocks are contractionary (i.e. positive tax shocks). Therefore, the Romer and Romer
deficit-driven shocks, which are directly comparable to those identified by Devries et al,
show no evidence of truncation.



                                            12
predicted by past output growth is the Netherlands, which we drop from the
sample12 .
    The construction of our plans is such that the sum of the anticipated
and the unanticipated components of each policy shift is always equal to the
original shocks coded in D&al, except for 7 cases. In such cases we have
decided to change their coding, after a check based on the original sources.
Detailed reasons are explained in the Data Appendix.13
    Summing up. The D&al data contain, over the period 1978-2009, a total
of 563 individual exogenous shifts in government spending and tax revenues
(unanticipated and anticipated) for seventeen countries. We construct plans
based upon the annual information available. We drop the Netherlands for
the reason illustrated above. In our baseline results we also drop Sweden and
Finland because we lack data on confidence for these countries. The results
including Sweden and Finland for the variables for which data are available
are essentially identical, as we show below. Thus in our baseline results we
use 14 countries: four non-European countries (the U.S., Canada, Australia
and Japan), two EU countries that are not members of the monetary union
(Denmark and the U.K.) and eight Euro area countries (Germany, France,
Italy, Spain, Austria, Belgium, Ireland, Portugal). 14
  12
     Note that the exclusion of Netherlands is not crucial to determine our results. Note
also that our results are slightly diﬀerent from those reported in de Cos and Mora (2012)
who find some correlation between a dummy set to one on occasion of the fiscal adjust-
ments identified by Devries et al. and zero everywhere else and past output growth. The
diﬀerence arises from the use of a dummy instead of a continuous variable which reflects
the actual change in fiscal variables, as we do here.
  13
     For example, according to Devries et al. (2011) the Italian Delegation Law of 1993
included L 31 trillion of expenditure-based fiscal consolidation (1994 OECD Economic
Surveys, p.44-45). However, the OECD report quantifies the expenditure cuts of the Dele-
gation Law to actually be 43.5 trillion. The L 31 trillion was the targeted primary surplus
decided in May 1993 and it was incorrently regarded as the total amount of expenditure
cuts in entry 1993 for Italy. As a consequence, when we encountered such cases we revised
the magnitude of the shocks according to the sources cited within the text.
  14
     Mertens and Ravn (2012) have pointed out the potential measurement error associated
with the measurement of fiscal shocks. Unfortunately the solution they propose–using
narrative shocks as instruments for the true unobservable shocks–is not applicable to plans
that include both anticipated and unanticipated components. Nevertheless, we believe that
the issue raised by these authors is a relevant one, and an extension of their approach to
plans is a very interesting agenda for future research.




                                            13
3.2     Constructing plans
We identify plans as sequences of fiscal corrections announced at time t to
be implemented between time t and time t + k; we call k the anticipation
horizon. We define the unanticipated fiscal shocks at time t for country i as
the surprise change in the primary surplus at time t:

                                     eui,t = τ ui,t + gi,t
                                                       u


where τ ui,t is the surprise increase in taxes announced at time t and imple-
                                    u
mented in the same year, and gi,t      is the surprise reduction in government
expenditure also announced at time t and implemented in the same year.
We denote instead as τ ai,t,j and gi,t,j
                                     a
                                         the tax and expenditure changes an-
nounced by the fiscal authorities of country i at date t with an anticipation
horizon of j years (i.e. to be implemented in year t + j). In the D&al dataset
fiscal plans almost never extend beyond a 3-year horizon: thus we take j = 3
as the maximum anticipation horizon 15 . We therefore define the observed
anticipated shocks in period t as follows


                  τ ai,t,0 = τ ai,t−1,1
                                            ¡                      ¢
                  τ ai,t,j = τ ai,t−1,j+1 + τ ai,t,j − τ ai,t−1,j+1 j > 1
                     a         a
                  gi,t,0   = gi,t−1,1
                                            ¡ a                    ¢
                     a
                  gi,t,j       a
                           = gi,t−1,j+1   + gi,t,j      a
                                                     − gi,t−1,j+1    j>1
                     a          a         a
                  ei,t,j = τ i,t,.j + gi,t,.j



    We shall illustrate how we use our classification of fiscal shocks to con-
struct fiscal plans with two examples: the plans introduced in Italy in 1991
and in Australia in 1984. The case of Italy is illustrated in Table 1. D&al
state that "...The narrative analysis leads to the conclusion that in 1991
fiscal consolidation amounted to 2.77 percent of GDP, with tax hikes worth
1.69 percent of GDP and spending cuts of 1.08 percent of GDP. Fiscal con-
solidation was motivated by government debt reduction, as the Bank of Italy
Annual Report 1990 (p. 69) explains ... However, as reported by the IMF in
  15
    In the sample there are a few occurences of policy shifts anticipated four and five years
ahead. Their number is too small to allow us to include them in our estimation.


                                             14
its 1992 Recent Economic Developments document (p. 21), a number of the
tax measures introduced in 1991-Lit 19.4 trillion (1.26 of GDP)-were of a
one-oﬀ nature.... The expiration in 1993 of one-oﬀ tax measures introduced
in previous years was worth 1.20 percent of GDP....". The first row of Table
1 illustrates our classification of this narrative record.

                            Insert Table 1 here

    Note that the plan introduced in 1991 was subsequently modified, in
1992 and in 1993, with the introduction of further unanticipated tax hikes
of 2.85 and 3.2 per cent of GDP respectively, and additional spending cuts
worth 1.9 and 2.48 per cent of the GDP. As we highlight below Italy is
indeed a country which normally does not stick to announced plans.These
modifications are illustrated in the second and third rows of Table 1. We label
fiscal adjustments respectively as "tax-based" (TB) and "expenditure-based"
(EB) if the sum of the unexpected plus the announced tax (expenditure)
changes (measured as percent of GDP in the year the plan is introduced) is
larger than the sum of the unexpected plus the announced expenditure (tax)
changes. Table 1 illustrates that this classification strategy leads to label
the 1991-1993 Italian adjustment as EB. Note that this happens because
the tax hike introduced in 1991, despite being larger than the corresponding
spending cuts, is transitory, while the spending cut is permanent. This multi-
year labelling strategy does not lead to marginal cases — in which a label is
attributed on the basis of a negligible diﬀerence between the share of tax hikes
and expenditure cuts in the overall adjustment. The data show that in most
cases a political decision was made as to the nature of the fiscal consolidation:
EB or TB. Table 1 in the Data Appendix lists our classification of all episodes
in TB and EB.
    We cannot observe the realizations of announced plans, because the nar-
rative method allows to identify exogenous corrections at the time when they
are announced but only total expenditure and receipts are observed upon im-
plementation. Thus we cannot control-because we do not observe it-for the
possibility that the composition of an adjustment changes (relative to what
had been announced) when it is implemented. We do observe, however, the
total adjustment if this diﬀers from what had been announced.
    Our second example is Australia. The plan which was introduced in 1985
with a series of sequential adjustments, lasted until 1988. After the December
1984 elections – in which the Labour party surprisingly defeated the sitting

                                       15
liberals – the government announced a sequence of medium-term spending
cuts aimed at reducing a large inherited budget deficit. Table 2 illustrates
this episode. The plan announced in 1984 featured no change in taxation and
spending cuts of 0, 45 per cent of GDP each year in 1985 and 1986. In 1986
the plan was revised: the new plan called for additional spending cuts of 0.4
of GDP in 1986, of 0.26 in 1987 and a very small reversal of −0.08 in 1988.
In the revised plan revenue increases were also introduced: a tax increase of
0.17 of GDP in 1986, a further increase of 0.19 of GDP in 1987 and an almost
complete reversal (−0.29) in 1988. All four years are labelled as periods of
EB adjustment. Note that because the revisions for 1988 were announced
in as part of a multi-year plan, 1988 is labelled as a year of EB adjustment
even if in that year we observe an (anticipated) reduction in taxation larger
that the (anticipated) increase in expenditure. This would not be the case
if we (incorrectly) overlooked plans and only considered year-to-year fiscal
adjustments.
    As the Australian and Italian examples illustrate, the procedure used to
label corrections as TB or EB uses only information available in real time:
the labelling of each plan is decided on the basis of information available
when the plan is announced and implemented. This labelling can therefore
be used to estimate and simulate the real time eﬀects of the adoption of a
plan and to detect potential diﬀerences between EB and TB plans. 16

                                 Insert Table 2 here

   The results of our classification of episodes for each country is reported
in Table 3. Sometimes fiscal plans change nature over time: for instance
they start as an EB plan and at some point turn into a TB plan. One
example of a policy reversal is Canada in 1991. A plan initially labelled
as TB was modified, after some time, to deliver the majority of corrections
on the expenditure side. At the time of the announcement we label such a
plan TB, but it then shifts to EB when the new announcement is made and
tax hikes are replaced by spending cuts. The coding of diﬀerent episodes is
  16
     This would not be possible with alternative classification schemes. For instance, using
the success of adjustments, say in terms of their ability to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio
to identify their status. Success can be a useful classification criterion within sample, but
it is useless for out-of-sample analyses, since the success of a plan cannot be determined
upon its announcement.



                                             16
implemented using two dummies, EB and TB, that take values of one when
the relevant adjustment is implemented, and zero otherwise.

                              Insert Table 3 here

      As already noted, fiscal plans — at least those in our dataset — diﬀer not
only in their composition (EB vs. TB) but also in the correlation between
unanticipated and anticipated shifts in fiscal variables—what we have labelled
the "style" of a plan. This is determined by the observed correlation between
unanticipated and anticipated shifts announced at time t. A permanent fis-
cal correction is characterized by zero or positive correlation between eut and
eat,t+,j (j > 1). Instead, stop-and-go adjustments display a negative correla-
tion between eui,t and eai,t,j (j > 1).


4      Specification of the empirical model
We estimate the eﬀect of fiscal adjustments on several variables: GDP growth
(all growth rates are annual), private consumption growth, the growth in pri-
vate fixed capital formation17 , the change in short-term (3−month) interest
rates, inflation, the (log of ) the Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) for both
consumers and firms computed by the OECD or the European Commission.
The sources of our data and all data transformations are described in Table
A2 in the Appendix.
    The model we estimate, (1), is a (truncated) moving average representa-
tion of the variable of interest, ∆zi,t (in turn GDP growth, private consump-
tion growth, etc.). We estimate a quasi-panel which allows for two types
of heterogeneity: within-country heterogeneity in the eﬀects of TB and EB
plans on the left-hand-side variable, and between-country heterogeneity in
the style of a plan
  17
    Except for Italy and Spain where lack of separate data on private investment at the
beginning of the sample forces us to study total investment: private plus public. Our
results are unaﬀected if we drop these two countries.




                                          17
       ∆zi,t = α + B1 (L)eui,t ∗ T Bi,t + B2 (L)eai,t,0 ∗ T Bi,t +                      (1)
               C1 (L)eui,t ∗ EBi,t + C2 (L)eai,t,0 ∗ EBi,t +
                    X
                    3                     X
                                          3
                          a
                   + γ j ei,t,j ∗ EBi,t +   δ j eai,t,j ∗ T Bi,t + λi + χt + ui,t
                      j=1                     j=1


       eai,t,1 = ϕ1,i eui,t + v1,i,t
       eai,t,2 = ϕ2,i eui,t + v2,i,t
       eai,t,3 = ϕ3,i eui,t + v3,i,t


    where λi and χt are country and time fixed eﬀects.
    In (1) shifts in fiscal policy aﬀect the economy through three components.
First, unanticipated changes in fiscal stance, eui,t , announced at time t and
implemented at time t; second the implementation at time t of policy shifts
that had been announced in the past, eai,t,0 ; third, the anticipation of future
changes in fiscal policy, announced at time t, to be implemented at a future
date, eai,t,j for j = 1, 2, 3. Our moving average representation is truncated
because the length of the B(L) and C(L) polynomials is limited to three-
years. This truncation, however, does not aﬀect the possibility of correctly
estimating the fiscal multipliers, as all omitted shocks and all information
lagged t − 4 and earlier are orthogonal to the variables included in our spec-
ification18 . ϕ1,i , ϕ2,i , ϕ3,i are estimated on a country by country basis on the
time series of the narrative fiscal shocks.
  18
    (1) diﬀers from a VAR. The usual practice in VAR models is to derive impulse re-
sponses first by estimating the model in autoregressive form, then by identifying structural
shocks from the VAR residuals, and finally inverting the VAR representation to obtain
the infinite MA representation in which all variables included in the VAR are expressed as
linear functions of a distributed lag of structural shocks. The coeﬃcients in this represen-
tation (that are not directly estimated) define the impulse response function. In our case,
since we observe the structural shocks from the narrative method, we can directly com-
pute impulse responses, thus following the estimation procedure adopted by Romer and
Romer (2010). The advantage of observable narrative shocks is that they allow to compute
impulse responses omitting — diﬀerently from a standard VAR — a large amount of infor-
mation which would be orthogonal to the shocks included in the regression. Therefore,
parsimony in the specification is paired with consistent (though not eﬃcient) estimation:.
We pay a cost in terms of precision, as the omitted information aﬀects the size of the
confidence intervals of the impulse response functions.

                                            18
      We compute impulse responses taking into account the correlation be-
tween unanticipated shocks in year t and shocks announced in year t to be
implemented in years t + 1, t + 2 and t + 3. That is when we simulate the
response to an anticipated shock we take into account the fact that such a
shock typically does not occur in isolation but is accompanied by the con-
temporaneous announcement of future shifts in fiscal variables according to
our estimates of the ϕ parameters. Impulse responses to correlated shocks
can be computed using the Generalized Impulse Response Functions (GIRF)
discussed in Garratt et al. (2012), where contemporaneous linkages across
shocks are based on the estimated covariances of the error terms. Follow-
ing a similar approach we first estimate the ϕ coeﬃcients which describe
the response of anticipated shocks to unanticipated ones. Then, when we
simulate the impact of a realization of eui,t , we also change eai,t,t+1 (by ϕ1,i ),
eai,t,t+2 (by ϕ2,i ),and eai,t,t+3 (by ϕ3,i ) 19 . In other words (1) is a quasi-panel:
we impose cross-country restrictions on the B, C and γ coeﬃcients, but we
allow for within- and between-country heterogeneity. "Within" because im-
pulse responses will be diﬀerent for TB and EB adjustments. "Between"
because they will also diﬀer across countries as the ϕ0 s diﬀer, according to
each country’s specific style. We compute impulse responses to a shock in
the unanticipated component of the fiscal corrections, eui,t , equal to one per
cent of GDP. The total size of the adjustment, however, will diﬀer across
countries as the response of anticipated corrections to unanticipated ones
diﬀers from one country to another. Finally, the eﬀects of diﬀerent style
of fiscal adjustments can be gauged by comparing the impulse responses of
diﬀerent countries. The model is estimated by SUR (Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions).
      The overall model contains a total of 56 equations: 4 equations for each
of the 14 countries. The total number of estimated parameters is 100: 18
common parameters, 14 country fixed eﬀects, 26 time dummies and (14*3)
parameters in the equations linking unexpected to expected shocks. We
compute impulse responses by simulation as illustrated in Appendix 2 . We
expect that our specification will deliver much more precise estimates of
the impulse response functions than those normally obtained in VAR for a
number of reasons. First, what we estimate is a quasi-panel version of the
  19
     Our estimates of the ϕ parameters are simply meant to capture the correlation between
observable anticipated and unanticipated corrections. Thus, for our purposes, there is no
need to instrument the regressors to obtain valid estimates.



                                           19
truncated MA representation adopted by Romer and Romer (2010) for U.S.
data and the cross-sectional dimension allows us to significantly enlarge the
sample size and the precision of the estimates. Second, consistently with
the SURE estimation of the quasi-panel model, we bootstrap residuals by
taking into account the fact that there is cross-sectional correlation among
them. Third, plans identified by the narrative records, diﬀerently from shocks
identified in a VARs, are observable and they are therefore not resampled
when confidence intervals are constructed by bootstrap methods. Finally,
allowing for an heterogenous eﬀect of TB and EB plans reduces the size of
residuals in the estimated model.

4.1    Discussion
Our proposed specification is meant to capture in a parsimonious way the im-
pact on fiscal multipliers of within and between country heterogeneity in the
composition of a fiscal adjustment. There are several aspects of our specifi-
cation that are worth discussing to illustrate the way in which we have solved
the trade-oﬀ between parsimony and the risk of under-parameterization.
    The direct way of modelling heterogeneity between tax and spending mul-
tipliers is a specification that distinguishes between the eﬀect of exogenous
tax adjustment and exogenous expenditure adjustments



             ∆zi,t = α + B1 (L)τ ui,t + B2 (L)τ ai,t,0 +                          (2)
                            u             a
                     C1 (L)gi,t + C2 (L)gi,t,0 +
                            X
                            3              X
                                           3
                               a a                a
                           + γ j τ i,t,j +   δ j gi,t,j + λi + χt + ui,t
                             j=1               j=1


               τ ai,t,1 = ϕ1,i τ ui,t + v1,i,t τ ai,t,1 = ϕ7,i gi,t
                                                                  u
                                                                      + v7,i,t
                  a               u               a               u
               τ i,t,2 = ϕ2,i τ i,t + v2,i,t τ i,t,2 = ϕ8,i gi,t + v8,i,t
               τ ai,t,3 = ϕ3,i τ ui,t + v3,i,t τ ai,t,3 = ϕ9,i gi,t
                                                                 u
                                                                      + v9,i,t
                  a               u             a                 u
               gi,t,1 = ϕ4,i gi,t + v4,i,t gi,t,1 = ϕ10,i τ i,t + v10,i,t
                  a               u             a
               gi,t,2   = ϕ5,i gi,t   + v5,i,t gi,t,2  = ϕ11,i τ ui,t + v11,i,t
               gi,t,3 = ϕ6,i gi,t + v6,i,t gi,t,3 = ϕ12,i τ ui,t + v12,i,t
                  a               u             a
                u
               gi,t   = ϕ13,i τ ui,t + v13,i,t


                                             20
    there are clearly many more parameters in (2) than in our baseline speci-
fication. However, the estimation of all the relevant ϕ0 s in this specification is
not feasible given the available observations on the components of fiscal plans.
Note that estimates of the ϕ0 s are essential to measure tax and spending
multipliers. Consider, for the sake of illustration, the case of a researcher in-
terested in the output eﬀect of an unanticipated tax change τ ui,t . B1 (L) would
correctly measure this multiplier only if ϕ1,i = ϕ2,i = ... = ϕ13,i = 0. In fact,
only in this case the experiment of introducing a shock to τ ui,t setting all the
other innovations to zero would be a valid one. If, for example, ϕ13,i 6= 0,
                    u
one cannot set gi,t    = 0 when simulating the eﬀect of an unanticipated tax
        u
shock τ i,t . In other words, since the parameters in our model are estimated
allowing for the sample correlation between changes in taxes and spending
as well as between unanticipated and anticipated changes, such correlations
cannot be assumed away when the model is simulated.
    Our specification saves degrees of freedom first by studying the corre-
lation between unanticipated and anticipated total adjustments, that is by
estimating in (1) three ϕ0 s parameters instead of thirteen as in (2) and then
by distinguishing between tax-based and expenditure-based adjustments.
    Finally, our specification also imposes the restriction that all anticipated
shocks occurring at time t have the same impact on the dependent variable
independently on how far back they had been announced. This is why we
use a single variable, eai,t,0 . As already argued (Mertens and Ravn 2011), this
seems a very reasonable way to save on degrees of freedom.


5     Results
In this section we present our baseline results from the estimation of (1) and
the associated equations used to estimate the ϕ0 s. The estimation runs from
1981 to 2007 (we observe exogenous shifts in fiscal variables over the period
1978-2009, but we lose observations from the presence of leads and lags of
the fiscal variables).
    Table 4 illustrates the diﬀerence in the style of fiscal adjustments in the
various countries. In this table (where we also report the results for Sweden
and Finland which are not in the baseline regressions because for these two
countries we lack data on confidence) we report the estimates of ϕ1,i , ϕ2,i , ϕ3,i
with their standard errors in brackets. We show a coeﬃcient of zero, with no
standard error, whenever there are too few observations available for estima-

                                        21
tion. Canada and Australia and Sweden record a cumulative response (sum
of the responses of one-, two- and three-year ahead announcements to an
unanticipated correction) which is in the region of unity and higher than one
for Canada., Austria, Denmark, France, Japan and the U.K. feature a posi-
tive but milder response of anticipated corrections to current unanticipated
ones with coeﬃcients ranging from 0.12 to 0.85. This correlation becomes
not statistically diﬀerent from zero in Belgium, Finland, Germany, Ireland,
Japan, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and the U.S., where fiscal policy corrections
are implemented mainly via unanticipated shocks20 . At the opposite end
of the spectrum lies Italy, where one and two—year ahead anticipations are
negatively correlated with unanticipated shocks (significantly at the one-year
horizon). This suggests that at least part of a typical Italian stabilization is
transitory.

                              Insert Table 4 here

    Figure 1 illustrates visually the potential importance of this point by re-
porting eui,t and eai,t,t+1 for all countries in our sample. The figure shows a
significant heterogeneity across countries in the design of their fiscal plans
and confirms the results of Table 4. Compare, for instance, the results for
Sweden and Italy. In Sweden the continuous and the dotted lines move to-
gether, indicating that unanticipated (the continuous line) and 1-year ahead
anticipated (the dotted line) shifts in fiscal stance move in the same direction.
That is, unanticipated tightenings are accompanied by the announcement of
more tightening one year down the road. The opposite happens in Italy.

                             Insert Figure 1 here

    Figure 2 reports impulse responses of output growth to EB and TB fiscal
plans where, as everywhere else in this paper for comparability with the avail-
able empirical literature, we report one standard errors bands. Countries are
ordered starting from those that feature a positive but mild correlation be-
tween future anticipated and current unanticipated corrections (Australia,
Austria, Denmark, France, the U.K. and Japan). Next we list the countries
for which this correlation is close to zero (Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Por-
tugal, Spain, and the U.S.). Finally the two opposite ends of the spectrum
  20
    Table 4 reports a zero with no standard error where the number of observations was
not large enough to estimate the relevant ϕ0 s.

                                         22
in terms of the relation between anticipated and unanticipated fiscal adjust-
ments, Canada and Italy. The patterns diﬀer across countries (because of
the heterogeneity in styles) but in all of them the diﬀerence between EB
and TB adjustments is large and statically significant. In all countries TB
adjustments are recessionary and there is no sign of recovery for at least the
three years following the start of a plan. In the case of EB adjustments re-
cessions are on average much smaller and short-lived. Note that this is an
average which could result from some bigger EB induced recessions and some
expansionary EB adjustments. Interestingly, Canada features the largest dif-
ference between TB and EB plans while the smallest is observed in the case
of Italy. This is not surprising because an unanticipated shift in taxes equal
to 1% of GDP (our experiment) in Italy is partly oﬀset by the anticipation of
future shifts in the opposite direction. This comparison hints at the fact that
adjustments have especially low cost when the announcement of a spending
cut is not accompanied by that of a future reversal. On the contrary they
are less eﬀective when they are stop-and-go.21
                                Insert Figure 2 here
    Figures 3 and 4 show the response of households’ consumption on durables
and non-durables and of business investment 22 . The results indicate that
the diﬀerent eﬀect on output growth of TB and EB adjustments is to be
attributed more to the response of private investment, than to that of private
consumption. Consumption growth typically responds less hetrogenously
than investment to TB and EB adjustments.
  21
      Guajardo et al (2011) also use the (D&al) data and also distinguish between EB and
TB adjustments. Compared with our results, however, the impulse responses reported
in that paper are constructed overlooking plans and country-specific styles i.e. overlook-
ing the correlation between unanticipated and anticipated shifts in taxes and spending.
Although the general message is similar–EB adjustments are less recessionary than TB
ones–overlooking plans results in much wider confidence intervals. Note that Guajardo et
al (2011) report, in their Figure 9, one standard error bands, with 64 per cent confidence
intervals. To allow comparability we do the same in this paper ( in a version of this paper
previously circulated labels on confidence bound were wrongly indicating the width of our
bands at two stadard deviations). It is probably worth noting that the diﬀerence between
the eﬀect of EB ant TB plans on output remains significat also if two standard errors
bands, with 95 per cent confidence intervals are considered.
   22
      The data refer to private capital formation for all countries except for Spain and Italy
where, for the early part of the sample, we only have data total capital formation which
includes both private and public capital formation. Our results are unchanged if we drop
these two countries in our estimation.

                                             23
                         Insert Figures 3 and 4

    Figures 5 and 6 report the responses of the indicators of consumer and
business confidence. The evidence of heterogeneity between TB and EB
adjustments is confirmed in the response of consumer confidence, and more
strongly confirmed for business confidence. The evidence from the responses
of business confidence and investment is consistent with a causal relation
running from business confidence to investment and output.

                         Insert Figures 5 and 6

   Finally, we consider the response of monetary policy and of inflation,
which are reported in Figures 7 and 8.

                         Insert Figures 7 and 8

    Overall, monetary policy (the change in 3-month interest rates) is more
expansionary in the case of EB adjustments than in the case of TB ones.
The diﬀerences in the responses of monetary policy to fiscal plans, however,
appears to be too small to explain the large diﬀerences in output responses;
moreover the pattern of cross-country heterogeneity in the responses of mon-
etary policy to fiscal plans does not match the one observed for output.
    The response of inflation helps understand why monetary policy might be
tighter during TB plans. Figure 8 shows that TB adjustments are in general
more inflationary than EB ones. One possibility, as discussed in Alesina and
Perotti (1997), is that TB plans include increases in indirect taxes and in
income taxes which trigger a response of wages. This evidence raises the
issue of the importance of accompanying monetary policy in determining
the heterogenous eﬀects on output of TB and EB plans. Could it be that
EB plans are less recessionary precisely because monetary policy is more
expansionary during such plans? If this were the case the heterogeneity
between the two types of plans could disappear at the zero lower bound,
where interest rates are prevented from falling. We address this issue in
the next section where we show that monetary policy cannot be the main
explanation for the diﬀerence in the eﬀects of TB vs EB adjustments.
    Before turning to our robustness analysis it is worth comparing once again
the results for Canada and Italy. These two countries, as we discussed above,


                                     24
are at the opposite ends of the spectrum in terms of their styles of adjust-
ments. In Canada the government typically announces fiscal plans that are
consistent over time. Italy, on the contrary, is the quintessential example of
stop-and-go policies. Interestingly, the evidence for Canada suggests that EB
adjustments, when they are part of a consistent plan, might be expansion-
ary, driven by a surge in private investment. In Italy, instead, the diﬀerence
between EB and TB plans is the smallest among the countries in our sam-
ple, and EB plans don’t feature positive eﬀects on output. This observation
suggests that consistent plans over time seem to be superior to stop-and-go,
largely unpredictable policies.23


6       Robustness
6.1     Monetary policy
Does the accompanying monetary policy explain the diﬀerence between EB
and TB adjustments? In this section we show that the answer is negative24 .
We show this results in two ways: first, we exploit the fact that for a sizeable
part of our sample monetary policy is constrained, since in the Euro area
it is conducted by the ECB and it cannot respond to country-specific fiscal
adjustments. Next, we design a counterfactual experiment aimed at evalu-
ating what the eﬀect of fiscal adjustment would be if policy rates remained
unchanged.

6.1.1    The eﬀect of fiscal policy in euro area countries
We now separate our observations in two groups: in the first group we in-
clude observations for euro area countries (Austria, Belgium, France, Finland,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain) from 1999; in the second group
all other observations: non euro-area countries (Australia, Denmark, U.K.,
  23
     The policy reversals which are part of Italian plans might suggest the presence of
intertemporal eﬀects. For instance, if taxes are high today, but expected to fall tomorrow,
labor supply and output migh increase today. This does not seem to be the case because
policy reversals in Italy are typically the result of temporary measures such as temporary
tax amnesties.
  24
     Guajardo et al (2011) also compare TB and EB adjustments and claim that this is
the case. Their evidence, however, is based on the analysis of isolated shocks, rather than
plans, a procedure which we have argued is incorrect, at least with these data.


                                            25
Japan, Sweden, U.S. and Canada) and euro-area countries before 1999. The
motivation for this divisions is that the common currency prevents monetary
policy from responding to fiscal developments in member countries25 . We
therefore proceed to the estimation of the following system


       ∆zi,t = α + δ k (L) ∆it + B1k (L)eui,t ∗ T Bi,t + B2k (L)eai,t ∗ T Bi,t + (3)
               C1k (L)eui,t ∗ EBi,t + C2k (L)eai,t ∗ EBi,t +
                   X
                   3                      X
                                          3
                          a
                  + γ jk ei,t,j ∗ EBi,t +   δ jk eai,t,j ∗ T Bi,t + λi + χt + ui,t
                    j=1                      j=1
       eai,t,1
             =    ϕ1,i eui,t
                   + v1,i,t
       eai,t,2
             =    ϕ2,i eui,t
                   + v2,i,t
       eai,t,3
             =    ϕ3,i eui,t
                   + v3,i,t
           k = EMU, non EU plus Europe before EMU

   In (3) the coeﬃcients describing the responses of the relevant macro vari-
ables to fiscal plans are restricted to be equal within each group, euro and
non-euro members, respectively. No restrictions are imposed between the
two groups.
   The impulse responses for output generated by the unrestricted system,
reported in Figure 9, confirms the robustness of our baseline results showing
an heterogenous eﬀect of EB and TB plans. Interestingly, this robustness
results emerge even if the panel restrictions are rejected26 .

                                   Insert Figure 9
  25
     A similar analysis is conducted by Jalil (2012). This paper considers fiscal shocks
rather than fiscal plans and finds that the tax multiplier is of about 3, while the spending
multiplier is close to zero in countries where monetary authorities are constrained in their
ability to counteract shocks because they are in either a monetary union or a liquidity
trap.
  26
     In this estimation we have extended the sample to Sweden and Finland, the two
countries which so far we had been excluded because of lack of some data. Introducing
these two countries—and even doing so in a less restricted system– leaves the main result
unaltered. This is confirmed when Sweden and Finland are included in the restricted
model. The results are available by the authors upon request.




                                            26
6.1.2   Counterfactual Evidence
Consider a simplified representation of the joint dynamics of output growth,
∆yt , the monetary policy variable (which for simplicity we denote MPt ),
and of our narrative fiscal corrections consisting of both unanticipated and
anticipated components

        ∙         ¸       ∙             ¸∙           ¸       ∙         ¸
            ∆yt               a11 a12        ∆yt−1               εyt
                      =                                  +
            MPt               a21 a22        MPt−1               εm
                                                                  t


                εyt = β 1 eft ∗ T Bt + β 2 eft ∗ EBt + β 3 enf    y
                                                             t + et
               εm
                t   = γ 1 eft ∗ T Bt + γ 2 eft ∗ EBt + γ 3 enf       y    m
                                                            t + γ 4 et + et



    The VAR innovations in the output growth equation, εyt , include the nar-
rative (structural) fiscal shocks, that are allowed to have heterogenous eﬀects
according to their nature, eft ∗ T Bt and eft ∗ EBt , non-fiscal shocks, enf
                                                                          t , and
                            y
a residual output shock et .that for our purposes we do not need to identify.
The VAR innovations in the equation for the monetary policy variable, εm       t ,
include the same structural shocks aﬀecting the output innovations, and a
structural monetary shock em   t . This model makes the (usual) recursive as-
sumption between macroeconomic variables and monetary policy – that is
we assume that monetary policy reacts contemporaneously to macro shocks,
but it takes at least one lag before monetary policy can aﬀect macroeco-
nomic outcomes. This assumption is standard in VAR models of the mone-
tary transmission mechanism. In principle, the recursive assumption become
less plausible the lower the frequency at which the data are observed. We
shall check its plausibility by comparing the response of output to monetary
policy derived in our extended empirical model with those available in the
literature and based on higher frequency data.
    The moving average representation for output growth, consistent with
the above representation and truncated after two periods can be written as
follows




                                             27
∆yt = β 1 eft T Bt + β 2 eft EBt + +β 3 enf    y
                                         t + et +
              ³                                                          ´
                   f                    f                    nf      y
      +a11 β 1 et−1 ∗ T Bt−1 + β 2 et−1 ∗ EBt−1 + β 3 et−1 + et−1 +
              ³                                                             ´
      +a12 γ 1 eft−1 T Bt−1 + γ 2 eft EBt−1 + γ 3 enf t−1 + γ  ey
                                                              4 t−1 +  em
                                                                        t−1 +
      ¡ 2              ¢ ³                                                     ´
       a11 + a12 a21 β 1 eft−2 T Bt−2 + β 2 eft−2 EBt−2 + β 3 enf t−2  +  ey
                                                                           t−2 +
                              ³                                                             ´
      (a11 a12 + a12 a22 ) γ 1 eft−2 T Bt−2 + γ 2 eft−2 EBt−2 + γ 3 enf
                                                                     t−2  +  γ  ey
                                                                               4 t−2 + em
                                                                                        t−2


     As structural shocks are orthogonal to each other, projecting ∆yt on eft ,
eft−1 and eft−2 allows us to obtain consistent estimates of the impulse responses
of output growth to T B and EB adjustments

              X
              3
                ˆ                            X
                                             3
                                               ˆ
      ∆yt =     δ i,T B eft−i+1 ∗ T Bt−i+1 +   δ i,EB eft−i+1 ∗ EBt−i+1 + v1t ,    (4)
              i=1                              i=1

This regression is equivalent (in the context of our example) to the output
growth equation estimated in (1) in Section 3.5. Its coeﬃcients reflect both
the direct eﬀect of fiscal policy on output (that depends on β 1 and β 2 ) and
the indirect eﬀect that depends on the response of monetary policy to the
fiscal adjustment, namely γ 1 and γ 2 . These two channels can be separated by
estimating the following augmented moving average model where we allow
output growth to respond directly to lagged monetary policy innovations
                           ˆ
through the coeﬃcients π. This augmented specification allows to "coun-
terfactually" shut down the indirect monetary policy channel and therefore
assess its importance in determining the heterogenous eﬀect of EB and TB
adjustments on output

               X
               3
                 ˆ        f
                                             X
                                             3
                                               ˆ
      ∆yt    =   π i,T B et−i+1 ∗ T Bt−i+1 +   π i,EB eft−i+1 ∗ EBt−i+1 +          (5)
                 i=1                                 i=1
                  X
                  2
                    ˆ
                 + π i,MP εm
                           t−i + v2t
                    i=1

   The following table compares the expected values of the coeﬃcients es-
timated in (4) and (5) and illustrates how our augmented specification can

                                          28
be used to estimate the direct eﬀect of fiscal policy on output controlling for
the response of monetary policy to fiscal adjustments. 27


                                       Closing the Monetary Policy Channel
                                          baseline specification
                 ∂∆yt                     ∂∆yt                                   ∂∆yt
                ∂eft ∗Fi                ∂eft−1 ∗Fi                             ∂eft−2 ∗Fi


 Fi = T B       β1                  a11 β 1 +a12 γ 1       (a211 + a12 a21 ) β 1 + (a11 a12 + a121 a22 ) γ 1
 Fi = EB        β2                  a11 β 2 +a12 γ 2       (a211 + a12 a21 ) β 2 + (a11 a12 + a12 a22 ) γ 2

                                         augmented specification
                 ∂∆yt                     ∂∆yt            ∂∆yt
                ∂eft ∗Fi
                           |εm
                             t =0
                                               |m
                                        ∂ef ∗F εt−1 =0
                                                                |m
                                                       ∂ef ∗F εt−2 =0
                                          t−1     i          t−2   i



 Fi = T B       β1                  a11 β 1                (a211 + a12 a21 ) β 1
 Fi = EB        β2                  a11 β 2                (a211 + a12 a21 ) β 2

                ∂∆yt                          ∂∆yt
                ∂em
                  t−1                         ∂em
                                                t−2

                a12                 (a11 a12 + a12 a22 )
                a12                 (a11 a12 + a12 a22 )


  27
    First moments of all estimated parameters are conditonal upon the regressors in the
relevant specification.




                                                  29
   Based on this analysis we have estimated an augmented version of (1)
using ∆it as a proxy for monetary innovations28

                    X
                    3
       ∆zi,t   = α+   δ k ∆it−k + B1 (L)eui,t ∗ T Bi,t + B2 (L)eai,t ∗ T Bi,t +          (6)
                         k=1
                   C1 (L)eui,t ∗ EBi,t + C2 (L)eai,t ∗ EBi,t +
                    X  3                    X3
                               a
                   + γ j ei,t,j ∗ EBi,t +       δj eai,t,j ∗ T Bi,t   + λi + χt + ui,t
                     j=1                    j=1
       eai,t,1 =   ϕ1,i eui,t + v1,i,t
       eai,t,2 =   ϕ2,i eui,t + v2,i,t
       eai,t,3 =   ϕ3,i eui,t + v3,i,t

     Augmenting our baseline specification with lags of ∆it allows us to com-
pute the impulse response to the fiscal plans by zeroing the response of mon-
etary policy to all innovations and in particular to fiscal adjustments. The
distributed lag of ∆it is significant in our output growth equation, but the
eﬀect of innovations in monetary policy on output are small relative to that
of fiscal adjustments. The dynamic responses of output growth to the change
in interest rates are described in the following table

                      The Dynamic Response of ∆y t to ∆i t−i
                      period i=1    i=2         i=3
                       coeﬀ -0.22 -0.15        -0.12
                      t-stat -8.73 -6.69       -4.73

    These coeﬃcients show a significant negative but small response of output
growth to changes in the monetary policy rate. Technically speaking the
response described by the coeﬃcients in the table is not directly comparable
with usual impulse responses describing the eﬀect of monetary policy on
output, because they are responses to monetary policy innovations and not
to exogenous monetary policy shocks. However, taking into account the well
established fact that monetary policy innovations are strongly correlated to
exogenous monetary policy shocks (see e.g.. Rudebusch 1998) it is interesting
  28
   Using a proxy for monetary policy innovations we are able to capture a more general
monetary policy reaction function than that adopted in the illustrative example above.


                                              30
to note that the response implied by our estimated coeﬃcients lies in between
the typical response obtained on U.S. data (see e.g.. Christiano et al. 1998)
and that obtained on euro area data, which is smaller than that observed for
the U.S. (see e.g.. Peersman and Smets 2001).
    The counterfactual exercise aimed at shutting down the response of mon-
etary policy to fiscal innovations is implemented by setting ∆it−i to zero.
The impulse responses thus computed are reported in Figure 10 along with
the responses obtained in the baseline model. The results in Figure 10 con-
firm the indications obtained estimating the baseline model. The conclusion
is that the diﬀerential response of monetary policy to EB and TB adjust-
ments cannot fully explain the diﬀerent eﬀect on output growth of EB and
TB plans.29

                              Insert Figure 10 here

   We have repeated this counterfactual experiment limiting the sample to
the countries belonging to the euro area. Figure 11 shows that both the main
evidence and the results of the counterfactual obtained by setting to zero the
response of monetary policy to fiscal adjustments remain robust.

                                 Insert Figure 11

6.2     Is the choice between TB and EB plans related to
        the cycle, or to accompanying reforms?
Some authors have found that the eﬀects of fiscal contractions on output
growth are asymmetric during economic expansions and recessions (see Auer-
bach and Gorodnichenko 2012, Bachmann and Sims 2011, Barro and Redlick
2011)30 . Could the asymmetry we have documented between TB and EB
plans be explained by the fact that the choice between the two types of
adjustment is related to the cycle? In other words, is it the case that TB
adjustments are chosen during recessions while EB ones are chosen during
  29
     Note that some of these countries adopted the Euro therefore had an identical mon-
etary policy for part of the period under consideration. Unfortunately we do not have
enough cases of fiscal adjustment in the first decade of the Euro to use this feature of
the data. it is in fact well known that after entering the monetary union, many countries
relaxed rather than tighten their fiscal stance.
  30
     A diﬀerent results is however obtained by Ramey et al.(2013).

                                           31
periods of economic expansions? In principle the narrative approach should
eliminate the correlation of the adjustments with the cycle, but the point is
more subtle. The type of fiscal consolidation may be unrelated to the cycle
when it is decided, but somehow it could happen that EB are chosen during
booms and TB during recessions, possibly by chance. We will show below
that this is not the case. A second concern may arise because of the possi-
bility that the asymmetry between TB and EB plans might be explained by
the fact that EB plans (diﬀerently from TB ones) often are adopted as part
of a wider set of market-oriented reforms, such as labor and product market
liberalizations. It could be that such reforms, rather than the character of
the fiscal plan, is the reason for the milder eﬀects on output growth.
    To address the first concern we use a measure of the cycle, defined as the
deviation of output from its Hodrick-Prescott trend. To address the second
we use an index of labor market reforms constructed by the OECD. We then
run a binary choice (panel) probit regression of the dummies identifying TB
and EB episodes on these two measures separately. We find no evidence of
a relation between the cycle or the degree of labor market reforms and the
choice whether to implement a TB adjustment. The coeﬃcient on the cyclical
variable is 0.04 with an associated standard error of 0.73. The McFadden
R-square of the regression is 0.001. There is instead very mild evidence for an
higher likelihood to choose an EB plan during a recession: the coeﬃcient on
the cyclical variable is −0.16 with an associated standard error of 0.07; the
McFadden R-square is 0.01. Interestingly, the marginal significance of the
cycle variable disappears when time dummies, capturing common shocks, are
included in the specification. Summing up. Our main result is not driven by
the endogeneity of the type of adjustment to the cycle.
    Similar results are obtained studying the relation between the choice
whether to adopt an EB or a TB plan and the OECD index of labor market
reforms. Note that this result is not inconsistent with the evidence and the
case studies in Perotti (2013) and Alesina and Ardagna (1998, 2012). These
papers argue that amongst all the fiscal adjustments the least costly are those
accompanied but some supply side reforms and by wage moderation. So, for
instance, amongst the EB adjustments those which are the least costly or
even expansionary are those accompanied by such reforms. Our result is dif-
ferent. What we find is that the diﬀerence between EB and TB cannot be
explained by supply side reforms.



                                      32
7    Conclusions
The main result of this paper is that while tax-based adjustments are asso-
ciated with deep and long lasting recessions, expenditure-based adjustments
are not. The output losses associated with the latter are very small, on av-
erage close to zero. This average is likely to be the result of some episodes of
fiscal adjustment which are characterized by small output costs, and other
which are accompanied by a (small) expansion. The aggregate demand com-
ponent which reflects more closely the diﬀerence in the response of output
to expenditure-based and tax-based adjustments is private investment. The
confidence of investors also does not fall much after an expenditure-based
adjustment, and promptly recovers and increases above the baseline. In-
stead it falls for several years after a tax-based adjustment. The diﬀerences
between the two types of adjustments is not to be explained by a diﬀerent
response of monetary policy, and therefore it should not vanish at the zero
lower bound. Nor is it explained by the cycle, or by systematically diﬀerent
choices of the supply side reforms that may accompany a fiscal correction.
Finally, and importantly, we have shown that the correct methodology to
answer the question What are the output eﬀects of fiscal consolidations? is
studying fiscal plans, rather than individual fiscal shocks as normally done
in the literature.


8    References

   Alesina A. and S. Ardagna (1998), “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment”, Eco-
nomic Policy, 13(27), 487—545.
   Alesina A. and S. Ardagna (2010), “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes
versus Spending”, Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 24, 35—68, edited by
J.R. Brown.
   Alesina A. and S. Ardagna (2012), “What Makes Fiscal Adjustments
Successful?”, forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 26. edited
by J.R. Brown.
   Alesina A., S. Ardagna, R. Perotti and F. Schiantarelli (2002), “Fiscal
Policy, Profits and Investment”, American Economic Review, 92(3), 571—
589.


                                      33
    Alesina A. and R. Perotti (1997) "The Welfare State and Competitive-
ness" American Economic Review 87, 347-66
    Auerbach A. and Y. Gorodnichenko, (2012), “Measuring the Output Re-
sponses to Fiscal Policy”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
4(2), 1—27.
    Bachmann R. and E. Sims, (2011),“Confidence and the Transmission of
Government Spending Shocks”, NBER Working Paper No. 17063, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    Barro R. J. and C. J. Redlick (2011), “Macroeconomic Eﬀects from Gov-
ernment Purchases and Taxes”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1),
51—102.
    Baxter M. and R. G. King (1993), “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium”,
American Economic Review, 83(3), 315—334.
    Blanchard O. and R. Perotti (2002), “An Empirical Characterization of
the Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Out-
put”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329—1368.
    Bloom N. (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica,
77(3), 623—685.
    Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M., and Evans, C. L. (1998). ‘Monetary
Policy shocks: what have we learned and to what end?’. NBER working
paper No. 6400.
    Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum and S. Rebelo (2011), "When is the Gov-
ernment Spending Multipliers Large?", Journal of Political Economy, 119
(1), 78-121.
    Corsetti, G.and A. Meier (2009), “Fiscal stimulus with spending rever-
sals”, CEPR Discussion Paper no 7302
    de Cos, Pablo Hernandez and E. Mora (2012) "Fiscal Consolidations and
Economic Growth". working paper, Banco de Espana.
    DeLong J. B. and L. H. Summers (2012), “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed
Economy ”, Working Paper.
    DeVries P., J. Guajardo, D. Leigh and A. Pescatori (2011), “A New
Action-based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidation”IMF Working Paper No. 11/128,
International Monetary Fund.
    Dixit A. and R. Pindick (1994), Investment Under Uncertainty Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.


                                    34
    Drautzburg T. and H.Uhlig (2013) "Fiscal Stimulus and distortionary
taxation", mimeo
    Eggertsson, G. B. (2010), "What Fiscal Policy is Eﬀective at Zero Interest
Rates?", NBER Macroeconomic Annual, D. Acemoglu and M. Woodford
(eds), Chicago University Press.
    Favero C., F.Giavazzi and J.Perego (2011) "Country Heterogeneity and
the International Evidence on the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy", IMF Economic
Review, 59,4, 652-682
    Galí J., J. D. López-Salido and J. Vallés (2007), “Understanding the
Eﬀects of Government Spending on Consumption”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 5 (1), 227—270.
    Garratt A., K. Lee, M. H. Pesaran and Y. Shin (2012), Global and Na-
tional Macroeconometric Modelling: A Long-Run Structural Approach Ox-
ford University Press.
    Giavazzi F. and M. Pagano (1990), “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be
Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries ”, NBER Chapters
in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1990, vol. 5, 75-122.
    Giavazzi F. and M. McMahon (2012), "The Household eﬀects of Govern-
ment Spending", in A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi (eds.), Fiscal Policy After
the Great Recession, University of Chicago Press and NBER, forthcoming .
    J. Guajardo, D. Leigh and A. Pescatori (2011), “Expansionary Austerity
New International Evidence", IMF Working Paper No. 11/158, International
Monetary Fund.
    Jalil A.(2012) "Comparing Tax and spending Multipliers: it is all about
controlling for monetary policy" mimeo, Dept of Economics, Reed College
    Leeper E. M. (2010), “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy”, NBER Work-
ing Papers No. 16510, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    Leeper E. M., T. B. Walker and S.-C. Yang (2008), “Fiscal Foresight:
Analytics and Econometrics”, NBER Working Papers No. 14028, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    Lippi M. and L. Reichlin (1994), “VAR Analysis, Non Fundamental Rep-
resentations, Blaschke Matrices”, Journal of Econometrics, 63(1), 307—325.
    Mertens K. and M. O. Ravn (2011), “Understanding the Aggregate Ef-
fects of Anticipated and Unanticipated Tax Policy Shocks”, Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 14(1), 27—54.


                                     35
   Mertens K. and M. O. Ravn (2013) "The Dynamic Eﬀects of Personal
and Corporate Income Tax Changes in the United States", The American
Economic Review , 103,4, 2012-47
   Perotti R (2013) :" The Austerity Myth: Gain without Pain?" forth-
coming in A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi (eds.) Fiscal Policy After the Great
Recession, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
   Peersman G. and F.Smets (2001) "the Monetary Transmission Mecha-
nism in the euro area" ECB Working Paper 91
   Ramey, V. (2011a), “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All
in the Timing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 1-50.
   Ramey V. (2011b), “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Econ-
omy?”, Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3), 673—685.
   Ramey V. (2013) " Government Spending and Private Activities" in A.
Alesina and F. Giavazzi (eds) Fiscal Policy after the Great Recession Uni-
versity of Chicago Press and NBER forthcoming
   Ramey, V., Owyang and S. Zubairy (2013), "Are Government Spending
Multipliers Greater During Periods of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century
Historical Data, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings forth-
coming
   Romer C. and D. H. Romer (2010), “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax
Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, American
Economic Review, 100(3), 763—801.
   Rudebusch, G. D. (1998). ‘Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR
Make Sense?’. International Economic Review, 39, 907-931.




                                   36
              Table         1: Stabilization plans in Italy (i=IT) 1991-1993
 time      τ ui,t
             τ ai,t,0       τ ai,t,1 τ ai,t,2 τ ai,t,3 gi,t
                                                         u   a
                                                            gi,t,0  a
                                                                   gi,t,1  a
                                                                          gi,t,2  a
                                                                                 gi,t,3           TB EB
 1991   1.69     0          -1.26        0        0    1.08   0      0      0      0               0  1
 1992   2.85 -1.26           -1.2        0        0    1.92   0      0      0      0               0  1
 1993    3.2 -1.2           -0.57        0        0    3.12   0      0      0      0               0  1
              Table         2: Stabilization plan         in Australia    (i=AU) in 1984
 time      τ ui,t
             τ ai,t,0        τ ai,t,1 τ ai,t,2 τ ai,t,3      u
                                                            gi,t  a
                                                                 gi,t,0     a
                                                                           gi,t,1  a
                                                                                  gi,t,2  a
                                                                                         gi,t,3   TB EB
 1985    0       0               0        0        0       0.45    0       0.45     0      0       0  1
 1986   0.17     0           0.19 -0.27            0       0.4 0.45        0.26 -0.08      0       0  1
 1987    0   0.19           -0.27         0        0       0.45 0.26       0.37     0      0       0  1
 1988    0   -0.27               0        0        0         0   0.37        0      0      0       0  1

 Table 3             Anticipated and unanticipated               fiscal adjustments                 years    plans
                    u
 country        τ   τ ai,t,0 τ ai,t,1 τ ai,t,2 τ ai,t,3 gi,t
                                                         u         a
                                                                 gi,t,0   a
                                                                         gi,t,1  a
                                                                                gi,t,2  a
                                                                                       gi,t,3     TB EB
   AU            4      7        7        3        1     5          6      6      3      1         2     8    5
   OE            5      1        1        0        0     5          2      2      0      0         3     4    2
   BG            7      4        4        0        0    10          4      4      0      0         3     8    3
   CN            9   14       14       10          8    10         12     12     11      8         8     7    10
   DE            9      6        6        3        0     9          6      6      3      1         8     8    3
   DK            4      0        0        0        0     3          1      1      0      0         2     2    2
   ES            7      3        3        0        0     7          2      2      0      0         5     5    2
   FN            2      1        1        0        0     5          2      2      0      0         0     6    2
   FR            5      5        5        3        1     4          2      2      0      0         7     5    4
    IR           6      0        0        0        0     3          1      1      0      0         5     2    0
    IT           12     6        6        0        0    12          0      0      0      0         3     9    5
   JP            7      7        7        1        0     7          2      2      0      0         7     5    7
   NL            9      2        2        0        0    11          2      2      0      0         1    12    4
   PT            4      2        2        0        0     4          2      2      0      0         5     2    2
   SW            3      4        4        2        1     3          4      4      2      1         0     7    2
   UK            4      5        5        1        0     5          6      6      1      0         7     3    4
   US            5   12       12       10          7     3          8      8      7      6         5    10    3
   Tot.         102 79        79       33       18      106        62     62     27     17        71 103      60

    NB A plan occurs when some unanticipated and anticipated adjustments
are observed simulataneously or when some future adjuments are announced
for the first time.


                                               37
    Table 4 Cross   countries heterogeneity in the design of multi - year plans
          CAN         AUS SWE GBR AUT DNK                       JPN       FRA
    ϕ1,i   0.99       0.85    0.48    0.34    0.31     0.24     0.27      0.18
          (0.19)     (0.12) (0.09) (0.02) (0.06) (0.03) (0.03) (0.08)
    ϕ2,i   0.59       -0.14   0.31    0.04      0        0    -0.0005 -0.02
         (0.097)     (0.08) (0.06) (0.02)                     (0.003) (0.04)
    ϕ3,i 0.022        -0.02   0.21     0        0        0        0       -0.03
          (0.04)     (0.01) (0.02)                                       (0.03)

             DEU           FIN     POR USA      ESP     BEL       IRL        ITA
    ϕ1,i      0.11         0.11    0.07   0.07  0.06    0.04       0        -0.22
             (0.11) (0.11) (0.14) (0.23) (0.06) (0.09)                     (0.04)
    ϕ2,i -0.096              0      0     0.07    0       0        0          0
             (0.08)                     (0.16)
    ϕ3,i      0.03           0      0    -0.01    0       0        0          0
             (0.01)                     (0.12)
    The following equations are estimated
    eai,t,1 = ϕ1,i eui,t + υ 1,i,t
    eai,t,2 = ϕ2,i eui,t + υ 2,i,t
    eai,t,3 = ϕ3,i eui,t + υ 3,i,t
    a
   ei,t,j are the corrections announced by the fiscal authorities of country i
at date t with an anticipation horizon of j years (i.e. to be implemented in
year t + j) for country i, eui,t are instead the unanticipated fiscal correction
announced and implemented in year t by the fiscal authorities of country i.




                                       38
                                         Unanticipated (solid) and Anticipated 1Y-ahead (dotted) Adjustments
                 CAN                               SWE                                          AUS                                 DNK
 6                                 6                                         6                                       6
 5                                 5                                         5                                       5
 4                                 4                                         4                                       4
 3                                 3                                         3                                       3
 2                                 2                                         2                                       2
 1                                 1                                         1                                       1
 0                                 0                                         0                                       0
-1                                -1                                        -1                                      -1
-2                                -2                                        -2                                      -2
 80   85    90     95   00   05    80   85    90     95     00     05        80     85     90     95    00     05    80   85   90     95    00   05
                 AUT                               GBR                                          JPN                                 FRA
 6                                 6                                         6                                       6
 5                                 5                                         5                                       5
 4                                 4                                         4                                       4
 3                                 3                                         3                                       3
 2                                 2                                         2                                       2
 1                                 1                                         1                                       1
 0                                 0                                         0                                       0
-1                                -1                                        -1                                      -1
-2                                -2                                        -2                                      -2
 80   85    90     95   00   05    80   85    90     95     00     05        80     85     90     95    00     05    80   85   90      95   00   05
                 USA                               DEU                                          BEL                                 IRL
 6                                 6                                         6                                       6
 5                                 5                                         5                                       5
 4                                 4                                         4                                       4
 3                                 3                                         3                                       3
 2                                 2                                         2                                       2
 1                                 1                                         1                                       1
 0                                 0                                         0                                       0
-1                                -1                                        -1                                      -1
-2                                -2                                        -2                                      -2
 80   85    90     95   00   05    80   85    90      95    00     05        80     85     90     95    00     05    80   85   90      95   00   05
                 PRT                               FIN                                          ESP                                 ITA
 6                                 6                                         6                                       6
 5                                 5                                         5                                       5
 4                                 4                                         4                                       4
 3                                 3                                         3                                       3
 2                                 2                                         2                                       2
 1                                 1                                         1                                       1
 0                                 0                                         0                                       0
-1                                -1                                        -1                                      -1
-2                                -2                                        -2                                      -2
 80   85    90     95   00   05    80   85    90     95     00     05        80     85     90     95    00     05    80   85   90     95    00   05




           Figure 1: Unanticipated and Anticipated Fiscal Adjustments




                                                             39
                            Tax Based (RED) and Exp Based (Blue) Adjustm ent
              AUS                                 AUT                                  DNK


1                              1                                         1

0                              0                                         0

-1                             -1                                       -1

-2                             -2                                       -2

-3                             -3                                       -3

-4                             -4                                       -4

      0   1    2    3   4           0        1     2       3      4            0   1    2    3   4
              ESP                                 FRA                                  GBR


1                              1                                         1

0                              0                                         0

-1                             -1                                       -1

-2                             -2                                       -2

-3                             -3                                       -3

-4                             -4                                       -4

      0   1    2    3   4           0        1     2       3      4            0   1    2    3   4
              JPN                                 BEL                                  DEU


1                              1                                         1

0                              0                                         0

-1                             -1                                       -1

-2                             -2                                       -2

-3                             -3                                       -3

-4                             -4                                       -4

      0   1    2    3   4           0        1     2       3      4            0   1    2    3   4
              IRL                                 PRT                                  USA


1                              1                                         1

0                              0                                         0

-1                             -1                                       -1

-2                             -2                                       -2

-3                             -3                                       -3

-4                             -4                                       -4

      0   1    2    3   4           0        1     2       3      4            0   1    2    3   4
              CAN                                 ITA


1                              1

0                              0

-1                             -1

-2                             -2

-3                             -3

-4                             -4

      0   1    2    3   4           0        1     2       3      4




     Figure 2: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on output growth




                                        40
                           Tax Based (RED) and Exp Based (Blue) Adjustment
             AUS                                 AUT                                 DNK
1                             1                                        1
0                             0                                        0
-1                            -1                                      -1
-2                            -2                                      -2
-3                            -3                                      -3
-4                            -4                                      -4
-5                            -5                                      -5
-6                            -6                                      -6
-7                            -7                                      -7
-8                            -8                                      -8
     0   1    2    3   4           0      1        2     3      4            0   1    2    3   4
             ESP                                FRA                                  GBR
1                             1                                        1
0                             0                                        0
-1                            -1                                      -1
-2                            -2                                      -2
-3                            -3                                      -3
-4                            -4                                      -4
-5                            -5                                      -5
-6                            -6                                      -6
-7                            -7                                      -7
-8                            -8                                      -8
     0   1    2    3   4           0      1        2     3      4            0   1    2    3   4
             JPN                                 BEL                                 DEU
1                             1                                        1
0                             0                                        0
-1                            -1                                      -1
-2                            -2                                      -2
-3                            -3                                      -3
-4                            -4                                      -4
-5                            -5                                      -5
-6                            -6                                      -6
-7                            -7                                      -7
-8                            -8                                      -8
     0   1    2    3   4           0      1        2     3      4            0   1    2    3   4
             IRL                                 PRT                                 USA
1                             1                                        1
0                             0                                        0
-1                            -1                                      -1
-2                            -2                                      -2
-3                            -3                                      -3
-4                            -4                                      -4
-5                            -5                                      -5
-6                            -6                                      -6
-7                            -7                                      -7
-8                            -8                                      -8
     0   1    2    3   4           0      1        2     3      4            0   1    2    3   4
             CAN                                 ITA
1                             1
0                             0
-1                            -1
-2                            -2
-3                            -3
-4                            -4
-5                            -5
-6                            -6
-7                            -7
-8                            -8
     0   1    2    3   4           0      1        2     3      4




Figure 3: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on consumption growth




                                              41
                               T a x Ba s e d (RED) a nd Ex p Ba s e d (Blu e ) Adjus tm e n t
                 AUS                                        AUT                                          DNK
 10.0                            10.0                                                 10.0
   7.5                             7.5                                                  7.5
   5.0                             5.0                                                  5.0
   2.5                             2.5                                                  2.5
   0.0                             0.0                                                  0.0
  -2.5                            -2.5                                                 -2.5
  -5.0                            -5.0                                                 -5.0
  -7.5                            -7.5                                                 -7.5
 -10.0                           -10.0                                                -10.0
         0   1    2    3   4              0         1         2        3         4               0   1    2    3   4
                 ESP                                        FRA                                          GBR
 10.0                            10.0                                                 10.0
   7.5                             7.5                                                  7.5
   5.0                             5.0                                                  5.0
   2.5                             2.5                                                  2.5
   0.0                             0.0                                                  0.0
  -2.5                            -2.5                                                 -2.5
  -5.0                            -5.0                                                 -5.0
  -7.5                            -7.5                                                 -7.5
 -10.0                           -10.0                                                -10.0
         0   1    2    3   4              0         1         2        3         4               0   1    2    3   4
                 JPN                                        BEL                                          DEU
 10.0                            10.0                                                 10.0
   7.5                             7.5                                                  7.5
   5.0                             5.0                                                  5.0
   2.5                             2.5                                                  2.5
   0.0                             0.0                                                  0.0
  -2.5                            -2.5                                                 -2.5
  -5.0                            -5.0                                                 -5.0
  -7.5                            -7.5                                                 -7.5
 -10.0                           -10.0                                                -10.0
         0   1    2    3   4              0         1         2        3         4               0   1    2    3   4
                 IRL                                        PRT                                          USA
 10.0                            10.0                                                 10.0
   7.5                             7.5                                                  7.5
   5.0                             5.0                                                  5.0
   2.5                             2.5                                                  2.5
   0.0                             0.0                                                  0.0
  -2.5                            -2.5                                                 -2.5
  -5.0                            -5.0                                                 -5.0
  -7.5                            -7.5                                                 -7.5
 -10.0                           -10.0                                                -10.0
         0   1    2    3   4              0         1         2        3         4               0   1    2    3   4
                 CAN                                         ITA
 10.0                            10.0
   7.5                             7.5
   5.0                             5.0
   2.5                             2.5
   0.0                             0.0
  -2.5                            -2.5
  -5.0                            -5.0
  -7.5                            -7.5
 -10.0                           -10.0
         0   1    2    3   4              0         1         2        3         4




Figure 4: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on fixed capital formation
                               growth




                                                     42
                              T a x B a s e d (RED) a n d Ex p Ba s e d (Blu e ) Ad ju s tm e nt
                AUS                                          AUT                                           DNK
  0                                0                                                        0

 -2                               -2                                                       -2

 -4                               -4                                                       -4

 -6                               -6                                                       -6

 -8                               -8                                                       -8

-10                              -10                                                      -10
       0    1    2    3   4               0         1         2         3         4                0   1    2    3   4
                ESP                                         FRA                                            GBR
  0                                0                                                        0

 -2                               -2                                                       -2

 -4                               -4                                                       -4

 -6                               -6                                                       -6

 -8                               -8                                                       -8

-10                              -10                                                      -10
       0    1    2    3   4               0         1         2         3         4                0   1    2    3   4
                JPN                                          BEL                                           DEU
  0                                0                                                        0

 -2                               -2                                                       -2

 -4                               -4                                                       -4

 -6                               -6                                                       -6

 -8                               -8                                                       -8

-10                              -10                                                      -10
       0    1    2    3   4               0         1         2         3         4                0   1    2    3   4
                IRL                                          PRT                                           USA
  0                                0                                                        0

 -2                               -2                                                       -2

 -4                               -4                                                       -4

 -6                               -6                                                       -6

 -8                               -8                                                       -8

-10                              -10                                                      -10
       0    1    2    3   4               0         1         2         3         4                0   1    2    3   4
                CAN                                          ITA
  0                                0

 -2                               -2

 -4                               -4

 -6                               -6

 -8                               -8

-10                              -10
       0    1    2    3   4               0         1         2         3         4




      Figure 5: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on ESI Consumer
                                Confidence




                                               43
                             Ta x Ba s e d (RED) a nd Ex p Ba s e d (Blue ) Adjus tm e nt
               AUS                                       AUT                                        DNK
  1                              1                                                   1

  0                              0                                                   0

  -1                             -1                                                 -1

  -2                             -2                                                 -2

  -3                             -3                                                 -3

  -4                             -4                                                 -4

  -5                             -5                                                 -5

  -6                             -6                                                 -6
       0   1    2    3   4             0         1        2        3         4              0   1    2    3   4
               ESP                                       FRA                                        GBR
  1                              1                                                   1

  0                              0                                                   0

  -1                             -1                                                 -1

  -2                             -2                                                 -2

  -3                             -3                                                 -3

  -4                             -4                                                 -4

  -5                             -5                                                 -5

  -6                             -6                                                 -6
       0   1    2    3   4             0         1        2        3         4              0   1    2    3   4
               JPN                                       BEL                                        DEU
  1                              1                                                   1

  0                              0                                                   0

  -1                             -1                                                 -1

  -2                             -2                                                 -2

  -3                             -3                                                 -3

  -4                             -4                                                 -4

  -5                             -5                                                 -5

  -6                             -6                                                 -6
       0   1    2    3   4             0         1        2        3         4              0   1    2    3   4
               IRL                                       PRT                                        USA
  1                              1                                                   1

  0                              0                                                   0

  -1                             -1                                                 -1

  -2                             -2                                                 -2

  -3                             -3                                                 -3

  -4                             -4                                                 -4

  -5                             -5                                                 -5

  -6                             -6                                                 -6
       0   1    2    3   4             0         1        2        3         4              0   1    2    3   4
               CAN                                       ITA
  1                              1

  0                              0

  -1                             -1

  -2                             -2

  -3                             -3

  -4                             -4

  -5                             -5

  -6                             -6
       0   1    2    3   4             0         1        2        3         4




Figure 6: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on ESI Business Confidence




                                             44
                                T a x B a s e d ( R E D ) a n d E x p B a s e d ( B lu e ) A d ju s t m e n t
                  AUS                                               AUT                                                 DNK
 1.5                                1.5                                                               1.5

 1.0                                1.0                                                               1.0

 0.5                                0.5                                                               0.5

 0.0                                0.0                                                               0.0

-0.5                               -0.5                                                              -0.5

-1.0                               -1.0                                                              -1.0

-1.5                               -1.5                                                              -1.5
         0    1    2    3   4                 0           1           2          3           4                  0   1    2    3   4
                  ESP                                               FRA                                                 GBR
 1.5                                1.5                                                               1.5

 1.0                                1.0                                                               1.0

 0.5                                0.5                                                               0.5

 0.0                                0.0                                                               0.0

-0.5                               -0.5                                                              -0.5

-1.0                               -1.0                                                              -1.0

-1.5                               -1.5                                                              -1.5
         0    1    2    3   4                 0           1           2          3           4                  0   1    2    3   4
                  JPN                                               BEL                                                 DEU
 1.5                                1.5                                                               1.5

 1.0                                1.0                                                               1.0

 0.5                                0.5                                                               0.5

 0.0                                0.0                                                               0.0

-0.5                               -0.5                                                              -0.5

-1.0                               -1.0                                                              -1.0

-1.5                               -1.5                                                              -1.5
         0    1    2    3   4                 0           1           2          3           4                  0   1    2    3   4
                  IRL                                               PRT                                                 USA
 1.5                                1.5                                                               1.5

 1.0                                1.0                                                               1.0

 0.5                                0.5                                                               0.5

 0.0                                0.0                                                               0.0

-0.5                               -0.5                                                              -0.5

-1.0                               -1.0                                                              -1.0

-1.5                               -1.5                                                              -1.5
         0    1    2    3   4                 0           1           2          3           4                  0   1    2    3   4
                  CAN                                               ITA
 1.5                                1.5

 1.0                                1.0

 0.5                                0.5

 0.0                                0.0

-0.5                               -0.5

-1.0                               -1.0

-1.5                               -1.5
         0    1    2    3   4                 0           1           2          3           4




       Figure 7: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on monetary policy
                        (change in the 3M TBills Rates)




                                                     45
                             T a x B a s e d (R ED ) a n d Ex p B a s e d (B lu e ) A d ju s tm e n t
               AUS                                            AUT                                               DNK
  1                               1                                                             1

  0                               0                                                             0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4

  -5                              -5                                                           -5

  -6                              -6                                                           -6
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               ESP                                            FRA                                               GBR
  1                               1                                                             1

  0                               0                                                             0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4

  -5                              -5                                                           -5

  -6                              -6                                                           -6
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               JPN                                            BEL                                               DEU
  1                               1                                                             1

  0                               0                                                             0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4

  -5                              -5                                                           -5

  -6                              -6                                                           -6
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               IRL                                            PRT                                               USA
  1                               1                                                             1

  0                               0                                                             0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4

  -5                              -5                                                           -5

  -6                              -6                                                           -6
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               CAN                                             ITA
  1                               1

  0                               0

  -1                              -1

  -2                              -2

  -3                              -3

  -4                              -4

  -5                              -5

  -6                              -6
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4




Figure 8: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments on inflation (GDP deflator)




                                                     46
                             T a x B a s e d (R ED ) a n d Ex p B a s e d (B lu e ) A d ju s tm e n t
               AUT                                            FRA                                               FIN

  2                                2                                                            2

  1                                1                                                            1

  0                                0                                                            0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               BEL                                            DEU                                               ESP

  2                                2                                                            2

  1                                1                                                            1

  0                                0                                                            0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               IRL                                            PRT                                               ITA

  2                                2                                                            2

  1                                1                                                            1

  0                                0                                                            0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               AUS                                            DNK                                               GBR

  2                                2                                                            2

  1                                1                                                            1

  0                                0                                                            0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               JPN                                            USA                                               SWE

  2                                2                                                            2

  1                                1                                                            1

  0                                0                                                            0

  -1                              -1                                                           -1

  -2                              -2                                                           -2

  -3                              -3                                                           -3

  -4                              -4                                                           -4
       0   1    2    3   4                0          1          2          3          4                 0   1    2    3   4
               CAN

  2

  1

  0

  -1

  -2

  -3

  -4
       0   1    2    3   4




    Figure 9: Impulse responses of output allowing for diﬀerent coeﬃcients
in the euro area (top 9 countries) and non-euro area (bottom 7 countries)



                                                    47
Baseline (Green) and Counterfactual (Zero MP response) (Blue) EB Adjustment, Baseline (Orange) and Counterfactual (Zero MP response) (Red) TB Adjustment
                                  AUS                                     AUT                                     DNK
                2                                       2                                       2

                1                                       1                                       1

                0                                       0                                       0

               -1                                      -1                                       -1

               -2                                      -2                                       -2

               -3                                      -3                                       -3

               -4                                      -4                                       -4

               -5                                      -5                                       -5
                    0       1      2      3       4          0      1      2      3       4          0      1      2       3      4
                                  FRA                                     GBR                                     JPN
                2                                       2                                       2

                1                                       1                                       1

                0                                       0                                       0

               -1                                      -1                                       -1

               -2                                      -2                                       -2

               -3                                      -3                                       -3

               -4                                      -4                                       -4

               -5                                      -5                                       -5
                    0       1      2      3       4          0      1      2      3       4          0      1      2       3      4
                                  BEL                                     DEU                                     ESP
                2                                       2                                       2

                1                                       1                                       1

                0                                       0                                       0

               -1                                      -1                                       -1

               -2                                      -2                                       -2

               -3                                      -3                                       -3

               -4                                      -4                                       -4

               -5                                      -5                                       -5
                    0       1      2      3       4          0      1      2      3       4          0      1      2       3      4
                                  IRL                                     PRT                                     USA
                2                                       2                                       2

                1                                       1                                       1

                0                                       0                                       0

               -1                                      -1                                       -1

               -2                                      -2                                       -2

               -3                                      -3                                       -3

               -4                                      -4                                       -4

               -5                                      -5                                       -5
                    0       1      2      3       4          0      1      2      3       4          0      1      2       3      4
                                  CAN                                     ITA
                2                                       2

                1                                       1

                0                                       0

               -1                                      -1

               -2                                      -2

               -3                                      -3

               -4                                      -4

               -5                                      -5
                    0       1      2      3       4          0      1      2      3       4




    Figure 10: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustments: Baseline and
                            Counterfactual




                                                            48
Baseline(GREEN)andCounterfactual (zeroMPresponse)(Blue)EBAdjustment, Baseline(ORANGE)and Counterfactual (zeroMPresponse)(RED)TBAdjustment
                                AUT                                FRA                                FIN
               0.4                                0.5                                0.5
               0.0
                                                  0.0                                0.0
              -0.4
                                                 -0.5                               -0.5
              -0.8
              -1.2                               -1.0                               -1.0
              -1.6
                                                 -1.5                               -1.5
              -2.0
                                                 -2.0                               -2.0
              -2.4
              -2.8                               -2.5                               -2.5
                     0    1      2     3     4          0    1      2     3     4          0    1     2      3     4
                                BEL                                DEU                               ESP
               0.5                                0.0                                0.5

               0.0                               -0.4                                0.0

              -0.5                               -0.8                               -0.5

              -1.0                               -1.2                               -1.0

              -1.5                               -1.6                               -1.5

              -2.0                               -2.0                               -2.0

              -2.5                               -2.4                               -2.5
                     0    1      2     3     4          0    1      2     3     4          0    1     2      3     4
                                IRL                                PRT                                ITA
               0.5                                0.5                                0.4

               0.0                                0.0                                0.0

              -0.5                               -0.5                               -0.4

              -1.0                               -1.0                               -0.8

              -1.5                               -1.5                               -1.2

              -2.0                               -2.0                               -1.6

              -2.5                               -2.5                               -2.0
                     0    1      2     3     4          0    1      2     3     4          0    1     2      3     4




     Figure 11: The eﬀect of TB and EB adjustment both Baseline and
                        Counterfactual for Europe




                                                            49
9     Data Appendix
Our data come from diﬀerent public sources such as Thomson Reuters Datas-
tream, the OECD Economic Outlook database, the Action-based Dataset of
Fiscal Consolidations compiled by DeVries et al (2011), which provide us
with the fiscal consolidation episodes, and the IMF International Financial
Statistics (IFS). Datastream was used to obtain time series of the Economic
Sentiment Indicators originally produced by the European Commission. This
confidence index was integrated with national sources. The series for private
final consumption expenditure and gross fixed capital formation are from
IFS. The other macroeconomic variables from the OECD Economic Outlook
database.
     Macroeconomic and Confidence Data Sources
     Variable                        Definition                            Source
     Consumer Confidence indicator        Economic Sentiment Indicator            European Commission
     Business Confidence Indicator        Economic Sentiment Indicator            European Commission
     Long Term Interest rate              10-Y Government bonds YTM               IMF IFS
     Short-Term Interest rate             3-M Treasury Bill YTM                   IMF IFS
     Consumption                          Total Final Consumption Expenditure     IMF IFS
     Investment                           Gross Private fixed Capital Formation   IMF IFS
     Output                               Gross Domestic Product                  OECD
     Population                           Total Resident Population               OECD
    The variables included as dependent variables, for each country i, in the
multy country moving average specification to compute the dynamic eﬀects
of fiscal adjustments where the following:

    1. Real per capita GDP growth is defined as
                                          yi,t                 popti,t
                         dyi,t = log(              ) − log(             )
                                         yi,t,−1              popti,t−1
      where yi,t is the real gdp at time t and popti,t is the total population at
      time t.
    2. Final per capita real consumption expenditure growth is
                                          fcei,t            popti,t
                       df cei,t = log(            ) − log(           )
                                         fcei,t−1          popti,t−1
      where fcei,t is the final real consumption expenditure at time t.

                                           50
  3. Gross capital formation per capita growth is the change in the log of
     real gross capital formation
                                         gcfi,t            popti,t
                       dgcfi,t = log(            ) − log(           )
                                        gcfi,t−1          popti,t−1
      where dgcfi,t is the real gross capital formation growth from time t-1
      to time t and gcfi,t is the gross fixed capital formation at time t.
  4. Consumer and business confidence indicators were defined in terms of
     logs.
                               lci,t = log(ci,t )
                                    lbi,t = log(bi,t )
      where lci,t is the log of the consumer confidence indicator at time t,
      ci,t is the consumer confidence indicator at time t, lbi,t is the log of the
      business confidence indicator, and bt is the business confidence indicator
      at time t.
  5. Term spreads are computed between the yield on long-term government
     bonds (ten-year) and the yield on short-term (three-month) bills

                                  si,t = irli,t − irsi,t

      where si,t is the spread at time t, irli,t is the long-term government
      bond (ten-year) at time t, and irsi,t is the short-term (three-month)
      bill at time t.

9.1    From the Action-based Dataset of Fiscal Consoli-
       dations to Fiscal Plans
Table 1 illustrates how we obtained fiscal plans by reclassifying adjustments
contained in the Action-based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidations of Devries et
al. (2011).
    The original database contains exogenous fiscal shifts in public revenues
and spending with respect to the previous year. The episodes capture the
changes in policy having eﬀect in year t, compared to a baseline scenario of
no policy change with respect to year t-1.
    Although Devries et al. (2011) often specify the date of approval of the
fiscal plans, when computing their impact they do not distinguish between

                                         51
measures that were announced in previous years or within the year of imple-
mentation. Hence, in order to take into account the multi-periodal feature
of the fiscal plans, we exploit the information about the date of approval
to distinguish between unexpected and expected shocks. The date of an-
nouncement is either found within the text or using the sources indicated by
Devries et al. (2011). Due to the annual nature of the data we define as
‘unanticipated’ all the fiscal plans which have impact on the calendar year
t and are approved between September of year t-1 and December of year
t. All the plans approved before this window of time and supposed to have
eﬀect within the calendar year t are coded as ‘anticipated’. For example,
the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA-93) in the US was
enacted on August 10, 1993 and had a budgetary impact (in percent of GDP)
of 0.12 in 1993, 0.40 in 1994, 0.26 in 1995, 0.29 in 1996, 0.30 in 1997; 0.15
in 1998 (Devries et al. 2011). Hence, the impact in 1993 is coded as unex-
pected, while all the other shocks are coded as announced components with
an impact horizon from one to five years.
    Thanks to this classification we can consider the combined eﬀect, in a
given year, of current and future policies with an impact horizon of up to five
years. After summing up these components for both taxes and expenditures,
we take the largest between the two in order to label the episodes to either
be expenditure-based or tax-based.
    The sum of the ‘unanticipated’ and ‘anticipated’ components of the fiscal
episodes is always equal to the original shocks by Devries et al.(2011).except
for 7 cases in which we slightly diverge from Devries et al. (2011) for the
following reasons:

   Belgium 1996
   Tax hikes of 0.5 percent of GDP revised in tax hikes of 0.8 percent of
GDP. In entry 1996, Devries et al. (2011) compute a tax shock totaling 0.5
percent of GDP. However, as can be read at p.19, the budgetary impact of
tax-based deficit-reduction measures in the 1996 Budget (1996 IMF Recent
Economic Developments, p.11) were of 0.9 percent of GDP (of which 0.1
percent of GDP consisting in sales of buildings and not considered in the
analysis). As a consequence the shock in revenues is of 0.8 percent of GDP
rather than 0.5 percent of GDP.

   Belgium 1997
   Spending cuts of 0.5 percent of GDP revised in spending cuts of 0.25

                                      52
percent of GDP and tax hikes of 0.41 percent of GDP revised in tax hikes of
0.16 percent of GDP. As clearly stated at p.19 of Devries et al. (2011), the
Budget 1996 included one-oﬀ measures equal to 0.5 percent of GDP, which
should be allocated equally across spending and tax measures. However,
Devries et al. (2011) neglect to apply the expiration of these one-oﬀ measures
in 1997. As a consequence, in 1997 the spending cuts should total 0.25
percent of GDP (0.5 percent of GDP from the 1997 Budget and -0.25 from
the one-oﬀ measures expired in 1997) and tax hikes should be equal to 0.16
(0.41 percent of GDP introduced in the 1997 Budget and -0.25 from the
expiration of previous one-oﬀ measures).

    Canada 1984
    Tax hikes of 0.27 percent of GDP revised in tax hikes of 0.2 percent of
GDP. According to Table 1 p. 28 of Devries et al. (2011) the 1983 Budget
approved C$ 1,215 million with impact in the fiscal year 1984-85. In order to
allocate this amount in the calendar years 1984 and 1985 Devries et al. (2011)
should impute C$ 3/4 billion in 1984 and C$ 1/4 billion in 1985. However,
as can be seen in Table 1, all of the measures are allocated in 1984 and, in
addition, C$ 1/4 are allocated in 1985. This procedure ends up counting 1/4
of the measures twice. As a consequence, we calculate again the impact of
the 1993 Budget in 1994, with tax hikes of 0.20 percent of GDP instead of
0.27 percent of GDP.

    Italy 1993
    Spending cuts of 2 percent of GDP revised in spending cuts of 3.1 percent
of GDP. Fiscal consolidation in 1993 was the result of two diﬀerent packages:
the Delegation Law and the May 1993 package. According to Devries et al.
(2011) the Delegation Law included L 31 trillion of expenditure-based fiscal
consolidation (1994 OECD Economic Surveys, p.44-45). However, the OECD
report quantifies the expenditure cuts of the Delegation Law to actually be
43.5 trillion. The L 31 trillion is the primary deficit surplus of that year.
As a consequence we revise the amount of spending cuts to be equal to 3.1
percent of GDP instead of 2 percent of GDP.

   Italy 2004
   Tax hikes of 0.67 percent of GDP revised in tax hikes of 1 percent of
GDP and spending cuts of 0.63 percent of GDP revised in spending cuts
of 0.9 percent of GDP. Devries et al. (2011) state at p.53 that the 2004

                                     53
Budget introduced savings of €16 billion (0.7 percent of GDP) and additional
measures decided in July 2004 amounting to €7.6 billion (0.6 percent of
GDP). It is clear that the proportion between the total amounts of the two
measures and their percentage over GDP is not consistent. As a consequence
we revised the fiscal consolidation shock in 2004 to be 1 percent of GDP of
tax hikes (instead of 0.67) and 0.9 percent of GDP of spending cuts (instead
of 0.63).

    Netherlands 1993
    Tax cuts of 0.16 of GDP revised in tax hikes of 0.04 and spending cuts of
0.28 percent of GDP revised in spending cuts of 0.88 percent of GDP. At the
very end of entry 1993 (p.64 of Devries et al. 2011) the total amount of tax
hikes is computed as the sum of -0.39 percent of GDP coming from tax cuts
decided in the 1993 Budget, +0.43 percent of GDP from additional measures
introduced in 1993 and -0.2 percent of GDP that are not mentioned in the
text. Probably, this -0.2 is considered to be the eﬀect of the expiration of
previous measures introduced in 1992. However, in entry 1992 these measures
are declared to be exclusively spending cuts and indeed they are applied in
the computation of the spending shock for 1993. As a consequence we revise
the amount of tax hikes to be 0.04 percent of GDP (-0.39+0.43).
    On the spending side we figured that there is a typo in the computation
at the very end of entry 1993 at p.64. Indeed, 0.78+0.3-0.2 is equal to 0.88
percent of GDP rather than 0.28 percent of GDP.

   United Kingdom 1997
   Spending cuts of 0.16 percent of GDP revised in spending cuts of 0.26
percent of GDP. Devries et al. (2011) neglect to apply the impact of 0.1
percent of GDP of spending cuts corresponding to a quarter of the measures
decided in the FSBR 1996-97 (see entry for 1996 and 1997 p. 77). As a
consequence, we consider the total amount of spending cuts introduced in
1997 to be 0.26 percent of GDP (0.16+0.1).




                                     54
                                     Table 1: Classification of fiscal adjustments
                                                         Tax                                           Spend
             Total   Tax    Spend                                                                                                   TB EB
                                     u,t       a,t       a,t+1     a,t+2   a,t+3   u,t       a,t       a,t+1    a,t+2   a,t+3
AUS   1985    0,45   0,00     0,45         0         0         0       0       0   0,45            0    0,45        0           0    0   1
AUS   1986    1,02   0,17     0,85   0,17            0    0,19     -0,27       0    0,4      0,45       0,26    -0,08           0    0   1
AUS   1987    0,90   0,19     0,71         0   0,19      -0,27         0       0   0,45      0,26       0,37        0           0    0   1
AUS   1988    0,10 -0,27      0,37         0   -0,27           0       0       0         0   0,37          0        0           0    0   1
AUS   1994    0,25   0,25     0,00   0,25            0    0,25         0       0         0         0       0        0           0    1   0
AUS   1995    0,50   0,50     0,00   0,25      0,25       0,25         0       0         0         0       0        0           0    1   0
AUS   1996    0,62   0,34     0,28   0,09      0,25 0,175           0,05   -0,04 0,275             0 0,475       0,17    -0,03       0   1
AUS   1997    0,70   0,18     0,53         0 0,175        0,05     -0,04       0   0,05 0,475           0,32     0,07           0    0   1
AUS   1998    0,37   0,05     0,32         0   0,05      -0,04         0       0         0   0,32       0,07        0           0    0   1
AUS   1999    0,04 -0,04      0,07         0   -0,04           0       0       0         0   0,07          0        0           0    0   1
AUT   1980    0,80   0,11     0,69   0,11            0         0       0       0   0,69            0       0        0           0    0   1
AUT   1981    1,56   0,50     1,06    0,5            0         0       0       0   1,06            0       0        0           0    0   1
AUT   1984    2,04   1,30     0,74    1,3            0         0       0       0   0,74            0       0        0           0    1   0
AUT   1996    2,41   0,88     1,53   0,88            0    0,44         0       0   1,53            0    1,12        0           0    0   1
AUT   1997    1,56   0,44     1,12         0   0,44            0       0       0         0   1,12          0        0           0    0   1
AUT   2001    1,02   0,90     0,12    0,9            0         0       0       0   0,12            0    0,55        0           0    1   0
AUT   2002    0,55   0,00     0,55         0         0         0       0       0         0   0,55          0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1982    1,66   0,00     1,66         0         0         0       0       0   1,66            0       0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1983    1,79   0,69     1,10   0,69            0         0       0       0    1,1            0       0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1984    0,69   0,28     0,41   0,28            0    0,73         0       0   0,41            0    0,88        0           0    0   1
BEL   1985    1,61   0,73     0,88         0   0,73            0       0       0         0   0,88          0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1987    2,80   0,00     2,80         0         0         0       0       0     2,8           0       0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1990    0,60   0,40     0,20    0,4            0         0       0       0    0,2            0       0        0           0    1   0
BEL   1992    1,79   0,99     0,80   0,99            0    0,03         0       0    0,8            0    0,39        0           0    0   1
BEL   1993    0,92   0,43     0,49    0,4      0,03       0,55         0       0    0,1      0,39       0,23        0           0    1   0
BEL   1994    1,15   0,55     0,60         0   0,55            0       0       0   0,37      0,23          0        0           0    0   1
BEL   1996    1,30   0,80     0,50    0,8            0   -0,25         0       0    0,5            0   -0,25        0           0    1   0
BEL   1997    0,41   0,16     0,25   0,41      -0,25           0       0       0    0,5      -0,25         0        0           0    0   1
CAN   1983    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0 0,203 0,351 0,227                 0         0       0        0           0    1   0
CAN   1984    0,20   0,20     0,00         0 0,203 0,351 0,227 0,044                     0         0       0        0           0    1   0
CAN   1985    1,03   0,53     0,50 0,203 0,325 0,594 0,308 0,046 0,502                             0 0,053      0,071   0,0365       1   0
CAN   1986    0,99   0,84     0,15 0,279 0,563 0,537 0,148 0,018                     0,1     0,05 0,147         0,055   0,0017       1   0
CAN   1987    0,28   0,14     0,14   -0,35 0,492          0,32     -0,23 0,088           0 0,135       -0,03 -0,095 -0,0284          1   0
CAN   1988    0,30   0,33    -0,03 0,034 0,292             -0,2 0,082 2E-04              0   -0,03     -0,09 -0,026             0    1   0
CAN   1989    0,31   0,24     0,08 0,421       -0,18 0,588 0,127 1E-03 0,156                 -0,08 0,087        0,052   0,0108       1   0
CAN   1990    0,86   0,57     0,29         0 0,569 0,123 9E-04                 0 0,207 0,084            0,25    0,042 -0,0041        1   0
CAN   1991    0,40   0,13     0,27 0,011 0,122           -0,01         0       0 0,022 0,248 0,228              0,093   0,0196       0   1
CAN   1992    0,21 -0,01      0,22         0   -0,01     -0,01         0       0         0 0,224 0,099          0,019           0    0   1
CAN   1993    0,35 -0,01      0,36         0   -0,01     -0,02         0       0 0,263 0,095 0,255              0,083   0,0146       0   1
CAN   1994    0,49   0,04     0,45 0,056       -0,02 0,098          0,04 0,004 0,213         0,24 0,469         0,302   0,0606       0   1
CAN   1995    0,99   0,18     0,81 0,082 0,094 0,098                0,03       0 0,368 0,446 0,917              0,525           0    0   1
CAN   1996    0,97   0,09     0,88         0 0,095 0,029               0       0   -0,01 0,888 0,538                0           0    0   1
CAN   1997    0,47   0,01     0,47   -0,02 0,027               0       0       0   -0,04     0,51          0        0           0    0   1
DEU   1982    1,18   0,56     0,62   0,56            0         0   -0,41       0   0,62            0       0        0           0    0   1
DEU   1983    0,87   0,30     0,57    0,3            0   -0,41         0       0   0,57            0       0        0           0    0   1
DEU   1984    0,18 -0,41      0,59         0   -0,41           0       0       0   0,59            0       0        0           0    0   1
DEU   1991    1,11   1,08     0,03   1,08            0    0,27     -0,46       0   0,03            0    0,19     0,18     0,18       1   0
DEU   1992    0,46   0,27     0,19         0   0,27      -0,46         0       0         0   0,19       0,18     0,18           0    0   1
DEU   1993    0,11 -0,07      0,18   0,39      -0,46           0    0,77       0         0   0,18       0,18     0,11           0    1   0
DEU   1994    0,91   0,08     0,83   0,08            0    0,84         0       0   0,65      0,18 0,245             0           0    0   1
DEU   1995    1,09   0,84     0,25         0   0,84            0       0       0         0 0,245           0        0           0    1   0
DEU   1997    1,60   0,50     1,10    0,5            0         0       0       0    1,1            0     -0,1       0           0    0   1
DEU   1998   -0,10   0,00    -0,10         0         0     0,3         0       0         0    -0,1         0        0           0    1   0
DEU   1999    0,30   0,30     0,00         0     0,3           0       0       0         0         0       0        0           0    1   0
DEU   2000    0,70 -0,05      0,75   -0,05           0         0       0       0   0,75            0       0        0           0    0   1
DEU   2003    0,74   0,74     0,00   0,74            0         0       0       0         0         0       0        0           0    1   0
DEU   2004    0,40 -0,70      1,10    -0,7           0         0       0       0    1,1            0       0        0           0    0   1
DEU   2006    0,50   0,00     0,50         0         0     0,5         0       0     0,5           0     0,4        0           0    0   1




                                                                 55
56
                                     Table 1: Classification of fiscal adjustments
                                                         Tax                                             Spend
             Total   Tax    Spend                                                                                                     TB EB
                                     u,t       a,t       a,t+1     a,t+2    a,t+3    u,t       a,t       a,t+1    a,t+2   a,t+3
DNK   1983    2,77   0,92     1,85   0,92            0         0       0        0    1,85            0       1        0           0    0   1
DNK   1984    2,38   0,67     1,71   0,67            0         0       0        0    0,71            1       0        0           0    0   1
DNK   1985    1,54   0,77     0,77   0,77            0         0       0        0    0,77            0       0        0           0    1   0
DNK   1995    0,30   0,30     0,00    0,3            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
ESP   1983    1,90   1,90     0,00    1,9            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
ESP   1984    1,12   0,37     0,75   0,37            0         0       0        0    0,75            0       0        0           0    0   1
ESP   1989    1,22   0,98     0,24   0,98            0   -0,28         0        0    0,24            0   -0,15        0           0    1   0
ESP   1990   -0,40 -0,25     -0,15         0   -0,25           0       0        0          0   -0,15         0        0           0    1   0
ESP   1991    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0     -0,6        0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
ESP   1992    0,70   0,30     0,40    0,9       -0,6       0,5         0        0     0,4            0     0,3        0           0    1   0
ESP   1993    1,10   0,80     0,30    0,3       0,5            0       0        0          0    0,3          0        0           0    1   0
ESP   1994    2,40   0,80     1,60    0,3       0,5            0       0        0     1,6            0       0        0           0    0   1
ESP   1995    0,74   0,00     0,74         0         0         0       0        0    0,74            0       0        0           0    0   1
ESP   1996    1,30   0,20     1,10    0,2            0         0       0        0     1,1            0       0        0           0    0   1
ESP   1997    1,20   0,10     1,10    0,1            0         0       0        0     1,1            0       0        0           0    0   1
FIN   1992    0,91   0,00     0,91         0         0         0       0        0    0,91            0 2,005          0           0    0   1
FIN   1993    3,71   0,00     3,71         0         0         0       0        0 1,705 2,005                0        0           0    0   1
FIN   1994    3,46   0,69     2,77   0,69            0   -0,69         0        0    2,77            0       0        0           0    0   1
FIN   1995    1,65 -0,63      2,28         0   -0,63           0       0        0    2,28            0    1,47        0           0    0   1
FIN   1996    1,47   0,00     1,47         0         0         0       0        0          0   1,47          0        0           0    0   1
FIN   1997    0,23 -0,70      0,93    -0,7           0         0       0        0    0,93            0       0        0           0    0   1
FRA   1979    0,85   0,85     0,00   0,85            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1987    0,26 -0,50      0,76    -0,5           0         0     -0,2       0    0,76            0       0        0           0    0   1
FRA   1988    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0     -0,2        0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1989   -0,20 -0,20      0,00         0    -0,2           0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1991    0,25   0,00     0,25         0         0         0       0        0    0,25            0     -0,1       0           0    0   1
FRA   1992   -0,10   0,00    -0,10         0         0         0       0        0          0    -0,1         0        0           0    0   1
FRA   1995    0,28   0,43    -0,15   0,43            0    0,45         0        0    -0,15           0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1996    1,34   0,87     0,47   0,42      0,45       0,11         0        0    0,47            0    0,09        0           0    1   0
FRA   1997    0,50   0,41     0,09    0,3      0,11            0     -0,1     -0,2         0   0,09          0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1998    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0     -0,1      -0,2       0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   1999   -0,10 -0,10      0,00         0    -0,1       -0,2        0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
FRA   2000   -0,20 -0,20      0,00         0    -0,2           0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
GBR   1979    0,27 -0,45      0,72   -0,45           0   -0,13         0        0    0,72            0    0,21        0           0    0   1
GBR   1980    0,08 -0,13      0,21         0   -0,13           0       0        0          0   0,21          0        0           0    0   1
GBR   1981    1,58   1,43     0,16 1,425             0 0,475           0        0 0,155              0 0,053          0           0    1   0
GBR   1982    0,53   0,48     0,05         0 0,475             0       0        0          0 0,053           0        0           0    1   0
GBR   1994    0,83   0,68     0,15 0,675             0 0,225           0        0    0,15            0    0,05        0           0    1   0
GBR   1995    0,28   0,23     0,05         0 0,225             0       0        0          0   0,05          0        0           0    1   0
GBR   1996    0,30   0,00     0,30         0         0         0       0        0     0,3            0     0,1        0           0    0   1
GBR   1997    0,79   0,53     0,26   0,53            0     0,3 0,206            0    0,16       0,1       0,01    0,005           0    1   0
GBR   1998    0,31   0,30     0,01         0    0,3 0,206              0        0          0   0,01 0,005             0           0    1   0
GBR   1999    0,21   0,21     0,01         0 0,206             0       0        0          0 0,005           0        0           0    1   0
IRL   1982    2,80   2,54     0,26   2,54            0         0       0        0    0,26            0    0,06        0           0    1   0
IRL   1983    2,50   2,44     0,06   2,44            0         0       0        0          0   0,06          0        0           0    1   0
IRL   1984    0,29   0,29     0,00   0,29            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
IRL   1985    0,12   0,12     0,00   0,12            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
IRL   1986    0,74   0,74     0,00   0,74            0         0       0        0          0         0       0        0           0    1   0
IRL   1987    1,65   0,53     1,12   0,53            0         0       0        0    1,12            0       0        0           0    0   1
IRL   1988    1,95   0,00     1,95         0         0         0       0        0    1,95            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1991    2,77   1,69     1,08   1,69            0   -1,26         0        0    1,08            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1992    3,51   1,59     1,92   2,85      -1,26       -1,2        0        0    1,92            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1993    5,12   2,00     3,12    3,2       -1,2     -0,57         0        0    3,12            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1994    1,43 -0,27      1,70    0,3      -0,57           0       0        0     1,7            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1995    4,20   2,41     1,79   2,41            0   -2,16         0        0    1,79            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1996    0,35 -0,74      1,09   1,42      -2,16     -0,41         0        0    1,09            0       0        0           0    1   0
ITA   1997    1,82   0,89     0,93    1,3      -0,41       -0,6        0        0    0,93            0       0        0           0    0   1
ITA   1998    0,68   0,01     0,67   0,61       -0,6           0       0        0    0,67            0       0        0           0    0   1




                                                                 57
                                     Table 1: Classification of fiscal adjustments
                                                         Tax                                           Spend
             Total   Tax    Spend                                                                                                    TB EB
                                     u,t       a,t       a,t+1     a,t+2   a,t+3   u,t       a,t       a,t+1    a,t+2    a,t+3
JPN   1979    0,12   0,12     0,00 0,115             0 0,123 0,031             0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
JPN   1980    0,21   0,21     0,00   0,09 0,123 0,091                  0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
JPN   1981    0,43   0,43     0,00 0,342 0,091 0,227                   0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
JPN   1982    0,71   0,31     0,40 0,085 0,227 0,057                   0       0 0,398             0 0,065          0            0    0   1
JPN   1983    0,42   0,06     0,37         0 0,057             0       0       0    0,3 0,065              0        0            0    0   1
JPN   1997    1,43   0,98     0,45 0,975             0 0,325           0       0   0,45            0    0,15        0            0    1   0
JPN   1998    0,48   0,33     0,15         0 0,325             0       0       0         0   0,15          0        0            0    1   0
JPN   2003    0,48   0,00     0,48         0         0         0       0       0   0,48            0       0        0            0    0   1
JPN   2004    0,64   0,19     0,45 0,188             0 0,063           0       0   0,45            0       0        0            0    0   1
JPN   2005    0,28   0,06     0,22         0 0,063             0       0       0   0,22            0       0        0            0    0   1
JPN   2006    0,72   0,45     0,27   0,45            0    0,15         0       0   0,27            0       0        0            0    1   0
JPN   2007    0,15   0,15     0,00         0   0,15            0       0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
NLD   1981    1,75   0,53     1,22   0,53            0         0       0       0   1,22            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1982    1,71   0,00     1,71         0         0         0       0       0   1,71            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1983    3,24   0,49     2,75   0,49            0         0       0       0   2,75            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1984    1,76   0,00     1,76         0         0         0       0       0   1,76            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1985    1,24   0,00     1,24         0         0         0       0       0   1,24            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1986    1,74   0,00     1,74         0         0         0       0       0   1,74            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1987    1,48   1,48     0,00   1,48            0     -0,3        0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
NLD   1988    0,05 -0,70      0,75    -0,4      -0,3           0       0       0   0,75            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   1991    0,87   0,87     0,00   0,87            0   -0,61         0       0         0         0    0,82        0            0    0   1
NLD   1992    0,74 -0,58      1,32   0,03      -0,61           0       0       0    0,5      0,82        -0,2       0            0    0   1
NLD   1993    0,92   0,04     0,88   0,04            0         0       0       0   1,08      -0,2          0        0            0    0   1
NLD   2004    1,70   0,40     1,30    0,4            0         0       0       0    1,3            0       0        0            0    0   1
NLD   2005    0,50   0,20     0,30    0,2            0         0       0       0    0,3            0       0        0            0    0   1
PRT   1983    2,30   1,35     0,95   1,35            0         0       0       0   0,95            0       0        0            0    1   0
PRT   2000    0,50   0,00     0,50         0         0         0       0       0    0,5            0       0        0            0    0   1
PRT   2002    1,60   1,20     0,40    1,2            0         0       0       0    0,4            0       0        0            0    1   0
PRT   2003   -0,75 -0,75      0,00   -0,75           0         0       0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
PRT   2005    0,60   0,52     0,08   0,52            0     1,1         0       0   0,08            0    0,55        0            0    1   0
PRT   2006    1,65   1,10     0,55         0    1,1        0,5         0       0         0   0,55        0,9        0            0    1   0
PRT   2007    1,40   0,50     0,90         0    0,5            0       0       0         0    0,9          0        0            0    0   1
SWE   1984    0,90   0,21     0,69   0,21            0         0       0       0   0,69            0       0        0            0    0   1
SWE   1993    1,81   0,42     1,39   0,42            0    0,19         0       0 1,392             0 0,586          0            0    0   1
SWE   1994    0,78   0,19     0,59         0   0,19            0       0       0         0 0,586           0        0            0    0   1
SWE   1995    3,50   1,40     2,10     1,4           0     0,8       0,6     0,4    2,1            0     1,2       0,9      0,6       0   1
SWE   1996    2,00   0,80     1,20         0     0,8       0,6       0,4       0         0    1,2        0,9       0,6           0    0   1
SWE   1997    1,50   0,60     0,90         0    0,6        0,4         0       0         0    0,9        0,6        0            0    0   1
SWE   1998    1,00   0,40     0,60         0    0,4            0       0       0         0    0,6          0        0            0    0   1
USA   1978    0,14   0,14     0,00 0,135             0         0 0,062         0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1979    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0 0,062           0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1980    0,06   0,06     0,00         0 0,062             0       0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1981    0,23   0,23     0,00   0,23            0         0       0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1983    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0         0    0,21 0,096           0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1984    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0    0,21 0,096           0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1985    0,21   0,21     0,00         0   0,21 0,096              0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1986    0,10   0,10     0,00         0 0,096             0       0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1987    0,00   0,00     0,00         0         0   -0,15         0       0         0         0       0        0            0    1   0
USA   1988    0,85   0,39     0,46   0,54      -0,15           0       0       0   0,46            0       0        0            0    0   1
USA   1990    0,33   0,26     0,07   0,26            0    0,29      0,24   -0,02   0,07            0    0,29     0,29     0,214       0   1
USA   1991    0,58   0,29     0,29         0   0,29       0,24     -0,02    0,07         0   0,29       0,29    0,214      0,43       0   1
USA   1992    0,53   0,24     0,29         0   0,24      -0,02      0,07    0,02         0   0,29 0,214          0,43      0,25       0   1
USA   1993    0,32   0,08     0,23     0,1     -0,02       0,4      0,19 0,075     0,02 0,214            0,5     0,34     0,215       0   1
USA   1994    0,90   0,40     0,50         0     0,4      0,19 0,075        0,06         0    0,5       0,34    0,215      0,24       0   1
USA   1995    0,53   0,19     0,34         0   0,19 0,075           0,06   -0,02         0   0,34 0,215          0,24      0,17       0   1
USA   1996    0,29   0,08     0,22         0 0,075        0,06     -0,02       0         0 0,215        0,24     0,17            0    0   1
USA   1997    0,30   0,06     0,24         0   0,06      -0,02         0       0         0   0,24       0,17        0            0    0   1
USA   1998    0,15 -0,02      0,17         0   -0,02           0       0       0         0   0,17          0        0            0    0   1




                                                                 58
10       Appendix 2: The computation of impulse
         responses
We compute impulse responses for our empirical model as the diﬀerence
between two model based forecasts: those obtained conditionally upon a
fiscal adjustment plan and those obtained when there is no fiscal plan.

   1. generation of a baseline simulation for all variables by solving dynam-
      ically forward the estimated system setting all shocks to zero;

   2. generation of an alternative simulation for all variables by giving a
      one per cent of GDP shock to eui,t , and letting all anticipated shocks
      react endogenously according to the ϕ coeﬃcients. Solve dynamically
      forward the model for the alternative scenarios up to the same horizon
      used in the baseline simulation;

   3. computation of impulse responses as the diﬀerence between the simu-
      lated values in the two steps described above;

   4. computation of confidence intervals by block bootstrapping31 , preserv-
      ing the cross-country correlation between the μi,t in each replication of
      the bootstrap—that is bootstrapping two rows of residuals at the time.32




  31
      As suggested by Oscar Jorda, we use block bootstrap to take into account the pos-
sibility of autocorrelation in the residuals of the estimated system. In fact, the evidence
for autocorrelation in the residuals is very weak and block bootstrapping makes very little
diﬀerence for our empirical results.
   32
      Bootstrapping requires saving the residuals from the estimated model and then it-
erating the following steps: a) re-sample rows of the saved residuals and generate a set
of observations for all variables, b) re-estimate the model; c) compute impulse responses
going through the steps described in the text; d) go back to step a). By going thruogh
1,000 iterations we produce bootstrapped distributions for impulse responses and compute
confidence intervals.

                                            59
