                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       SOURCES OF COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE IN POLLUTING INDUSTRIES

                                          Fernando Broner
                                            Paula Bustos
                                         Vasco M. Carvalho

                                        Working Paper 18337
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18337


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We thank Bruno Caprettini for superb research assistance. We received valuable comments from David
Atkin, Michael Greenstone, Gene Grossman, Rema Hanna, Elhanan Helpman, Carol McAusland,
Giacomo Ponzetto, Daniel Sturm, Scott Taylor, Jaume Ventura and participants at presentations held
at CEPR-ERWIT, NBER-Summer Institute’s Environmental and Energy Economics Workshop, Princeton
IES Summer Workshop, Graduate Institute Geneva, Central European University, Université Toulouse,
INSEAD, Universidad Carlos III, CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra. We thank Isabelle Morin from
Abt Associates for her help in obtaining the pollution intensity data. We acknowledge financial support
from the Fundación Ramón Areces, the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, and the European
Research Council (FP7/2007-2013, grant 263846). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Fernando Broner, Paula Bustos, and Vasco M. Carvalho. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sources of Comparative Advantage in Polluting Industries
Fernando Broner, Paula Bustos, and Vasco M. Carvalho
NBER Working Paper No. 18337
August 2012, Revised December 2012
JEL No. F11,F18,Q53,Q56

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the determinants of comparative advantage in polluting industries. We combine data on
environmental policy at the country level with data on pollution intensity at the industry level to show
that countries with laxer environmental regulation have a comparative advantage in polluting industries.
Further, we address the potential problem of reverse causality. We propose an instrument for environmental
regulation based on meteorological determinants of pollution dispersion identi…ed by the atmospheric
pollution literature. We find that the effect of environmental regulation on the pattern of trade is causal
and comparable in magnitude to the effect of physical and human capital.


Fernando Broner                                      Vasco M. Carvalho
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra                    CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27                            Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona                                      08005 Barcelona,
Spain                                                SPAIN
fbroner@crei.cat                                     vcarvalho@crei.cat

Paula Bustos
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
pbustos@crei.cat




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18337
1        Introduction

During the last few decades, many countries adopted environmental regulations in order to limit the
emission of pollutants. The fact that these regulations vary across countries suggests the possibility
that environmental regulation a¤ects the location of polluting activities. In particular, if stricter
environmental regulation increases the relative cost of production for polluting industries, one would
expect these to relocate to countries with laxer regulation. In other words, lax environmental regulation
is a potential source of comparative advantage in polluting industries. This e¤ect is known in the
literature as the pollution haven e¤ ect.
        Determining the existence and strength of this e¤ect is important for a number of policy relevant
discussions. First, the concentration of polluting activities in countries with lax regulation can impose
substantial health costs to developing countries where recent studies document high local pollutant
concentrations.1 Second, the e¤ectiveness of policies targeted towards reducing global greenhouse gas
emissions depends on the degree of reallocation of industrial activity across countries in response to
environmental regulation. Third, the extent to which environmental regulation can be used as an
instrument to carry out trade policy has been a recurrent issue in international trade negotiations.2
        Despite the theoretical appeal and policy relevance of the pollution haven e¤ect, there is still no
consensus about its economic signi…cance. Early empirical studies found that the e¤ect of environmen-
tal regulation on comparative advantage is small and unimportant relative to traditional determinants
of comparative advantage, such as capital abundance.3;4 More recent studies attributed these results to
mismeasurement and endogeneity of environmental regulation and proposed an instrumental variable
approach.5 However, this approach has not yet provided convincing evidence on the pollution heaven
e¤ect due to the di¢ culties in …nding valid instruments for environmental regulation.
        In this paper, we combine data on environmental policy at the country level with data on pollution
intensity at the industry level to implement the standard test of comparative advantage proposed by
Romalis (2004).6 We …nd that countries with laxer environmental regulation have a comparative
advantage in polluting industries. In addition, we address the potential problem of reverse causality.
To do so, we propose an instrument for environmental regulation based on exogenous meteorological
determinants of pollution dispersion identi…ed by the atmospheric pollution science literature. We
…nd that the e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative advantage in polluting industries is
    1
     See Greenstone and Hanna (2011) for India, Hanna and Oliva (2011) for Mexico, and Chen et al. (2011) for China.
    2
     The inclusion of speci…c clauses in NAFTA dissuading members from “encourag(ing) investment by relaxing [...]
environmental measures” (Article 1114) is consistent with this concern.
   3
     See Grossman and Krueger (1993), Antweiler et al. (2001), and, for a survey, Copeland and Taylor (2004).
   4
     In contrast, there is ample evidence that environmental regulation a¤ects the location of polluting industries within
the U.S.. See Henderson (1996), Becker and Henderson (2000), Greenstone (2002), List et al. (2003), Hanna (2010), and
Greenstone et al. (2012) for an evaluation of the e¤ects of the Clean Air Act.
   5
     See Ederington and Minier (2003) and Levinson and Taylor (2008). We review the literature in detail below.
   6
     This test has been used to study a variety of sources of comparative advantage in the recent literature. See Levchenko
(2007), Nunn (2007), Costinot (2009), Bombardini et al. (2012), Cuñat and Melitz (2012), and Manova (2012).


                                                            1
causal and comparable in magnitude to the e¤ect of physical and human capital endowments.
       To guide the empirical work, we begin by presenting a simple model that analyzes the e¤ects of
environmental policy on the patterns of international trade. As is standard in the literature on trade
and the environment, we treat pollution as another factor of production, whose relative supply is
determined by environmental policy; see Copeland and Taylor (2003).7 The model illustrates how lax
environmental regulation is associated with a comparative advantage in polluting industries. Further,
the model di¤erentiates between emissions, which are a function of technology and the size of pol-
luting industries, and pollution concentration, which is what a¤ects the utility of households. The
link between the two depends on meteorological conditions a¤ecting the dispersion of pollution. In
particular, a given level of emissions is associated with lower pollution concentration in countries with
favorable meteorological conditions. The model shows that the optimal environmental policy is laxer
in such countries. This result motivates our choice of instrument for environmental policy.
       Turning to our empirical strategy, we extend Romalis (2004)’s cross-country, cross-industry method-
ology by incorporating environmental regulation as a determinant of comparative advantage in pollut-
ing industries. Speci…cally, we treat pollution intensity as a technological characteristic of industries,
like capital and skill intensity. At the same time, we treat environmental regulation as a characteristic
of countries, like capital and skill abundance. We ask whether countries with laxer environmental
regulation have a comparative advantage in polluting industries. An advantage of this procedure is
that it allows us to answer this question more broadly than existing studies that tend to focus on
particular industries or trading partners. Further, it allows us to control for additional sources of
comparative advantage.
       We …nd evidence that environmental regulation is an important source of comparative advantage.
That is, we show that countries with laxer environmental regulation systematically display higher U.S.
import market shares in polluting industries than in other industries. To assess the magnitude of the
e¤ect of environmental regulation on market shares implied by our estimates, we perform the following
quanti…cation exercise. We use the sample median to divide countries into lax versus strict air pollution
regulation. Similarly, we group industries into those that are more pollution intensive than the median
and those that are not. Now consider taking the average lax air pollution regulation country and
enacting a reform such that the policy stance would be that of the average strict regulation country.
What would happen to its market share in the average polluting industry relative to the average
non-polluting industry? Our estimates imply that the di¤erence in market shares would decrease by
0.08 percentage points. The equivalent e¤ects for the classical determinants of comparative advantage
are 0.17 percentage points for capital abundance and 0.20 for skill abundance. To put these …gures in
perspective, note that the average country commands a market share of 1.25 percentage points in the
   7
    Early theoretical contributions to the trade and the environment literature include Pethig (1976), McGuire (1982),
Chichilnisky (1994), and Copeland and Taylor (1994 and 1995).


                                                          2
average industry.
       An important concern regarding the interpretation of the OLS results described above is the
direction of causality. For example, suppose a country has a comparative advantage in polluting
industries because it is abundant in some unobserved input. Then, these industries might lobby more
successfully to prevent the enactment of stringent environmental regulations. This would imply that
comparative advantage in polluting industries causes laxer environmental policy, leading to a positive
bias in our OLS estimates. On the other hand, reverse causality could lead to a negative bias if,
in the face of a heavily polluted environment, citizens successfully push for stricter regulation.8 To
address this concern we need an instrument for environmental regulation. That is, a source of variation
in environmental regulation that is not determined by comparative advantage in polluting industries
(exogenous) and does not a¤ect comparative advantage through other channels (exclusion restriction).
       The rationale for the choice of instrument is provided by our model, which predicts that optimal
environmental policy is laxer in countries where meteorological conditions facilitate the dispersion of
pollutants in the atmosphere. To identify the meteorological determinants of pollution dispersion we
turn to the literature on atmospheric pollution. This literature has identi…ed two main forces acting
on the dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere: wind speed, which determines horizontal dispersion
of pollution; and mixing height, which determines the height within which pollutants disperse. These
two elements are key components of models used to predict pollution concentration. In particular,
in the simplest model of atmospheric pollution - the “Box model” (see Arya, 1998, for a textbook
treatment) - pollution concentration is inversely proportional to the product of wind speed and the
mixing height, known as the “ventilation coe¢ cient.” The Box model thus provides us with a simple
measure for assessing the potential for pollution dispersion across countries: given two countries with
the same level of emissions, the country with the higher ventilation coe¢ cient will have lower pollution
concentration.
       In a nutshell, our instrumental variables strategy is based on the following hypothesis: where
meteorological conditions are such that the dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere is facilitated
- i.e. countries with high ventilation coe¢ cient - the marginal cost of emissions is lower and, as a
result, optimal air pollution regulation tends to be laxer. Consistent with the model, we …nd that the
ventilation coe¢ cient is a strong predictor of country-level air pollution regulation. We argue that
the ventilation coe¢ cient satis…es the exogeneity requirement because it is determined by exogenous
weather and geographical characteristics. Additionally, the exclusion restriction is likely to be satis…ed
as the ventilation coe¢ cient is not correlated with other determinants of comparative advantage such
as capital and skill abundance.9
   8
      For example, List and Sturm (2006) report evidence showing that citizens’ environmental concerns a¤ect environ-
mental policy in the United States.
    9
      We check that the instrument is as good as randomly assigned by showing that countries with above median venti-
lation coe¢ cient do not di¤er in terms of observables, other than environmental regulation, from countries with below


                                                          3
    Our baseline two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of the e¤ect of environmental regulation
on comparative advantage in polluting industries are 80 percent higher than the corresponding OLS
estimates. This …nding suggests a negative bias in our OLS estimates, possibly due to reverse causality
or to measurement error in our proxy for air pollution regulation. Taken together, the evidence
presented in this paper suggests that the e¤ect of environmental regulation on the pattern of trade is
causal and comparable in magnitude to the e¤ect of physical and human capital.

Related Literature:
    We contribute to a rich literature studying the role of environmental regulation on comparative
advantage. In one of the most in‡uential early studies, Grossman and Krueger (1993) inquire whether
free trade between Mexico and the U.S. can lead to a reallocation of pollution-intensive industries
towards Mexico, the country with laxer environmental regulation.10 They propose to measure the
pollution intensity of an industry as the share of pollution abatement costs (PAC) in value added, in
the same way that labor intensity is measured by the share of wages in value added. They …nd that
Mexico tends to export relatively more in labor intensive industries, but not in pollution intensive
industries, concluding that the costs involved in complying with environmental laws are small in
relation to the other components of total cost that determine comparative advantage.
    We see our work as a generalization of the cross-sectional comparative advantage test in Grossman
and Krueger (1993) to a broad cross-section of countries. Like them, we test whether di¤erences
in environmental regulation across countries generate comparative advantage in pollution-intensive
industries. We di¤er from them in three dimensions. First, we use a broad cross-section of countries
and a direct country-level measure of environmental policy. Second, we use emissions per unit of output
to measure industry-level pollution intensity rather than relying on PAC which do not fully re‡ect the
capital costs of complying with regulations.11 Third, we analyze data from recent periods where trade
with developing countries became more important. As a result of these di¤erences, we reach opposite
conclusions: we …nd a sizable e¤ect of environmental regulation in comparative advantage in polluting
industries, comparable in magnitude to the e¤ect of the traditional determinants of comparative
advantage.
    A second strand of the literature has analyzed how more stringent environmental regulation follow-
ing the Clean Air Act a¤ected U.S. comparative advantage (Ederington and Minier, 2003, Ederington
et al., 2005, and Levinson and Taylor, 2008). These studies exploit changes in PAC within industries
to identify the e¤ect of environmental regulation. Note that the interpretation of PAC in these stud-
ies di¤ers from that in Grossman and Krueger (1993) who use di¤erences in PAC across industries
median ventilation coe¢ cient. See Table 1.
  10
     Two other important contributions to the early literature are Kalt (1988) and Tobey (1990).
  11
     The capital costs of complying with regulations are hard to measure because it is di¢ cult to separate them from
standard cost of capital. An example would be a situation in which a new facility needs to be built to comply with
environmental regulations.


                                                         4
to measure pollution intensity. In contrast, the recent literature uses variation in PAC across time
to measure industry-speci…c changes in environmental regulation stringency. The typical …nding is
that U.S. industries facing larger increases in PAC experienced either small or statistically insigni…-
cant increases in overall imports. Ederington et al. (2005) …nd larger estimates for imports coming
from developing countries. However, the estimates are not statistically di¤erent for countries with lax
and strong environmental regulation and are in fact smaller for more pollution-intensive industries.
These puzzling results might be related to the use of PAC to measure both changes in environmental
regulation and pollution intensity.12
       In sum, the common …nding of the recent literature is that OLS estimates of the e¤ect of increases
in PAC on import penetration in the U.S. are at best small. In contrast, our OLS estimates imply
that environmental regulation is a source of comparative advantage in polluting industries.
       Several authors have attributed the weakness of OLS estimates to biases caused by mismeasure-
ment and endogeneity of environmental regulation.13 Indeed, recent studies found larger estimates
of the e¤ects of environmental regulation on trade ‡ows when using instrumental variable strategies.
However, this evidence has not settled the debate because the proposed instruments for environmen-
tal regulation require strong assumptions to satisfy the exogeneity and exclusion restrictions. For
example, Ederington and Minier (2003) instrument for changes over time in U.S. industry-level envi-
ronmental regulation with a set of variables that includes industry size. More recently, Levinson and
Taylor (2008) have proposed to instrument industry-level changes in environmental regulation with
changes in both income per capita and emissions in the states where the corresponding industry is
located. Both sets of variables are likely to be endogenous to a variety of observables and unobserv-
ables, possibly including trade itself. In addition, it is hard to exclude the possibility that both sets of
variables a¤ect trade through channels other than environmental regulation. As examples, industry
size can a¤ect comparative advantage due to increasing returns to scale (Krugman, 1979), and income
per capita can a¤ect comparative advantage due to home market e¤ects (Krugman, 1980).
       In this paper we propose an instrument for environmental regulation based on meteorological
conditions identi…ed by the atmospheric pollution science literature that can be used to establish the
causal e¤ects of environmental regulation on economic outcomes. This instrument can contribute to
solve the identi…cation problem stressed by the earlier literature because it is based on exogenous
weather patterns and is not correlated with observable sources of comparative advantage other than
environmental regulation, thus it is likely to meet the exclusion restriction.
       Our work is also related to the literature studying the e¤ect of environmental regulation on indus-
  12
     Copeland and Taylor (2004) point out a number of problems arising from the use of PAC as measures of pollution
intensity and environmental regulation. For example, more stringent regulation can cause the more polluting activities
within an industry to migrate to other countries. This compositional e¤ect can generate a negative correlation between
imports and changes in PAC.
  13
     See the survey by Copeland and Taylor (2004).



                                                          5
trial activity within the U.S.. Henderson (1996), Becker and Henderson (2000), Greenstone (2002),
and List et al. (2003) …nd that polluting industries have relocated to U.S. counties where environmen-
tal regulation is laxer.14 These studies exploit variation in regulatory oversight caused by the Clean
Air Act’s classi…cation of counties into attainment and non attainment status with respect to national
air quality standards. We perform a similar comparative statics exercise in the sense that we compare
the e¤ect of di¤erences in environmental regulation across geographical units on the level of activity of
industries that di¤er in their pollution intensity.15 While the size of the estimates is not directly com-
parable, taken together our …ndings suggest that the elasticity of output in polluting industries with
respect to environmental regulation is large not only across U.S. counties but also across countries.
       The instrument we propose could also be of interest to this literature on plant location and envi-
ronmental regulation. In particular, it could help isolate the sources of environmental policy variation
across U.S. counties. As Greenstone (2002) notes, the Clean Air Act’s classi…cation of counties into
attainment and non attainment status depends on pollution levels which are partly related to en-
dogenous local manufacturing sector activity but also partly driven by exogenous weather patterns.
While in this paper we only exploit cross-country variation in atmospheric conditions, our instrumen-
tation strategy can potentially be applied to smaller geographical units in order to isolate the part of
variation in environmental regulation across U.S. counties that is exogenously determined by weather
conditions.
       Finally, methodologically our paper is closest to a growing literature studying sources of compar-
ative advantage. Like us, this literature has applied the cross-country, cross-industry methodology
proposed by Romalis (2004). A number of papers have emphasized the importance of institutional
factors. In particular, Manova (2012) focuses on …nancial development and Levchenko (2007), Nunn
(2007) and Costinot (2009) focus on contract enforcement. Finally, Bombardini, Gallipoli and Pu-
pato (2012) study the e¤ects of dispersion in the distribution of skills while Cuñat and Melitz (2012)
stress the importance of labor market policies. Relative to these, we emphasize the importance of
environmental policy as a source of comparative advantage in polluting industries.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical model. Section 3 describes
our empirical strategy and data sources. Section 4 presents our OLS and 2SLS estimates. Section 5
concludes.
  14
     Greenstone et al. (2012) also …nd that TFP in polluting industries decreased in counties with stricter environmental
regulation.
  15
     Relatedly, Keller and Levinson (2002) show that U.S. states whose environmental regulation became relatively laxer
in the period 1977-1994 showed a relative increase in inward foreign direct investment in manufacturing. Hanna (2010)
studies the e¤ect of the Clean Air Act Amendements on American multinational’s and …nds that it lead to an increase
in their foreign assets and output. Other recent studies of the e¤ect of environmental regulation on FDI are Kellenberg
(2009) and Wagner and Timmins (2009).




                                                           6
2     A simple model

In this section we present a simple model that illustrates how environmental policy a¤ects comparative
advantage in polluting industries. The model describes a world with many countries, two tradable
goods, one clean and one dirty, and two factors of production, labor and clean air. The clean good
is labor intensive and the dirty good is clean-air intensive. Lax environmental regulation corresponds
to allowing …rms to use up a large amount of clean air. As a result, countries with lax environmental
regulation have a comparative advantage in the dirty good.
    The model also shows how environmental policy itself depends on country characteristics. In
particular, we focus on whether countries are subject to meteorological conditions that facilitate the
dispersion of pollutants. Dispersion of pollutants is faster in countries with a high ventilation coe¢ -
cient, and thus these countries can be thought of as having a large endowment of clean air. The model
shows that in these countries the optimal policy is to allow …rms to use up a large amount of clean
air, so their environmental regulation is lax.


2.1   Setup

The world is composed of many small countries, indexed by j 2 J. Labor is the only factor of
production. There is a mass one of residents in each country, each endowed with L units of labor.
There are two goods, one clean and one dirty, both of which are tradable. Production of the clean
good requires labor and does not generate emissions. Labor productivity in country j is Aj , so that


                                       Qcj = Aj Lcj for j 2 J,                                      (1)


where Qcj denotes production of the clean good and Lcj denotes labor allocated to the clean industry.
Production of the dirty good does not require labor but generates emissions. In particular, each unit
of the dirty good generates Aj    units of emissions, so that


                                      Edj = Aj    Qdj for j 2 J,                                    (2)


where Edj denotes emissions generated in the dirty industry and Qdj denotes production of the dirty
good. The parameter      2 [0; 1] captures the extent to which countries with higher productivity also
have access to less polluting technologies. Inverting equation (2), we obtain


                                       Qdj = Aj Edj for j 2 J.                                      (3)




                                                   7
As a result, we can reinterpret technology as production of the dirty good requiring clean air as an
input instead of as generating pollution as a by-product.16
       Pollution concentration in country j depends not only on the level of local emissions but also on
how fast pollutants disperse in the atmosphere. In particular, pollution concentration in country j is
equal to
                                                         Ej
                                                  Zj =      for j 2 J,                                               (4)
                                                         Vj
where Vj denotes the ventilation coe¢ cient of country j. The functional form of the equation deter-
mining pollution concentration is derived from the Box model of atmospheric pollution dispersion,
which we discuss in detail in the next section.
       Utility is increasing in consumption of the clean and dirty goods and decreasing in pollution
concentration:
                               Uj (Ccj ; Cdj ; Zj ) = U Ccjc Cdjd       W (Zj ) for j 2 J,                           (5)

where      c   +   d   = 1, U 0 > 0, U 00 < 0, W 0 > 0, and W 00 > 0.
       Producing the dirty good is associated with a negative local externality. We assume that countries
address this externality by imposing emission limits. This is realistic as environmental policy often
takes the form of quantity limits as countries impose restrictions on the location and size of di¤erent
industries.17;18 In particular, we assume that each country j imposes a cap on emissions,


                                                  Ej     Ej for j 2 J.                                               (6)


       These emission limits are implemented by distributing Ej emission rights to each resident of country
j.19


2.2      Equilibrium

To obtain the equilibrium we proceed in two steps. First, we solve the model for a given pattern
of emission limits Ej for j 2 J. Second, we …nd the equilibrium emission limits. These are chosen
optimally by each country, taking into account the emission limits chosen by other countries and the
  16
     This interpretation is common in the literature on trade and the environment. See Copeland and Taylor (2003) for
a textbook analysis.
  17
     For example, this is the case for the Clean Air Act in the U.S. When pollution concentration reaches certain limits
in a given county, that county becomes nonattainment, which triggers strong policy responses. For a detailed description
of air pollution regulation in the U.S. see Greenstone (2002).
  18
     In the literature on trade and the environment, environmental policy is often implemented as an emission tax,
although it would be equivalent to implement it as a quantity restriction. That is because the di¤erent distributional
e¤ects of the two are not captured by representative agent models. In our model, though, environment policy cannot be
implemented as an emission tax. The reason is that, given our strong simplifying assumptions, the elasticity of emissions
with respect to the emission tax would be in…nite.
  19
     In the context of our model, imposing limits on pollution concentration has the same e¤ect as imposing limits on
emissions, as equation (4) implies a one-to-one relation between the two.



                                                            8
resulting goods prices. The …rst step is very simple. Given emission limits, the model is isomorphic
to a two-good, two-factor model in which emissions are a second factor of production as opposed to a
by-product.
      Let Pc and Pd denote the prices of the clean and dirty goods respectively. Since Pd > 0, constraint
(6) is binding and production is given by


                                    Qcj = Aj L and Qdj = Aj Ej for j 2 J,                                                                      (7)


where we have imposed the market clearing condition Lcj = L. Let Ij Ej denote the income of the
residents of country j as a function of emission limits Ej , which is given by


                                    Ij Ej = Pc Aj L + Pd Aj Ej for j 2 J.                                                                      (8)


With Cobb-Douglas preferences, consumption is given by

                                       c   Ij Ej                           d       Ij Ej
                             Ccj =                  and Cdj =                                   for j 2 J.                                     (9)
                                           Pc                                      Pd

   Integrating this equation over all countries for the clean good and imposing the market clearing
         R           R
condition j2J Ccj = j2J Aj L, we obtain the relative price of the dirty good
                                                                 R
                                                Pd          d        j2J   Aj L
                                                   =            R                    .                                                        (10)
                                                Pc          c       j2J   Aj Ej

We normalize prices so that the price of the “composite good” is one.20 Under this normalization,
goods prices are
                                      R             !   d
                                                                                           R                 !   c
                                           A Ej                                                j2J Aj L
                        Pc =    c     Rj2J j                    and Pd =            d      R                         .                        (11)
                                        j2J Aj L                                               j2J   Aj Ej

      The welfare of country j is a function of its emission limits and is given by

                                                                               1
                               Uj Ej = U Ij Ej                   W Vj               Ej     for j 2 J.                                         (12)


      Equations (7), (9), (11), and (12) describe the equilibrium for a given pattern of pollution limits
Ej for j 2 J.
      Since countries are small, we can analyze the e¤ects of country characteristics taking goods prices
as given. In particular, consider an increase in emission limits Ej . Equations (7) and (9) show that
Qcj is una¤ected and Qdj , Ccj , and Cdj increase. The following result follows:
 20
      The price of the composite good is min fPc Cc + Pd Cc jCc c Cd d = 1 g. It is equal to one if Pc                   c
                                                                                                                             Pd d =   c
                                                                                                                                          c
                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                       .


                                                                 9
Result 1 (Pollution Haven E¤ect). Countries with higher emission limits export less of the clean good
and more of the dirty good:

                               d                           d
                                  (Qcj    Ccj ) < 0 and       (Qdj      Cdj ) > 0.
                              dEj                         dEj

   We now turn to the determination of emission limits. Country j chooses Ej to maximize its welfare
in equation (12), taking as given goods prices Pc and Pd . The optimum Ej is determined implicitly
by the …rst order condition

                                                                   1
                      0 = Vj Pd Aj U 0 Ij Ej              W 0 Vj       Ej      for j 2 J.         (13)


This condition shows that countries trade o¤ the increase in income resulting from allowing an ad-
ditional unit of emissions with the utility cost associated with the resulting increase in pollution
concentration.
   How do optimal emission limits Ej depend on the ventilation coe¢ cient Vj ? Once again, since
countries are small we can analyze the e¤ect of Vj taking as given goods prices. Take the total
derivative of Equation (13) with respect to Vj and rearrange to obtain

                                                             2                   1
                     dEj    Pd Aj U 0 Ij Ej           + Vj       Ej W 00 Vj          Ej
                         =                                                                  .     (14)
                     dVj   Vj 1 W 00 Vj 1 Ej             Vj Pd2 A2j         U 00 Ij Ej

From the properties of U ( ) and W ( ) it follows that both the numerator and the denominator are
positive. The following result follows:

Result 2 (Ventilation Coe¢ cient and Policy). Countries with a higher ventilation coe¢ cient Vj impose
higher emission limits Ej :
                                                 dEj
                                                     > 0.                                         (15)
                                                 dVj
   The intuition behind this result is as follows. A higher ventilation coe¢ cient means that a given
level of emissions results in lower pollution concentration. Thus, in countries with high ventilation
coe¢ cients it is less costly in terms of pollution concentration to raise emission limits in order to
increase income.
   How do optimal emission limits Ej depend on productivity Aj ? In principle, this is ambiguous
because there are two opposing e¤ects. On the one hand, a higher Aj has a positive income e¤ect.
This leads to lower emission limits to reduce pollution concentration and increase consumption of clean
air. On the other hand, a higher Aj has a substitution e¤ect that leads to higher emission limits since
producing the dirty good generates less emissions. The strength of the latter e¤ect depends on . In
the Appendix A we show the following result:

                                                    10
Result 3 (Productivity and Policy). Countries with higher productivity Aj impose lower emission
limits Ej ,
                                                 dEj
                                                     < 0,                                           (16)
                                                 dAj
if either (i)   = 0, or (ii) the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion   c U 00 (c)/ U 0 (c) > 1.

    This result shows that countries with higher income tend to have lower emission limits. This income
e¤ect on environmental regulation is well known in the literature. However, our model points to an
important caveat. In our model income depends on both productivity and the ventilation coe¢ cient.
In particular, if two countries are equally productive, the one with the higher ventilation coe¢ cient
will impose higher emission limits, which will increase its income. Thus, it is only when controlling for
the ventilation coe¢ cient that countries with higher income will tend to have lower emission limits.
    To conclude the analysis in this section, let us make a few remarks regarding the e¢ ciency of
environmental policy. In the model the equilibrium is e¢ cient because of two important assumptions.
First, pollution externalities are only local. As a result, countries have an incentive to fully inter-
nalize the negative e¤ects of their emissions when setting environmental policy. This assumption is
reasonable for the pollutants analyzed in this paper. But it would not be reasonable, for example,
for greenhouse gas emissions, where international coordination plays a crucial role. Second, countries
choose policy optimally and are able to enforce it. This assumption is reasonable for countries with
strong institutions, but less so for countries where political economy considerations can bias policy
choice and where lack of resources can restrict governments’ability to enforce environmental policy.


3    Empirical speci…cation and data sources

The model presented above guides empirical work by delivering two clear predictions. First, conditional
on other determinants of comparative advantage, countries with less stringent environmental policy
will have a comparative advantage in polluting industries. Second, environmental policy will be less
stringent in countries where meteorological conditions are such that pollution emissions are more easily
dispersed in the atmosphere.
    To assess the empirical content of these predictions, we extend the standard cross-country, cross-
industry methodology proposed by Romalis (2004) to study the determinants of comparative advan-
tage in polluting industries. For this purpose, we incorporate environmental regulation as a country
characteristic and pollution intensity as an industry characteristic in a standard cross-country cross-
industry trade equation. To motivate this empirical speci…cation, recall that the model in Section
2 - and much of the literature on trade and the environment - treats pollution as another input in
production. We thus treat pollution intensity as a technological characteristic of an industry, in the
same way we treat its capital and skill intensity. Further, in our model, regulation is implemented as

                                                     11
a quantity restriction determining the total amount of clean air that is available for use as an input
in production.21 Therefore, we treat environmental regulation in the same way that we treat capital
and skill abundance. Our empirical speci…cation then takes the form:


                        Mic =     1   Ec   ei +   2   Kc   ki +   3   Hc   hi +      c   +   i   + "ic ,             (17)

where Mic are country c’s relative import shares into the U.S. in industry i, described in further detail
below; Ec is a measure of the laxity of air pollution regulation in country c; ei is a measure of the
pollution intensity of industry i; Kc and Hc denote country c’s endowments of capital and human
capital; ki and hi are industry i’s capital and skill intensity;           c   and   i   are country and industry …xed
e¤ects. Result (1) in Section 2, namely that a country with laxer environmental regulation should
export relatively more in polluting industries, would correspond to …nding                        1   > 0.
       The model also shows how the stance of environmental policy depends on the prevalence of meteo-
rological conditions that facilitate the dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere. Wherever conditions
are such that the dispersion of pollutants is fast, Result (2) indicates that the optimal policy is to
allow …rms to use up a larger amount of clean air, i.e. environmental regulation is laxer. This suggests
an instrumental variables strategy, whereby exogenous cross-country variation in pollution dispersion
potential leads to variation in the strictness of environmental policy. Notice also that if, as we argue
below, this variation in pollution dispersion conditions does not a¤ect other traditional determinants
of comparative advantage - i.e. the exclusion restriction is met - we can use it to assess the direction
of causality in equation (17). That is, by pinpointing a source of exogenous variation in environmental
policy we can address whether laxer environmental policy leads to comparative advantage in polluting
industries and not the reverse. For a detailed discussion of our empirical strategy refer to Section 4.
       To implement the empirical speci…cation described in equation (17) we use standard variable
de…nitions and sources whenever possible. The dependent variable, country c’s relative import shares
(Mic ) into the U.S., is de…ned as country c’s U.S. import share in sector i divided by the average share
of country c in U.S. imports. This normalization, suggested by Romalis (2004), aims at making trade
shares comparable across countries by accounting for heterogeneity in country size and the closeness
of the trade relationship with the U.S. Alternatively, we could use a log-transformation of imports,
but this has the disadvantage of dropping the observations with zero trade, around one third of the
total. We thus prefer the speci…cation in shares.22 The data on U.S. imports refers to manufacturing
industries in 2005 and is sourced from Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002), updated to 2006.
       Industry-level skill and capital intensity (hi and ki respectively) are measured using U.S. industry
  21
     This interpretation is also appropriate in models in which regulation is implemented as a pollution tax. See Copeland
and Taylor (2003) for details.
  22
     For completeness, in Appendix D we show that we obtain similar coe¢ cient estimates when we use the log of imports
as our dependent variable.



                                                           12
data. Under the assumption that there are no factor intensity reversals, U.S. industry characteristics
are a good measure of di¤erences in factor intensity across industries for all countries. Skill and capital
intensity data are drawn from Bartelsman and Gray’s (1996) NBER-CES manufacturing data, updated
to 2005. Skill intensity of an industry is de…ned as one minus the share of wages of production workers.
Capital intensity is measured as an industry’s stock of physical capital per unit of value added. For
measures of factor abundance at the country level, we use the stocks of human capital and physical
capital per worker (Hc and Kc respectively) from Barro and Lee (2010) and the Penn World Tables
(Heston, Summers and Aten, 2009), respectively.23
       As discussed above we additionally need to obtain: i) a measure of air pollution intensity of an
industry; ii) a measure of meteorological conditions determining a country’s air pollution dispersion
potential; and iii) a measure of the laxity of air pollution regulation of a country. In what follows we
detail the sources of each of these measures.


3.1      A measure of air pollution intensity

We treat pollution intensity as a technological characteristic of an industry. That is, in the same way
an industry can be characterized as capital intensive, we can also rank industries by how pollution
intensive their production technologies are. In order to compute such a measure we turn to data derived
from the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) National Emissions Inventory and obtain, for each
manufacturing industry, total pollution emitted per unit of output.
       In particular, our measure of air pollution intensity at the industry level is drawn from data
compiled for the EPA’s Trade and Environmental Assessment Model (TEAM).24 TEAM’s air emissions
baseline data is in turn based on the EPA’s 2002 National Emissions Inventory. From this data set,
we obtain the total amount of air pollution emitted by 4-digit NAICS manufacturing industries in the
U.S. in 2002. We focus our analysis on emissions of three criteria air pollutants: Carbon Monoxide
(CO), Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) and Sulfur Dioxide (SO2). Given information on the value added of
each industry we then compute the pollution intensity of each industry as total emissions per dollar
of value added.
       In total, we have pollution intensity data for 85 manufacturing industries. Table 2 lists the ten
most pollution intensive industries in our data set. In particular, metal manufacturing, mineral (non-
metallic) products manufacturing, paper manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and petroleum and
coal products make it to the top of the list in every pollutant ranking displayed in Table 2. More
generally, and despite di¤erences in the exact ordering of sectors across pollutant categories, computing
  23
      We compute the stock of human capital following the method in Hall and Jones (1999). Physical capital per worker
is obtained by applying the perpetual inventory method to investment data . See Appendix C for further details the
sources and de…nitions of these and all other variables used in this paper.
   24
      This data is assembled by the EPA and Abt Associates. See Abt Associates (2009) for a complete description.
Levinson (2009) also uses TEAM-EPA data when computing measures of industry-level pollution intensity.



                                                         13
a rank correlation reveals a high average correlation: pollution intensive industries in a given pollutant
tend to be so in all pollutants (see Table 3 panel A).
    Our list of the most pollution intensive manufacturing industries is broadly consistent with the
ranking of “dirty industries”in Mani and Wheeler (1999) who rely - along with much of the published
literature - on an alternative indicator of pollution intensity based on the older Industrial Pollution
Projection System (IPSS) data set assembled by the World Bank.25;26 Additionally, and just as Hettige
et al. (1995) had noted for IPSS data, the distribution of industry-level pollution intensity derived
from our TEAM-EPA data is fat tailed with a small number of highly pollutant sectors. For example,
the least pollution intensive manufacturing sector in Carbon Monoxide - tobacco manufacturing- is 24
times less polluting than the most CO intensive industry, alumina and aluminum production.
    Finally, it is important to understand how the pollution intensity of an industry correlates with
other industry-level technological characteristics. Table 3 panel B reports the correlation of our mea-
sures of an industry’s pollution intensity and its capital and skill intensity. Across all pollutants,
pollution intensive industries tend to be capital intensive and slightly unskilled intensive. The positive
correlation between pollution intensive and capital intensive industries is again in accordance with the
discussion in Mani and Wheeler (1999) for the IPSS data set.27


3.2     A measure of air pollution dispersion potential

It has long been recognized that meteorological conditions a¤ect air pollution transport and its dis-
persion in the atmosphere. For a given amount of emissions at a location, the resulting concentration
of pollutants is determined by winds, temperature pro…les, cloud cover, and relative humidity, which
in turn depend on both small- and large-scale weather systems; see Jacobson, (2002), for a textbook
treatment. Further, when the atmosphere’s potential for pollution dispersion is limited acute air
pollution episodes are likely to occur, posing signi…cant risks to human health.28
    Thus, depending on meteorological characteristics, two countries with the same industry mix and
the same level of economic activity can have very di¤erent levels of pollution concentration in the
atmosphere, and therefore rank di¤erently in terms of the health outcomes of its citizenry. If, as it
  25
     The IPPS data also gives pollution intensity per sector across a range of pollutants. However this data refers to 1987
measurements. Thus our EPA-TEAM data is based on a newer vintage data. Furthermore, as Abt Associates (2009)
note, the data used in developing the IPPS pollutant output intensity coe¢ cient, and the 1987 Toxic Release Inventory
(TRI) database in particular, “have been the subject of substantial concerns regarding their reliability. The year 1987
was the …rst the TRI data were self-reported by facility. A 1990 EPA report found that 16 percent of releases reported
in the 1987 database were o¤ by more than a factor of ten, and 23 percent were o¤ by a factor of two.”
  26
     At this degree of sectoral disaggregation, it is di¢ cult to …nd comparable pollution intensity data for other countries.
Still, Cole et al. (2005) and Dean and Lovely (2010), when reporting 3-digit ISIC manufacturing pollution intensities
for, respectively, the UK during the 1990s and China in 1995 and 2004, single out the same highly polluting industries
as we do here: metal manufacturing, non-metallic mineral products, petroleum and paper manufacturing.
  27
     Antweiler et al (2001) make the same point based on pollution abatement cost data for the U.S..
  28
     A notorious example is that of the steel town of Donora, Pennsylvania where in 1948 a week-long period of adverse
meteorological conditions prevented the air from moving either horizontally or vertically. As local steel factories continued
to operate and release pollutants into the atmosphere 20 people died. (See EPA, 2005, p.3 and Jacobson, 2002, p.88.)


                                                             14
seems reasonable to assume, the stringency of environmental policy responds to the latter, we would
expect that in countries where pollution is easily dispersed in the atmosphere air pollution regulation
will not be as strict. The model presented in Section 2 illustrates this basic insight by showing that
welfare maximizing environmental policies should indeed respond to the prevalence of meteorological
conditions that facilitate air pollution dispersion.
       In order to pinpoint meteorological variables that can potentially act as environmental policy
shifters we turn to the large and established literature on air pollution meteorology. The latter is an
integral part of environmental policy and monitoring. In the U.S., for example, the EPA routinely
resorts to meteorological models both to monitor air quality and to predict the impact of regulation
and new sources of air pollution.29 State-of-the-art atmospheric dispersion models typically combine
a sophisticated treatment of physical and chemical processes with background environmental charac-
teristics, detailed inventories on source pollutants, and the geology and geography of the terrain. For
the purposes of this paper, we focus on a small set of exogenous variables identi…ed by this literature
as the main meteorological determinants of air pollution concentration.30
       To this e¤ect, we resort to an elementary urban air quality model, widely studied in the literature,
the so-called Box model. This model takes into account the two main forces acting on pollutant
dispersion. First, pollution disperses horizontally as a result of wind. Higher wind speed leads to
faster dispersion of pollutants emitted in urban areas to areas away from them. Second, pollution
disperses vertically as a result of vertical movements of air, which result from temperature and density
vertical pro…les.31 In a nutshell, if a parcel of air is warmer than the air surrounding it, the warmer
air will tend to rise as a result of its lower density. This continues until the parcel of air rises to a
height where its temperature coincides with that of the surrounding air. The height at which this
happens is known as the mixing height.32 This process results in air being continuously mixed in the
vertical space between ground level and the mixing height. As a result, the higher the mixing height
the greater the volume of air above an urban area into which pollutants are dispersed.
       In its simplest form, the Box model predicts pollution concentration levels inside a three-dimensional
  29
      Meteorological models are inputs into air quality models. Under the Clean Air Act, the “EPA uses air quality models
to facilitate the regulatory permitting of industrial facilities, demonstrate the adequacy of emission limits, and project
conditions into future years” (EPA, 2004, pp. 9-1). Further, air quality models “can be used as part of risk assessments
that may lead to the development and implementation of regulations.” (EPA, 2004, pp. 9-1).
   30
      Including more information - as prescribed by these sophisticated air pollution dispersion models - would not nec-
essarily be of help for the purposes of this paper. First, the demand on data inputs alone would preclude cross-country
comparisons as many developing countries simply do not have such detailed information. Second, and more importantly,
these detailed models include variables that are clearly endogenous from our perspective such as the current ‡ow of
pollution and the array of environmental policies currently in place.
   31
      That is, how air temperature and density varies with height in the atmosphere.
   32
      To be precise, the warm parcel of air cools as it ascends since it expands due to the drop in atmospheric pressure.
If the rate at which the rising air parcel cools –known as the adiabatic lapse rate– is faster than the rate at which the
surrounding air cools –the environmental lapse rate– there exists a height at which their temperature will coincide and
the parcel will stop rising. This is the mixing height; see EPA (2005), or Jacobson, (2002), pp. 157-165 for further
details.



                                                           15
box. The base of the box is given by a square urban land area of edge length L, which emits E units
of pollution per unit area. The height of the box is the mixing height h. Pollutants enter the box as a
result of local emissions and are assumed to disperse vertically instantaneously. Wind is perpendicular
to one of the sides of the box and its speed is u. Pollutants leave the box as part of dirty air through
its downwind side. It is assumed that the air entering the box through its upwind side is clean. As
shown in Appendix B, this implies that the total amount of pollution within the box follows a simple
di¤erential equation. In steady state, the average concentration of pollution, Z, in the urban area is
given by
                                                           L E
                                                     Z=          .                                                     (18)
                                                           2 u h
       The product of wind speed and mixing height, u h, is known in the literature as the “ventilation
coe¢ cient”.33 The average concentration of pollution in the urban area is inversely proportional to
its ventilation coe¢ cient.34 The Box model thus provides a simple metric to assess and compare the
potential for air pollution dispersion across urban areas: given two areas that di¤er in their ability
to disperse pollution in the atmosphere, the same amount of pollution emissions can have di¤erential
e¤ects on pollution concentration. Further, this source of variation in pollution concentration is
exogenous as it is determined to a large extent by weather systems.
       The Box model has been successfully used in a variety of air quality applications. Up until recently,
both the U.S. National Weather Service and the UK Meteorological O¢ ce used the Box model for
operational air quality forecasting. (See Middleton, 1998, and Munn, 1976.) Given the relatively low
demand that it imposes on data, the model has also been used to compare the potential for health
damaging pollution episodes in various areas and to assess the in‡uence of meteorology on urban
pollutant concentrations, both in developed and developing countries. (See De Leeuw et al., 2002, for
Europe, Vittal Murty et al., 1980, for India, and Gassmann and Mazzeo, 2000, for Argentina.)
       To the best of our knowledge, and despite its routine application in many countries, there is no
readily available data set on the distribution of ventilation coe¢ cients worldwide. To construct such
data set, we source the necessary information on meteorological outcomes - wind and mixing height -
from the European Centre for Medium-Term Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) ERA-Interim data set
(Dee et al., 2011). This data set is the latest version of the ECMWF’s long-standing “meteorological
reanalysis” e¤orts, whereby historical observational data is combined with the ECMWF’s global me-
teorological forecasting model to produce a set of high quality weather outcomes on a global grid of
0:75o      0:75o cells, or roughly 83 square kilometers. ERA-Interim source data relies overwhelmingly
on satellite observations (see Dee et al., 2011), thus ensuring global coverage of comparable quality
  33
    This measure is also known in the atmospheric pollution literature as the ventilation factor or air pollution potential.
  34
    This result is true regardless of the size and shape of the city and the distribution of emissions within the city. More
generally, the concentration of pollutants is decreasing in the ventilation coe¢ cient for a large variety of models.




                                                            16
across locations and time.35;36
       For each month between January 1980 and December 2010 and for each cell, the ERA-Interim
data set provides noon time averages for wind speed (at 10 meters above the ground) and mixing
height37 (in meters above the ground). By multiplying these two values, we construct a monthly series
of ventilation coe¢ cients. Since our focus is on long term meteorological characteristics, we average
the monthly ventilation coe¢ cient over the period January 1980 to December 2010.38;39 Figure 1 maps
the log of the resulting average ventilation coe¢ cient.
       The distribution of ventilation coe¢ cients worldwide is the result of both large and small scale
factors. Ventilation coe¢ cients tend to be lower where both the depth of the mixing layer and wind
speed are low. These are particularly low around the coasts of the Paci…c ocean, due to the presence
of semi-permanent high pressure systems. Conversely, in dry subtropical land regions, in particular
in desert areas, mixing height tends to be high as a result of thermal low pressure systems. Therefore
ventilation coe¢ cients tend to be high. This is the case of most of North Africa and the Middle East
as well as the desert regions of southern Africa. Most of Europe, West Africa and the Atlantic coast
the Americas display intermediate ventilation coe¢ cients.40 Small scale factors, including altitude,
ruggedness and soil type, introduce spatial variation within these broad patterns.
       Given the high spatial resolution of ERA-Interim, the ventilation coe¢ cient data described above
is typically de…ned at the sub-national level. Instead, we are interested in exploiting cross-country
variation in this measure and hence some form of aggregation to the national level is needed. Given
our focus on manufacturing industries - which tend to localize in urban areas - and our usage of the
Box model - geared towards the study of urban pollution - we extract information on the ventilation
coe¢ cient of each country’s capital city. Notice that, for historical reasons, the location of a country’s
capital tends to predate the rise of manufacturing and is therefore unlikely to re‡ect concerns on
whether its atmospheric conditions lead to more or less pollution dispersion. Thus, to implement our
baseline measure of a country’s ventilation coe¢ cient, we select the grid-cell where the capital city is
located and assign to the latter the average ventilation within the corresponding cell.41 We then take
  35
     As Dee et al. (2011) detail, these satellite observations are supplemented with data from other sources, speci…-
cally: radiosondes, pilot balloons, aircrafts, wind pro…lers as well as ships, drifting buoys and land weather stations’
measurements.
  36
     Kudamatsu et al. (2011) use a previous vintage of this dataset - ERA 40 - to look at the impact of weather
‡uctuations on infant mortality in Africa.
  37
     ERA-interim refers to mixing height as “boundary layer height”.
  38
     To check for the stability of our measure over this period we have also computed decadal averages. The correlation
of our measure across decades is close to one.
  39
     Given the seasonality of meteorological conditions, as a robustness check, we have also constructed a “worst month
of the year” series by selecting, for each cell, the month of the year where the average ventilation coe¢ cient is lowest.
The correlation with our baseline measure is high and all results go through.
  40
     We are not aware of studies concerning global patterns of ventilation coe¢ cients. However, our results are in line
with the global patterns described by Von Engeln and Teixeira (2010 ) for mixing height and Archer and Jacobson (2005)
and Lu, McElroy and Kiviluoma (2009) for wind speed.
  41
     We compute this distance based on the coordinates at the center of each grid-cell in the ERA-Interim dataset and
the coordinates of the capital city for each country.


                                                           17
the ventilation coe¢ cient of a country to be given by that of its capital. Henceforth, we denote this
(country-level) measure of air pollution dispersion by Vc : Figure 2 presents the resulting country map.
       As a robustness check, we have also computed the ventilation coe¢ cient of a country as the
population-weighted average of the ventilation coe¢ cient across all grid cells corresponding to that
country.42 Figure 3 presents a scatter plot of our baseline, capital-city ventilation coe¢ cient measure
against this alternative. The correlation is 0.91 and it is signi…cant at the 1% level. Given the high
spatial correlation of our source data across grid-cells, it is not surprising that the cross-country dis-
tribution of ventilation coe¢ cients obtained in this fashion is similar our baseline discussed above. We
prefer to use the capital-city measure as our baseline because the location of capitals tends to predate
the industrial revolution thus it is unlikely to be determined by atmospheric pollution dispersion po-
tential while the current overall geographical distribution of population could be in principle a¤ected
by it.
       Finally, we assess whether our ventilation coe¢ cient measure correlates with other traditional
country-level determinants of comparative advantage such as capital or skill abundance. We …nd
that in our sample there is no signi…cant correlation between the ventilation coe¢ cient of a country
and its abundance in physical capital, human capital or its GDP per capita. The correlation of the
ventilation coe¢ cient with capital and skill abundance and GDP per capita is                      0:01,    0:03 and
  0:005, respectively. Further, none of these are signi…cant at the 10% level. Our measure is only
weakly correlated with oil reserves per capita and fertile land per capita (correlations of 0:14 and
  0:15 respectively).43


3.3      A measure of air pollution regulation

Clean air is a textbook example of a public good. Absent any regulation, polluting industries would
not internalize the environmental damages generated by their production activities and would thus
overexploit the commons. By imposing limits on the amount of pollution emitted, environmental
regulation therefore de…nes the total endowment of clean air that can be used as an input in production.
This is made explicit in the simple model of Section 2 where regulation is implemented as air quantity
restriction.
       In the data however, a country’s stance on air pollution regulation is a multidimensional object
spanning a variety of policy measures such as emission caps, taxes on air-polluting activities or R&D
subsidies targeting low emission technologies. Given the paucity of comparable cross-country data
  42
     To do this, we obtain high-resolution, gridded population data from the Population Count Grid dataset assembled by
CIESIN/Columbia University, FAO and CIAT (2005). See Appendix C for further details on this source and construction
of this alternative measure.
  43
     We measure oil abundance as oil reserves per capita. The data on oil reserves is made available by the U.S. Energy
Information Administration. Fertile land is de…ned as total land area of a country times its percentage of fertile soil
and is sourced from Nunn and Puga (2012). For a more detailed description of these variables and their sources refer to
Appendix C.


                                                          18
covering all these dimensions, such a measure is di¢ cult to compute. Instead, we follow the literature
in proxying for air pollution regulation with the only actual air pollution policy measure that is
available for a broad cross-section of countries: grams of lead content per liter of gasoline.44
    As Hilton and Levinson (1998) and Lovei (1998) discuss, lead emissions are toxic and pose severe
health problems ranging from cardiovascular diseases to signi…cant reductions in the I.Q. of children
exposed to it. As a result, both national environmental agencies and international organizations have
explicitly targeted reduction in lead emissions. Lead is de…ned by the EPA as a criteria air pollutant
(since 1976) and both the World Bank and the United Nations Environment Program have been
actively involved in supporting national environmental policies that address lead pollution.
    Tail-pipe emissions from vehicles fueled by leaded gasoline are the largest source of lead exposure.
As a result, policies targeting lead pollution in the atmosphere have taken the form of legislation
capping the lead content of gasoline. Thus, we source cross-country data on the average lead content
(in grams) per liter of gasoline from the World Bank (Lovei, 1998) which in turn collects data from
industry and consulting sources, World Bank reports and through direct contact with government
o¢ cials.45 From this, we obtain lead content data for 101 countries in 1996. Our policy measure
ranges from 0 - re‡ecting a ban on leaded gasoline in countries like Sweden or Denmark - to 0.85
grams per liter of gasoline in Venezuela. See Table 4 for a ranking of countries according to this
measure of environmental regulation stringency.
    As discussed above, while admittedly narrow and applying primarily to industries relying heavily
on transportation activities, lead content per liter of gasoline is, to the best of our knowledge, the only
actual air pollution regulation measure available for a broad cross-section of countries. Further, as
Damania et al. (2003) discuss, this variable correlates well with other proxies for the environmental
stance of a country such as the environmental stringency index put forth by Dasgupta et al. (2001),
public expenditure on environmental R&D as a proportion of GDP or per capita membership of
environmental organizations.46 Our lead content measure is also negatively correlated with other
traditional determinants of comparative advantage like capital (correlation coe¢ cient of                     0:64) and
skill abundance (coe¢ cient of         0:69). This is as expected and re‡ects the fact that richer countries
have tended to spearhead e¤orts in addressing atmospheric lead pollution. Indeed, the correlation
of grams of lead per liter of gasoline with log income per capita is                 0:63 and signi…cant at the 1%
level. Still, as Lovei (1998) notes, explicit government intervention in several middle and low income
   44
      For studies using this policy measure see, for example, Hilton and Levinson (1998), Damania, Frederiksson and List
(2003) and Cole, Elliot and Fredriksson (2006).
   45
      While the extant literature as extensively used the lead content policy measure, the source of our lead content data
is novel. The literature has traditionally sourced the data from Associated Octel Ltd. (1996), the main commercial
producer of ethyl lead compounds up until recently. The World Bank technical report from which we source our data
(Lovei, 1998) cross-checks and supplements Octel’s data with other primary sources of data as discussed in the main
text.
   46
      Relative to our policy measure the main drawback of these proxies is that they are available for a small number of
countries only.


                                                           19
countries have also contributed to stringent policy being enacted in parts of the developing world. In
our sample, this is the case of Bolivia or Thailand for example.
         Finally, in the empirical analysis of Section 4 we will be exploiting the link between our measures
of air pollution regulation and air pollution dispersion. In particular, recall that we will be using the
latter as an exogenous source of variation in air pollution regulation stringency. With this is mind, and
before pursuing an explicit instrumental variables strategy in a cross-country, cross-industry setup, it
is useful to take a …rst look at the e¤ect of the ventilation coe¢ cient on country-level environmental
regulation. Table 5 reports coe¢ cient estimates of a regression of lax environmental regulation (Ec )
on the ventilation coe¢ cient (Vc ). The estimated coe¢ cient reported in column 1 indicates that a
one standard deviation increase in the ventilation coe¢ cient induces a 22% of a standard deviation
decrease in the stringency of environmental regulation. Subsequent columns show that this estimate
is robust to the inclusion of other country characteristics like per capita GDP, fertile land per capita,
oil reserves per capita, capital and skill endowments and the e¢ ciency of legal institutions.47
         Note in particular that the inclusion of a control for GDP per capita in column 2 does not sig-
ni…cantly a¤ect the estimated e¤ect of the ventilation coe¢ cient on environmental regulation. That
is, the ventilation coe¢ cient has a direct e¤ect on environmental regulation and is not capturing the
e¤ect of geographical or weather characteristics on the level of income. The relationship between en-
vironmental regulation (Ec ) on the ventilation coe¢ cient (Vc ) is illustrated in Figure 3, where country
names are included. Fitted values correspond to the regression reported in column 2, where GDP per
capita is included as a control.48


4         Empirical strategy and results

In this section we investigate whether lax environmental regulation can be a source of comparative
advantage in polluting goods. We test whether lax regulation countries capture larger shares of U.S.
imports in polluting industries by estimating equation (17):


                          Mic =   1   Ec   ei +   2   Kc   ki +   3   Hc   hi +      c   +   i   + "ic ,

where Ec is a measure of the laxity of air pollution regulation in country c; ei is a measure of the
pollution intensity of industry i; Kc and Hc denote country c’s endowments of capital and human
capital; ki and hi are industry i’s capital and skill intensity;           c   and   i   are country and industry …xed
    47
     As a measure of the e¢ ciency of legal institutions we use the total number of procedures mandated by law or court
regulation that demand interaction between the parties or between them and the judge or court o¢ cer (World Bank,
2004). See Appendix C for a more detailed discussion
  48
     As a robustness check, in Appendix Table D16 we show that similar estimates are obtained when computing the
ventilation coe¢ cient of a country as the population-weighted average of the ventilation coe¢ cient across all grid cells
corresponding to that country.



                                                           20
e¤ects.
   Our outcome of interest is the relative market share, Mic , which measures a country c’s comparative
advantage by comparing its import market share in a given industry i to its average market share in
U.S. imports. Thus, if a country had identical import market shares in all industries, Mic would take
the value of one for all industries. Mic takes values larger (smaller) than one for industries where a
country has an import market share that is larger (smaller) than its average import market share,
that is, for industries where the country has a comparative advantage (disadvantage). Note that Mic
measures comparative advantage for all countries except the U.S., which only plays the role of the
common market where we observe and compare the import market shares of all the other countries.
   Note that the resulting estimation strategy follows the same logic as a standard di¤erences-in-
di¤erences (DD) strategy. We compare the market shares in polluting relative to non-polluting in-
dustries across countries with lax and stringent environmental regulation. The di¤erence between
our estimates and a standard DD strategy is that we use a continuous measure of the intensity of
treatment: the stringency of a country’s environmental regulation. In addition, we have a continuous
measure of the level of exposure to the treatment, namely an industry’s pollution intensity. As a
benchmark, note that the simpler DD estimates would directly answer the following question: is the
share of exports in pollution intensive industries larger for countries with lax air pollution regulations?
Anticipating the more detailed empirical analysis below, we start by answering this simpler question.
For this purpose, we divide the sample into lax versus strict air pollution regulation countries, de…ned
as those with a measure of lead content of gasoline, respectively, above and below the sample median.
Similarly, we group industries into those that are pollution intensive and those that are not. We de…ne
an industry to be pollution intensive in a given pollutant if it is in the top quartile of the distrib-
ution of total pollution intensities for that pollutant. We …nd that, for lax regulation countries, 51
percent of their manufacturing exports to the U.S. are in NOx intensive industries while for strict air
pollution regulation countries only 28 percent of exports are in NOx intensive industries. The pattern
repeats itself for SO2 (48 versus 29 percent respectively) and CO (51 versus 31 percent respectively).
Thus, countries with lax air pollution regulations tend to export relatively more in pollution intensive
industries.


4.1   OLS estimates

We start by reporting estimates of the e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative advantage
in polluting industries. Note, that, as discussed in Section 3.1, we measure industry-level pollution
intensity as emissions per unit of output for three pollutants: sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides
(NOx) and carbon monoxide (CO). Table 6 reports estimation of Equation (17) separately for each
of these three air pollutants (without controlling for capital and skill interactions) for a sample of 101



                                                    21
countries and 85 industries. This table and all subsequent tables in the paper report standardized
beta coe¢ cients and robust standard errors.49 The second column reports the estimate of                1   for the
interaction of NOx pollution intensity of the industry with the measure of lax air pollution regulation
of the country. The third and fourth columns report the analogous estimation for SO2 and CO.
Since these are beta coe¢ cients they can be directly compared across pollutants. The estimated
 1     coe¢ cients on the country’s air pollution regulation and the industry’s air pollution intensity
interaction (Ec      ei ) are positive and statistically signi…cant at 1 percent for each pollutant. Note
that the estimated e¤ects are of a similar magnitude across pollutants. This is not surprising because,
as discussed in Section 3.1, these pollution intensity measures are highly correlated as industries tend
to be polluting across all three pollutants. Thus, to simplify the exposition, in what follows we only
report estimates for the average pollution intensity across these three pollutants, which is reported in
column 1.


4.1.1      Baseline estimates

Our baseline estimation of Equation (17) with controls for factor endowments and other determinants
of comparative advantage is reported in Table 7. Note that as the measure of human capital endowment
is only available for a subset of 73 countries, the sample is smaller than in Table 6. Columns 1
and 2 show that adding controls for capital and skill interactions (Kc              ki and Hc      hi ) does not
signi…cantly a¤ect the estimated coe¢ cients, which suggests that the environmental regulation and
pollution intensity interaction (Ec       ei ) is not capturing the e¤ects other classical determinants of
comparative advantage. The estimated coe¢ cient on the pollution interaction reported in column
2 implies that if a country moves from the mean to a one standard deviation below the mean air
pollution regulation, the di¤erence in relative market shares between an industry that is one standard
deviation above the mean pollution intensity and the mean industry increases by 8.3% of a standard
deviation. The equivalent estimates for the capital intensity and skill intensity interactions are 5.1%
and 6.6%.
       Our estimates imply that lax regulation countries systematically display higher U.S. import market
shares in polluting industries. To quantify the e¤ect of environmental regulation on market shares
we divide the sample into lax versus strict air pollution regulation countries, de…ned as those with a
measure of lax air pollution regulation, above and below the sample median, respectively. Similarly,
we group industries into those that are more pollution intensive than the median and those that are
not. Now consider taking the average lax air pollution regulation country and enacting a reform such
that the policy stance would be that of the average strict regulation country. What would happen
to its market share in the average polluting industry relative to the average non-polluting industry?
  49
    In Appendix D we show that all coe¢ cient estimates are also precisely estimated when clustering errors across
countries and industries.


                                                       22
Our estimates imply that the di¤erence in market shares would decrease by 0.08 percentage points.
The equivalent estimates for the classical determinants of comparative advantage are 0.17 percentage
points for the capital intensity interaction and 0.20 for skill.50 To put these numbers in perspective,
consider that in this sample, the average country holds a market share of 1.25 percentage points in
the average industry.
       Finally, let us highlight that we …nd that countries with lax environmental regulation have a com-
parative advantage in polluting industries even without controlling for other sources of comparative
advantage. Moreover, the estimated e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative advantage in
polluting industries is stable when we include controls for the capital and skill intensity interactions.
This suggests that exploiting variation across countries in factor abundance and variation across in-
dustries in factor intensity allows us to isolate the e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative
advantage. This helps overcome an important problem highlighted by the earlier literature: as coun-
tries with lax environmental regulation are usually capital scarce and capital intensive sectors tend to
be polluting, it is hard to di¤erentiate the e¤ect of environmental regulation on exports of polluting
goods from the e¤ect of capital abundance in exports of capital intensive industries.


4.1.2      Robustness

A potential problem in the estimation of Equation (17) is that environmental regulation is partially de-
termined by other country characteristics. In particular, it is possible that richer citizens demand more
stringent environmental regulation (Grossman and Krueger, 1993, Copeland and Taylor, 1994). This
leads to a positive correlation between environmental regulation and certain country characteristics.
If pollution intensity is also correlated with the corresponding industry characteristics, the omission
of these other determinants of comparative advantage can bias the estimated e¤ect of environmental
regulation. We assess the importance of this omitted variable problem by evaluating the robustness
of our estimates to the inclusion of controls for other sources of comparative advantage.
       First, we control for the possibility that more technologically advanced countries specialize in
industries where the pace of innovation is faster. For this purpose, we include an interaction between
GDP per capita and measures of industry-level TFP growth or the value added share of output. This
  50
    This is calculated as follows. The level of air pollution regulation of an average lax country is given by EcLax = 0:552,
the simple average of Ec over all countries whose environmental stance is laxer than the world median. The level
of air pollution regulation of an average strict country is de…ned analogously and given by EcStrict = 0:049: Thus the
decrease in air pollution regulation laxity when moving from an average lax country to an average strict country is given by
EcStrict EcLax = 0:503: Similarly, de…ne the level of pollution intensity of an average polluting (non-polluting) industry
as the average ei over all industries above (below) the median industry pollution intensity. This gives eP  i   eN
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                     = 1:1663:
The beta coe¢ cient of 0.083 in Table 7 corresponds to a non-normalized coe¢ cient of 0.632. Thus, in terms of our outcome
variable, Mic , the e¤ect of the policy reform discussed in the text would be 0:632 (EcStrict EcLax ) (eP i   eN
                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                   ) = 0:371:
Recall that given our normalization for country size, this number is in units of the average market share of the average lax
country. In the data, the latter is 0:2 percent. Thus, the di¤erence in market shares between polluting and non-polluting
industries when moving from lax to strict regulation is given by 0:371 0:2 = 0:08 percentage points. The numbers
cited for capital and skill are calculated in an analogous way.


                                                             23
does not a¤ect the estimated coe¢ cient on the pollution interaction, as reported in Columns 2, 3
and 4 of Table 7. Similarly, we control for institutional determinants of comparative advantage. In
particular, the recent trade literature (Antras, 2003, Nunn, 2007, Levchenko, 2007, Costinot, 2009)
has highlighted the role of contracting institutions for the production and trade of products for which
relationship-speci…c investments are important. Columns 5, 6 and 7 show that the estimated coe¢ cient
on the pollution interaction remains stable after the inclusion of an interaction of the e¢ ciency of legal
institutions and the measure of contracting intensity of the industry developed by Nunn (2007).51
       A potential problem with the …rst strategy to deal with omitted sources of comparative advantage
discussed above is that we do not have precise measures for all the industry characteristics that might
be correlated with pollution intensity. For example, suppose that we do not have a good measure of
an industry’s R&D intensity, which is negatively correlated with pollution intensity. The pollution
interaction could then be capturing the fact that rich countries (stringent regulation) tend to specialize
in R&D intensive industries (not polluting). To address this concern, we note that the worst case
scenario would be one where the omitted industry characteristic is perfectly correlated with pollution
intensity. But in this case, we could use pollution intensity itself as a proxy for the omitted industry
characteristic. This is what we do: we include an interaction of the relevant country characteristic,
in this case GDP per capita, and pollution intensity in the estimation of equation (17). Estimation
results are reported in Table 8 where a comparison of columns 3 and 4 shows that the estimated
e¤ect of environmental regulation on exports of polluting goods increases by 30% when controlling
for an interaction of GDP per capita and pollution intensity. Thus, if anything, pollution intensity
seems to be positively correlated with omitted characteristics of industries that richer countries tend
to specialize in, which tends to downward bias the estimated e¤ect of environmental regulation on
exports of polluting industries.
       A second potentially important omitted source of comparative advantage is natural resources, as
industries that are intensive in the use of natural resources might be more polluting. Recall that
throughout we are excluding agriculture and mining from the analysis, as the location of those indus-
tries is largely determined by the availability of natural resources. A remaining di¢ culty is that some
manufacturing industries rely on mining and agricultural goods as inputs. As most of these inputs are
traded there is no a priori reason for industries to locate close to natural resources. Still, industries
with higher transport costs for inputs than outputs might tend to locate close to natural resources.
To address this concern we include controls for natural resource abundance of the country and the
corresponding natural resource intensity of the industry whenever possible. For example, we construct
an industry-level measure of oil intensity that we interact with country-level oil abundance.52 When
  51
     As a measure of the e¢ ciency of legal institutions we use the total number of procedures mandated by law or court
regulation that demand interaction between the parties or between them and the judge or court o¢ cer from the World
Bank (2004).
  52
     We compute oil-intensity at the industry-level using data on the value share of crude oil as an input in production


                                                          24
it is not possible to construct a measure of the relevant industry characteristic, we rely on the proxy
discussed above: we use pollution intensity as a proxy for the omitted industry characteristic. For
example, absent an industry-level measure of land intensity of inputs, we interact pollution intensity
of the industry with the fertile land per capita of the country. Columns 4, 5 and 6 of Table 8 show
that the estimated coe¢ cient on the interaction of environmental regulation and pollution intensity
remains positive, stable and statistically signi…cant at 1% after the inclusion of controls for interactions
of pollution intensity with fertile land per capita, and oil intensity with oil abundance. These results
suggest that environmental regulation is not capturing the e¤ect of other country characteristic that
in‡uences comparative advantage in polluting industries.
    Additionally, to address potential correlation in errors across subsets of industries or countries,
we show in Appendix D that the estimated coe¢ cients are also precisely estimated when clustering
errors across countries and industries (see Bertrand et al., 2004). Tables D1 and D2 replicate the
coe¢ cient estimates reported in Tables 7 and 8 but report standard errors clustered at the country-
level. Similarly, Tables D6 and D7 report standard errors clustered at the industry and country-
level.53 Finally, in Tables D11 and D12 we show that we obtain similar coe¢ cient estimates when
using log imports instead of import market shares as our dependent variable. Recall that we prefer
the speci…cation in import market shares because that allows us to analyze the full sample where a
third of the observations are zero.


4.2    Instrumentation Strategy

In the previous section, we showed that countries with laxer environmental regulation have a compara-
tive advantage in polluting industries. However, interpreting the OLS estimates as the causal e¤ect of
environmental regulation on comparative advantage faces the di¢ culties of reverse causality and joint
determination. As an example of reverse causality, suppose a country has a comparative advantage in
polluting industries because it is abundant in some unobserved input. Then, these industries might
lobby more successfully to prevent the enactment of strong environmental regulations. This would
imply that comparative advantage in polluting industries causes laxer environmental policy, leading
to a positive bias in the estimated e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative advantage in
polluting industries. On the other hand, reverse causality could lead to a negative bias if, in the
face of a heavily polluted environment, citizens successfully push for stricter regulation. Moreover,
our measure of environmental regulation, the lead content of gasoline, is an imperfect proxy for air
pollution regulation as it only measures one of its dimensions. This can result in measurement error,
which would also lead to a negative bias.
from the U.S. input-output matrix. We measure oil abundance as oil reserves per capita. For further details refer to
Appendix C.
   53
      We cluster standard errors simultaneously at the country and industry-level following the 2-way clustering methods
developed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008).


                                                          25
   To address these concerns we need an instrument for environmental regulation. That is, a source
of variation in environmental regulation that is not determined by comparative advantage in polluting
industries (exogenous) and does not a¤ect comparative advantage through other channels (exclusion
restriction). As discussed above, we rely on the ventilation coe¢ cient, which measures the speed at
which pollutants disperse in the atmosphere, to construct an instrument for air pollution regulation.
The rationale for our choice of instrument is illustrated by the model presented in Section 2, which
predicts that countries with a higher ventilation coe¢ cient face lower pollution concentration for a
given level of emissions, thus tend to enact less stringent air pollution regulation.
   Consistent with the model, we …nd that the ventilation coe¢ cient is a strong predictor of country-
level air pollution regulation. As discussed in Section 3.3., when we estimate a cross-country regression
of environmental regulation on the ventilation coe¢ cient we …nd that a one standard deviation increase
in the latter produces a 22% of a standard deviation increase in the former, with estimates statistically
signi…cant at 1% and robust to the inclusion of controls for other country characteristics (see Table 5
and Figure 3).
   The ventilation coe¢ cient arguably satis…es the exogeneity requirement because it is determined by
exogenous weather and geographical characteristics. To see this, recall that the ventilation coe¢ cient
is de…ned as the product of wind speed, which measures horizontal dispersion of pollutants, and
mixing height, which measures vertical dispersion. Regarding the exclusion restriction, we argue
that the ventilation coe¢ cient only a¤ects comparative advantage through its e¤ect on air pollution
regulation. To see this, recall that although the ventilation coe¢ cient a¤ects pollution concentration,
the latter only a¤ects comparative advantage through regulation because clean air is a public good. As
a result, the shadow price of pollution emissions is determined by environmental regulation. Absent
regulation, the shadow price of emissions would be zero for all levels of the ventilation coe¢ cient.
Therefore, the latter would not have a direct e¤ect on comparative advantage in polluting industries,
as …rms would not have incentives to internalize the costs associated with pollution emissions.
   A potential challenge to the exclusion restriction remains: the geographical and weather charac-
teristics that determine the ventilation coe¢ cient could in‡uence not only pollution concentration but
also a country’s endowments of other production factors and then shape its comparative advantage
through other channels. To address this concern we show that the ventilation coe¢ cient is not corre-
lated with observables other than environmental regulation. To see this, …rst note that the correlation
coe¢ cients between the ventilation coe¢ cient and GDP per capita, capital and skill endowments are
between -0.005 and 0.03 and not statistically di¤erent from zero (see Section 3.3). Additionally, we
check that the instrument is as good as randomly assigned. That is, we show that countries with
above median ventilation coe¢ cient do not di¤er in terms of observables, other than environmental
regulation, from countries with below median ventilation coe¢ cient. In particular, in Table 1 we



                                                   26
provide cross-country averages of all country-level variables conditioning on whether countries are
above or below the median in terms of the ventilation coe¢ cient and environmental regulation. We
…nd that income per capita, capital abundance, skill abundance, oil abundance, and the e¢ ciency of
legal institutions are not statistically di¤erent in the samples of countries above and below median
ventilation coe¢ cient. As expected, all these observables are statistically di¤erent in the samples of
countries above and below median environmental regulation, suggesting that policy is very likely en-
dogenous. The absence of correlation between the ventilation coe¢ cient and the main determinants
of comparative advantage suggests that the exclusion restriction is satis…ed. Still, we include them as
controls in what follows.
    To make our instrumentation strategy clear, recall that our estimating equation (17) follows the
same logic as a standard di¤erences-in-di¤erences (DD) estimation where we use a continuous measure
of the intensity of treatment, namely the stringency of a country’s environmental regulation, and a
continuous measure of the level of exposure to the treatment, namely an industry’s pollution intensity.
The identi…cation problem we face in the estimation of equation (17) is that the treatment is not
randomly asssigned. Thus, we use the ventilation coe¢ cient, Vc ; as an instrument for environmen-
tal regulation, Ec : Note that because the treatment (Ec ) has heterogenous e¤ects on industries with
di¤erent levels of pollution intensity (ei ), we are interested in estimating the coe¢ cient on the inter-
action of environmental regulation in country c and pollution intensity in industry i (Ec                   ei ). Thus,
we instrument for this interaction (Ec           ei ) in equation (17) using the interaction of the ventilation
coe¢ cient in country c and pollution intensity in industry i (Vc                ei ), as described by the following
…rst stage regression equation:


                       Ec    ei =   1   Vc   ei +   2   Kc    ki +   3   Hc   hi +   c   +   i   +   ic .          (19)

    The requirements for this instrumentation strategy to be valid are: …rst, that the ventilation coef-
…cient is a valid instrument for environmental regulation, second, that pollution intensity is exogenous
with respect to our outcome of interest.54 We argued above that the ventilation coe¢ cient satis…es
the …rst requirement. In addition, pollution intensity satis…es the second requirement: it is exogenous
with respect to our outcome of interest, the relative market share of country c in industry i (Mic ). To
see this, recall that our pollution intensity measure is based on emissions per unit of output in the U.S..
Thus, the main potential concern is that it might not be exogenous to U.S. comparative advantage.
However, our outcome of interest, Mic ; measures comparative advantage for all countries except the
U.S., by comparing a country’s U.S. import market share in a given industry i to its average market
share in U.S. imports. That is, the U.S. only plays the role of the common market where we observe
  54
     See Ozer-Balli and Sorensen (2010) for a discussion of implementation of instrumental variable strategies in linear
regressions with interaction terms. For a formal discussion, see also section 2.3.4 of Angrist and Krueger (1999).




                                                             27
and compare the import market shares of all the other countries. By de…nition, the U.S. import market
share in U.S. imports is zero for all industries, thus our outcome variable Mic is independent of U.S.
comparative advantage.
       To simplify the exposition, we start by reporting the direct e¤ect of the ventilation coe¢ cient on
comparative advantage or reduced form estimates. Next, we report our 2SLS estimates where we use
the ventilation coe¢ cient as an instrument for environmental regulation.


4.2.1       Reduced form estimates

In this section we estimate the reduced form e¤ect of the ventilation coe¢ cient on comparative advan-
tage in polluting industries. This estimate is interesting in its own right because it is independent from
the particular measure of air pollution regulation used. We thus estimate the following speci…cation:


                          Mic =     1   Vc   ei +    2   Kc   ki +   3   Hc   hi +    c   +   i   + "ic ,                  (20)


where Vc is the ventilation coe¢ cient in the capital of country c, ei is pollution intensity of industry i.
Estimation results are reported in Table 9. Column 1 estimates                  1    without including any control, and
the remaining columns add controls sequentially. The …rst important result is that the e¤ect of the
ventilation coe¢ cient on comparative advantage in polluting industries (                     1)      is always positive, stable
across speci…cations and signi…cant at            1%.55
       As discussed above, the main concern in interpreting the estimates of                      1     is that the geographical
and weather characteristics that determine the ventilation coe¢ cient could also in‡uence a country’s
endowments of other production factors and then shape its comparative advantage through other
channels. To address this concern we assess the stability of the estimated                    1   coe¢ cient to the inclusion
of controls. We start by reporting estimates for the largest sample of countries that has information
on per capita GDP but not capital and skill endowments. The results reported in columns 1 and 2 of
Table 9 show that the estimated              1   is una¤ected by the inclusion of a control for the interaction of
GDP per capita and pollution intensity. In addition, a control for the interaction of oil abundance and
oil intensity in column 3 is highly signi…cant but only marginally a¤ects                          1.    Moving to the smaller
sample of countries where measures of human capital are available, columns 4 to 6 show that the
estimate of     1   is una¤ected by the inclusion of controls for the skill and capital interactions. Finally,
columns 7 to 9 show that        1   estimates are also similar when including controls for the legal institutions
and fertile land per capita interactions.
  55
    We report standardized beta coe¢ cients and robust standard errors in Table 9. In Appendix D, we show that
coe¢ cient estimates remain precisely estimated when clustering standard errors across countries or across countries and
industries (see Tables D3 and D8, respectively). In Table D13 we show similar estimates are obtained when using the
log of imports instead of the import market share as our dependent variable. Finally, Table D17 shows that similar
estimates are obtained when computing the ventilation coe¢ cient of a country as the population-weighted average of the
ventilation coe¢ cient across all grid cells corresponding to that country.


                                                              28
    The estimated coe¢ cient on the ventilation and pollution interaction (Vc                  ei ) reported in column
9, where all controls are included, implies that when we move from a country at the mean ventilation
coe¢ cient to a country at one standard deviation above the mean, the predicted relative import share
in an industry that is one standard deviation above the mean pollution intensity is 5.3% of a standard
deviation higher relative to the import share in the industry with the mean pollution intensity. The
beta coe¢ cients of other sources of comparative advantage are of a similar size, from 7.6% for the oil
interaction to 4.2% for the capital interaction.


4.2.2    2SLS estimates

In this section we report our two-stage least squares estimates of the e¤ect of air pollution regulation on
comparative advantage in polluting industries. As a reminder, we use the interaction of the ventilation
coe¢ cient in country c and pollution intensity in industry i (Vc ei ) as an instrument for the interaction
of environmental regulation in country c and pollution intensity in industry i (Ec                      ei ) in equation
(17). Recall that in our theoretical model, environmental regulation is a function of the ventilation
coe¢ cient (Result 2) and the country’s level of technology (Result 3). In an e¤ort to proxy for the
latter we control for an interaction of GDP per capita (Yc ) and pollution intensity. In addition, we
include the classical determinants of comparative advantage as controls as they belong to the second
stage equation.
    The estimation of the …rst-stage regression described in equation (19) is reported in Table 10. The
…rst column includes only the interaction of the ventilation coe¢ cient and pollution intensity (Vc                    ei )
as a regressor, and the rest of the columns add the remaining controls sequentially. The estimated
coe¢ cient on Vc       ei is positive, stable and statistically signi…cant at 1% in all speci…cations. The
F-test on the excluded instrument (Vc           ei ) varies between a value of 152 in column 1 where no controls
are included, 93 in column 5 when only controls for capital and skill interactions are included, and 126
in the last column where all controls are included. Thus, it is unlikely that our second stage estimates
will be biased by weak instruments. Note that the magnitude of our …rst stage estimates of the e¤ect
of the ventilation coe¢ cient on environmental regulation is the same that we obtained when regressing
country-level regulation on country-level ventilation coe¢ cients, that is Ec on Vc , as reported in Table
5. In particular, the estimates in the …rst column of Tables 5 and 10 where no controls are included,
are identical and have the same interpretation: if a country moves from the mean to a one standard
deviation above the mean ventilation coe¢ cient, the laxity of environmental regulation increases by
22% of a standard deviation.
    Two-stage least squares estimates of equation (17) are reported in Table 11.56 The …rst column
  56
     As in previous sections, we report standardized beta coe¢ cients and robust standard errors in all baseline tables. In
Appendix D, we show that coe¢ cient estimates reported in Tables 10 and 11 remain precisely estimated when clustering
standard errors across countries or across countries and industries (see tables D4 and D5 and D9 and D10, respectively).



                                                            29
includes only the (instrumented) interaction between environmental regulation and pollution intensity
(Ec ei ) and the rest of the columns add the remaining controls sequentially. The estimated coe¢ cient
on the instrumented Ec         ei is positive, stable and statistically signi…cant at 1% in all speci…cations.
The stability of the estimated coe¢ cient when controls for other country characteristics are included
suggests that the exclusion restriction is satis…ed: the ventilation coe¢ cient a¤ects comparative ad-
vantage through its e¤ect on environmental regulation, not because it is correlated with other sources
of comparative advantage. The estimated coe¢ cient on the pollution interaction (Ec                     ei ) reported
in column 4, where controls for per capita GDP, capital and skill interactions are included, implies
that if a country moves from the mean to a one standard deviation below the mean in air pollution
regulation stringency, the predicted relative import share of an industry that is one standard deviation
above the mean pollution intensity increases by 18.6% of a standard deviation relative to the import
share of the mean pollution intensity industry.
    To assess the magnitude of the e¤ect of environmental regulation on market shares implied by our
estimates, we perform a quanti…cation equivalent to the one presented above for OLS estimates. We
use the sample median to divide countries into lax versus strict air pollution regulation. Similarly, we
group industries into those that are more pollution intensive than the median and those that are not.
Now consider taking the average lax air pollution regulation country and enacting a reform such that
the policy stance would be that of the average strict regulation country. What would happen to its
market share in the average polluting industry relative to the average non-polluting industry? Our
2SLS estimates imply that the di¤erence in market shares would decrease by 0.20 percentage points.
    Our baseline 2SLS estimates of the e¤ect of environmental regulation on comparative advantage in
polluting industries are around 80% higher than OLS estimates. To see this, note that OLS estimation
of our baseline equation reported in column 4 of Table 11 is reported in column 4 of Table 8, where                  1

is 0.108. The …nding that the 2SLS estimates exceed OLS estimates suggests that reverse causality and
measurement error were generating a downwards bias in OLS estimates. As discussed above, reverse
causality can downwards bias the estimated e¤ect of environmental regulation if comparative advantage
in polluting industries results in higher levels of pollution, which in turn induces the population
to demand more stringent air pollution regulations. In particular, some advanced countries that
industrialized earlier might have faced stronger demand from their citizens to address air pollution
problems. If these countries tend to export more in polluting industries and have more stringent
regulation, OLS estimates can be downwards biased. An additional source of downwards bias in OLS
estimates is measurement error. Recall that our measure of environmental regulation, while easily
comparable across countries, is limited to one dimension of air pollution regulation and is thus at best
Further, in tables D14 and D15 we show that we obtain similar estimates when using the log of imports instead of the
import market share as our dependent variable. Finally, Tables D18 and D19 shows that similar estimates are obtained
when computing the ventilation coe¢ cient of a country as the population-weighted average of the ventilation coe¢ cient
across all grid cells corresponding to that country.


                                                          30
partial and subject to measurement error.
    Taken together, the results suggest that our instrument captures the variation in the environmental
regulation measure that is directly driven by the broader e¤ect of meteorological conditions on pollution
concentration and the demand for air pollution policy. These estimates suggest that the e¤ect of
environmental regulation on comparative advantage is likely causal and comparable in magnitude to
classical determinants of comparative advantage such as capital and skill abundance.


5    Conclusion

The traditional view in the trade and environment literature has held that the e¤ects of environmental
regulation on comparative advantage in polluting industries are small and unimportant relative to
traditional determinants of comparative advantage. This conclusion stands at odds with ongoing
policy debates and regulatory measures that seem premised on the existence of a signi…cant pollution
haven e¤ect. Further, it con‡icts with a large body of evidence documenting a sizeable e¤ect of
environmental regulation on intranational plant location.
    The empirical results presented in this paper question the traditional view. In a standard cross-
country, cross-industry test of comparative advantage, we show that the stance of environmental
regulation is a statistically and economically signi…cant determinant of comparative advantage in
polluting industries. We …nd the magnitude of this e¤ect to be comparable to the e¤ect of other
traditional determinants of comparative advantage.
    Further, the extant literature has stressed the likely endogeneity of environmental regulation. We
address this problem by acknowledging the importance of meteorological factors in shaping pollution
concentration outcomes and, as a result, policy stringency. In particular, by turning to the literature on
the determinants of atmospheric pollution dispersion we have identi…ed a meteorological variable - the
ventilation coe¢ cient - that has a strong e¤ect on environmental policy stringency and is uncorrelated
with other determinants of comparative advantage. Using the ventilation coe¢ cient as an instrument
for air pollution regulation stringency, we show that the e¤ect of the latter on comparative advantage
is not only economically signi…cant but likely causal.
    Our results suggest a number of directions for future research. The analysis can be extended to
the case of green house gases (GHG). In quantitative models of climate change, a crucial ingredient
is the degree to which reductions in GHG emissions resulting from policies in advanced countries will
result in increases in emissions in developing countries as a result of the relocation of GHG-intensive
industries (see, for example, Elliott et al., 2010). Our methodology can be used to estimate this leakage
e¤ect. In addition, our instrumental variables strategy can be applied to intranational settings. For
example, the literature studying the e¤ect of air pollution regulation within the U.S. has stressed
that a county’s attainment status is determined by both industrial location and weather conditions


                                                   31
a¤ecting pollution concentration (see Greenstone, 2002, and List et al., 2003). Thus, our instrument,
the ventilation coe¢ cient, can be used to identify exogenous variation in attainment status across
counties.


References

 [1] Abt Associates Inc., (2009). “Trade and environmental assessment model: Model description,”
    prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency National Center for Environmental Eco-
    nomics/Climate Economics Branch, Cambridge MA: Abt Associates.

 [2] Angrist, J., and A. Krueger, (1999). “Empirical strategies in labor economics,” in Handbook of
    Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card eds., Elsevier, 1277-366.

 [3] Antras, P., (2003). “Firms, contracts, and trade structure,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 118,
    1375-418.

 [4] Antweiler, W., B. Copeland, and S. Taylor, (2001). “Is free trade good for the environment?”
    American Economic Review 91, 877-908.

 [5] Archer, C., and M. Jacobson, (2005). “Evaluation of global wind power,”Journal of Geophysical
    Research - Atmospheres 110, D12110.

 [6] Arya, S., (1998). Air Pollution Meteorology and Dispersion, New York: Oxford University Press.

 [7] Associated Octel, (1996). “Worldwide gasoline and diesel fuel survey,”London: Associated Octel
    Ltd.

 [8] Barro, R., and J. Lee, (2010). “A new data set of educational attainment in the World, 1950-2010,”
    NBER Working Paper 15902.

 [9] Bartelsman, E., and W. Gray, (1996). “The NBER manufacturing productivity database,”NBER
    Technical Working Paper 205.

[10] Becker, R., and J. Henderson, (2000). “E¤ects of air quality regulations on polluting industries.”
    Journal of Political Economy 108, 379-421.

[11] Bertrand, M., E. Du‡o, and S. Mullainathan, (2004). “How much should we trust di¤erences-in-
    di¤erences estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-75.

[12] Bombardini, M., G. Gallipoli, and G. Pupato, (2012). “Skill dispersion and trade ‡ows,”American
    Economic Review 102, 2327-48.



                                                  32
[13] Cameron, C., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller, (2008). “Bootstrap-based improvements for inference
    with clustered errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 414-27.

[14] Caselli, F., (2005). “Accounting for cross-country income di¤erences,” in Handbook of Economic
    Growth, P. Aghion and S. H. Durlauf eds., Elsevier, 679-741.

[15] Chen, Y., A. Ebenstein, M. Greenstone, and H. Li, (2011). “The long-run impact of air pollution
    on life expectancy: Evidence from China’s Huai river policy,” mimeo.

[16] Chichilnisky, G., (1994). “North-South trade and the global environment,” American Economic
    Review 84, 851-74.

[17] Cole, M., R. Elliott, and P. Fredriksson, (2006). “Endogenous pollution havens: Does FDI in‡u-
    ence environmental regulations?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 108, 157-78.

[18] Cole M., R. Elliott, and K. Shimamoto, (2005). “Industrial characteristics, environmental regula-
    tions and air pollution: An analysis of the U.K. manufacturing sector,”Journal of Environmental
    Economics and Management 50, 121-43.

[19] Copeland, B., and S. Taylor, (1994). “North-South trade and the environment,”Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 109, 755-87.

[20] Copeland, B., and S. Taylor, (1995). “Trade and transboundary pollution,” American Economic
    Review 85, 716-37.

[21] Copeland, B., and S. Taylor, (2003). Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence, Princeton
    University Press.

[22] Copeland, B., and S. Taylor, (2004). “Trade, growth, and the environment,”Journal of Economic
    Literature 42, 7-71.

[23] Costinot, A., (2009). “On the origins of comparative advantage,” Journal of International Eco-
    nomics 77, 255-64.

[24] Cuñat, A., and M. Melitz, (2012). “Volatility, labor market ‡exibility, and the pattern of com-
    parative advantage,” Journal of the European Economic Association 10, 225-54.

[25] Damania, R., P. Fredriksson, and J. List, (2003). “Trade liberalization, corruption, and envi-
    ronmental policy formation: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management 46, 490-512.

[26] Dasgupta, S., A. Mody, D. Roy, and D. Wheeler, (2001). “Environmental regulation and devel-
    opment: A cross-country empirical analysis,” Oxford Development Studies 29, 173-87.

                                                 33
[27] De Leeuw, F., E. van Zantvoort, R. Sluyter, and W. van Pul, (2002). “Urban air quality assessment
    model: UAQAM,” Environmental Modeling & Assessment 7, 243-58.

[28] Dean, J., and M. Lovely, (2010). “Trade growth, production fragmentation, and China’s environ-
    ment,” NBER Working Paper 13860.

[29] Dee, D., et al., (2011). “The ERA-Interim reanalysis: Con…guration and performance of the data
    assimilation system,” Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 137, 553-97.

[30] Ederington, J., A. Levinson, and J. Minier, (2005). “Footloose and pollution-free,” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 87, 92-9.

[31] Ederington, J., and J. Minier, (2003). “Is environmental policy a secondary trade barrier? An
    empirical analysis,” Canadian Journal of Economics 36, 137-54.

[32] Elliott, J., I. Foster, S. Kortum, T. Munson, F. Pérez Cervantes, and D. Weisbach, (2010). “Trade
    and carbon taxes,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100, 465-9.

[33] Environmental Protection Agency, (2004). Risk Assessment and Modeling - Air Toxics Risk As-
    sessment, Volume 1 - Technical Resource Manual, O¢ ce of Air Quality Planning and Standards,
    Emissions Standards Division.

[34] Environmental Protection Agency, (2005). Basic Air Pollution Meteorology, Air Pollution Train-
    ing Institute.

[35] Feenstra, R., J. Romalis, and P. Schott, (2002). “U.S. imports, exports and tari¤ data, 1989-2001,”
    NBER Working Paper 9387.

[36] Gassmann, M., and N. Mazzeo, (2000). “Air pollution potential: Regional study in Argentina,”
    Environmental Management 25, 375-82.

[37] Gellert, W., S. Gottwald, M. Hellwich, H. Kastner, and H. Kustner (1977). The VNR Concise
    Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.

[38] Greenstone, M., (2002). “The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity: Evi-
    dence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Acts and the census of manufactures,”Journal of Political
    Economy 110, 1175-219.

[39] Greenstone, M., and R. Hanna, (2011). “Environmental regulations, air and water pollution, and
    infant mortality in India,” NBER Working Paper 17210.

[40] Greenstone, M., J. List, and C. Syverson, (2012). “The e¤ects of environmental regulation on the
    competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing,” NBER Working Paper 18392.

                                                  34
[41] Grossman, G., and A. Krueger, (1993). “Environmental impacts of a North American free trade
    agreement,” in The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber ed., MIT Press, 13-56.

[42] Grossman, G., and A. Krueger, (1995). “Economic growth and the environment,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 110, 353-77.

[43] Hall, R., and C. Jones, (1999). “Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker
    than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 14, 83-116.

[44] Hanna, R., (2010). “U.S. environmental regulation and FDI: Evidence from a panel of U.S.-based
    multinational …rms,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, 158-89.

[45] Hanna, R., and P. Oliva, (2011). “The e¤ect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from a natural
    experiment in Mexico City,” NBER Working Paper 17302.

[46] Henderson, V., (1996). “E¤ects of air quality regulation,” American Economic Review 86, 789-
    813.

[47] Heston, A., R. Summers and B. Aten, (2009). Penn World Table Version 6.3, Center for Inter-
    national Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices, University of Pennsylvania.

[48] Hettige, H., P. Martin, M. Singh, and D. Wheeler, (1995). “The industrial pollution projection
    system,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1431.

[49] Hilton, F., and A. Levinson, (1998). “Factoring the environmental Kuznets curve: Evidence from
    automotive lead emissions,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 35, 126-41.

[50] Jacobson, M., (2002). Atmospheric Pollution: History, Science and Regulation, Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press.

[51] Kalt, J., (1988). “The impact of domestic environmental regulatory policies on U.S. international
    competitiveness,” in International Competitiveness, M. Spence and H. Hazard eds., Cambridge,
    MA: Harper and Row, Ballinger, 221-62.

[52] Kellenberg, D., (2009). “An empirical investigation of the pollution haven e¤ect with strategic
    environment and trade policy,” Journal of International Economics 78, 242-55.

[53] Keller, W., and A. Levinson, (2002). “Pollution abatement costs and foreign direct investment
    in‡ows to U.S. states,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 691-703.

[54] Kudamatsu, M., T. Persson, and D. Stromber, (2011). “Weather and infant mortality in Africa,”
    mimeo.


                                                 35
[55] Levchenko, A., (2007). “Institutional quality and international trade,”Review of Economic Stud-
    ies 74, 791-819.

[56] Levinson, A., (2009). “Technology, international trade, and pollution from U.S. manufacturing,”
    American Economic Review 99, 2177-92.

[57] Levinson, A., and S. Taylor, (2008). “Unmasking the pollution haven e¤ect,” International Eco-
    nomic Review 49, 223-54.

[58] List, J., D. Millimet, P. Fredriksson, and W. McHone, (2003). “E¤ects of environmental regu-
    lations on manufacturing plant births: Evidence from a propensity score matching estimator,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 944-52.

[59] List, J., and D. Sturm, (2006). “How elections matter: Theory and evidence from environmental
    policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 1249-81.

[60] Lovei, M., (1998). “Phasing out lead from gasoline, worldwide experience and policy implications,”
    World Bank Technical Paper 397.

[61] Lu, X., M. McElroy, and J. Kiviluoma, (2009). “Global potential for wind-generated electricity,”
    Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences 106, 10933-8.

[62] Mani, M., and D. Wheeler, (1999). “In search of pollution havens? Dirty industry migration in
    the World economy,” in Trade, Global Policy and the Environment, P. Frederiksson ed., World
    Bank.

[63] Manova, K., (2012). “Credit constraints, heterogeneous …rms, and international tyrade,” Review
    of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[64] McGuire, M., (1982). “Regulation, factor rewards, and international trade,” Journal of Public
    Economics 17, 335-54.

[65] Middleton, D., (1998). “A new Box model to forecast urban air quality: BOXURB,” Environ-
    mental Monitoring and Assessment 52, 315-35.

[66] Munn, R., (1976). “Air pollution metereology,”in Urban Air Quality Management, M. Suess and
    S. Craxford eds., World Health Organization, Regional Publications, European Series 1.

[67] Nunn, N., (2007). “Relationship-speci…city, incomplete contracts and the pattern of trade,”Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 122, 569-600.

[68] Nunn, N., and D. Puga, (2012). “Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa,” The
    Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 20-36.

                                                  36
[69] Ozer-Balli, H., and B. Sorensen, (2010). “Interaction e¤ects in econometrics,” Empirical Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming

[70] Pethig, R., (1976). “Pollution, welfare, and environmental policy in the theory of comparative
    advantage,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 2, 160-9.

[71] Rauch, J., (1999). “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of International
    Economics 48, 7-35.

[72] Romalis, J., (2004). “Factor proportions and the structure of commodity trade,” American Eco-
    nomic Review 94, 67-97.

[73] Tobey, J., (1990). “The e¤ects of domestic environmental policies on patterns of World trade: An
    empirical test,” Kyklos 43, 191-209.

[74] Vittal Murty, K., D. Viswanadham, and Y. Sadhuram, (1980). “Mixing heights and ventilation
    coe¢ cients for urban centres in India,” Boundary-Layer Meteorology 19, 441-51.

[75] Von Engeln, A., and J. Teixeira, (2010). “A planetary boundary layer height climatology derived
    from ECMWF re-analysis data,” mimeo.

[76] Wagner, U., and C. Timmins, (2009). “Agglomeration e¤ects in foreign direct investment and the
    pollution haven hypothesis,” Environmental and Resource Economics 43, 231-56.

[77] World Bank, (2004). Doing Business in 2004: Understanding Regulation, World Bank and Oxford
    University Press.




                                                 37
Figure 1
Ventilation coe¢ cient




Note: Log of Average Monthly Ventilation Coe¢ cient. For each month between January 1980 and December 2010, we obtain
average wind speed at 10 meters and mixing height (both at 12 p.m.) from the ERA-Interim, full resolution, dataset made
available by the ECMWF. For each of the 0.75         0.75 cells we then average over all months and take logs. Darker (lighter)
areas correspond to lower (higher) ventilation coe¢ cients.


Figure 2
Country-level ventilation coe¢ cient




Note: Log of Average Monthly Ventilation Coe¢ cient in each country’s capital. For each month between January 1980 and
December 2010, we obtain average wind speed at 10 meters and mixing height (both at 12 p.m.) from the ERA-Interim, full
resolution, dataset made available by the ECMWF. For each of the 0.75         0.75 cells we compute its distance to the nearest
capital city. The ventilation coe¢ cient in each capital is then given by the value of the nearest cell. As before we average over
all months and take logs. Darker (lighter) areas correspond to lower (higher) ventilation coe¢ cients in a country’s capital.
Figure 3
Ventilation coe¢ cient in the capital city and the whole country




                                       10
                                                                                                                               SAUKWT
                                                                                                                       SDN IRQ
                                                                                                                             SOM
                                                                                                                            OMN
                                                                                                                 KENTCDYEMEGY
                                                                                                                           NER
                                       9                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                     JOR
                                                                                                                     ZAFTKM
                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                             ETHISRMWIMLI
                                                                                                                    BFA
                                                                                                                     MRT
                                                                                                               SVK
                                                                                                                GERGBR
                                                                                                                 TUR
                                                                                                                   MUS
                                                                                                                   BEL
                                                                                                           PRT
                                                                                                          AUT  FRA
                                                                                                              MDG
                                                                                                              RWA
                                                                                                            ESP   BLR
                                                                                                                  MOZ
                                                                                                                 UKR
                                                                                                                 LTU
                                                                                                                 POL
                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                                                                MDA
                                                                                                               HUN  IRL
                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                   TZA
                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                           KAZSWE
                                                                                                            CYP
                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                              EST
                                                                                                            ROM    AFG SYR
                                                                                                                   TUN
                                                                                                                 LVA
                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                             BDI
                                                                                                    TTO
                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                       AZE
                                                                                                       UZB
                                                                                                      CHE   BGR DZA IRNLBY
                                                                                                           ALB
                                                                                                          HRV
                                                                                                           BIH
                                                                                                          MKD
                                                                                                           SVN
                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                                JAM    COMNOR
                                                                                                         ARM
                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                  FJI   LBN
                                                                                                       NGA
                        Capital City



                                                                                          CUBGMB   GEO     MAR
                                  8



                                                                PNG                             URY
                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                             GNB    BHR
                                                                                                  NZL      AGO
                                                                                                      SEN
                                                                                                  BENCAF
                                                                                                TJK                 QAT
                                                                                                 GHA
                                                                                                   TGOUGA
                                                                                    VEN  PRY
                                                                                           COG
                                                                                         GAB  CIV
                                                                                                ZAR
                                                                                               GIN                          ARE
                                                                            THA       ARG  NIC
                                                                                          KGZ CMR PAK
                                                                          IDN PAN PHL     LBR
                                                                                         SLE
                                                                                    GUY
                                                                                     CAN GNQ
                        7




                                                                      BTN              TWN
                                                                                SLV
                                                                                  NPL AUS             HKG
                                                                                 DOM
                                                                                KOR  SGP
                                                                                    MNG
                                                                 HND         BGD
                                                                             VNM     CRIHTI
                                                                                    JPN
                                                                     LAO CHNBOL
                                                                COL    KHMMYS
                                       6




                                                                    PER
                                                                      CHL
                                                                GTM
                                                             MEX ECU
                                       5




                                                       5          6              7             8                    9               10
                                                                           Population-Weighted Average

                                                                  Country Observations                   Fitted Values




Note: The relationship between the ventilation coe¢ cient in the capital city ( , used in the main regressions) and the
country-wide, population-weighted average. Both variables are in natural logarithms. Country names are included. See the
Data Appendix for further details.


Figure 4
Ventilation coe¢ cient and environmental regulation
                                       2




                                                                                              VEN     CUB
                                                                                                       LBN LBY
                                                                                                     URY
                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                                                     OMN
                        Lax Environmental Regulation




                                                                                                                    EGY   KWT
                                                                                        CMR     QAT
                                               1




                                                                                           ARE                  ZWE
                                                                                                  AGO
                                                                          BGD                  BENBHR
                                                                CHL                         UGA JAM DZA ROMMUS
                                                                                                          TUN
                                                                                                               BFATCD IRQ
                                                                                                           ESP MLI       SAU
                                                                PER                                    HRV
                                                                                                        BDIMDG
                                                                                                         GRC
                                                                               AUS                MAR
                                                                                                   NGA     PRT ETH
                                                                                             GHA            MOZZAF
                                                                                      IDN       SEN
                                    0




                                                            ECU                        LBR                RUSISR
                                                                             SGPHKG                    ITA IRLTUR NER
                                                                                        PAK          NOR   FRA
                                                                                                     CHE NLD BEL
                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                          VNM    TWNCAN                   MDA
                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                                                         DNKGER
                                                                        JPN                         FIN
                                                                                                      IRN
                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                          SYR
                                                                                                           CZEMWIJOR
                                                                                                                   KEN
                                                             MEX     LAO
                                                                    MYS                                   HUN
                                                                                                      BGR
                                                                                                    LKA             YEM
                                                                                           PRY             POL
                                                                                           CIV
                                                                                         ARG                SVK
                                                                     CHN CRI
                          -1




                                                                                     PAN
                                                                                     PHL         BRA          MRT
                                                                                        THA
                                                              GTM COL
                                                                        BOL
                                                                                             NIC
                                       -2




                                                       -3         -2             -1               0                 1                   2
                                                                               Ventilation Coefficient

                                                                  Country Observations                   Fitted Values




Note: The …gure depicts the partial e¤ect of the ventilation coe¢ cient on environmental regulation corresponding to the
regression reported in column 2 of Table 5 where income per capita is included as a control. Both variables are measured in
terms of standard deviations from the mean.
                  Table 1
                  Lack of correlation between instrument for environmental regulation and observables

                                                              Lax Environmental Regulation                                              Ventilation Coe¢ cient
                                                Above Median        Below Median       Di¤erence of Means             Above Median        Below Median      Di¤erence of Means
        Income per capita                             8.13               9.37                -1.24***                       8.78              8.73                  0.05
                                                     (0.16)             (0.12)                (0.20)                       (0.18)            (0.15)                (0.23)

        Capital Abundance                             9.44              11.23                -1.79***                      10.41             10.29                  0.12
                                                     (0.21)             (0.15)                (0.26)                       (0.24)            (0.20)                (0.31)

        Skill Abundance                               0.59               0.92                -0.33***                       0.80              0.72                  0.08
                                                     (0.04)             (0.03)                (0.05)                       (0.05)            (0.04)                (0.06)

        Fertile Land per capita                      77.11              82.82                 -5.71                        67.57              92.17                 -24.60
                                                    (12.29)            (15.96)               (20.20)                       (9.10)            (17.74)               (20.06)

        Oil Abundance                                 2.55               0.23                 2.33**                        1.46              1.29                  0.17
                                                     (1.17)             (0.12)                (1.16)                       (0.96)            (0.70)                (1.18)

        E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions              23.84              34.29               -10.45***                      29.70             28.56                  1.15
                                                     (1.83)             (1.39)                (2.29)                       (1.79)            (1.81)                (2.55)

Note: The table reports the mean of the variables on the left for countries above and below the median lax environmental regulation, and above and below the median ventilation
coe¢ cient. For every variable we use the maximum number of observations available: this is 101 for (log) income per capita, (log) capital abundance and fertile land per capita, 99 for
oil abundance, 89 for e¢ ciency of legal institutions and 73 for skill abundance. In the sample of 101 countries median lax environmental regulation is 0.38; median ventilation coe¢ cient
is 8.22. *** indicates signi…cance of the di¤erence of the means at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 2
Ten most pollution intensive manufacturing industries for each pollutant.

            NOx                                              SO2                                               CO
 Rank       Industry                                  EF     Industry                                EF        Industry                                   EF
 1          Lime and gypsum                           13.6   Petroleum and Coal Products             13.7      Alumina and aluminum                       43.2
 2          Cement and concrete                       9.92   Nonferrous Metal(not Aluminum)          13.0      Iron/Steel Mills and Ferroalloy            20.6
 3          Petroleum and Coal Products               8.46   Alumina and Aluminum                    12.7      Petroleum and Coal Products                15.8
 4          Pulp/paper/paperboard mills               6.71   Lime and gypsum                         9.86      Lime and Gypsum                            14.4
 5          Glass and glass products                  6.52   Pulp/paper/paperboard mills             9.44      Steel Products Other                       12.3
 6          Basic Chemicals                           4.80   Cement and concrete                     7.72      Basic Chemicals                            10.7
 7          Pesticide and fertilizer                  4.67   Pesticide and fertilizer                6.68      Pulp/paper/paperboard mills                10.2
 8          Veneer/Plywood/Eng. Wood                  2.97   Basic Chemicals                         6.60      Nonferrous Metal(not Alum.)                8.99
 9          Iron/Steel Mills and Ferroalloy           2.94   Grain/Oilseed Milling                   4.59      Veneer/Plywood/Eng.Wood                    8.19
 10         Grain/Oilseed Milling                     2.73   Other Chemicals                         3.71      Cement and Concrete                        8.13

Note: Emission factors (EF) are de…ned as tons of pollutant emitted per million dollars of value added.



Table 3
Panel A: Rank correlation of industry-level                                                  Panel B: Correlation between industry-level,
pollution intensity across di¤erent pollutants.                                              pollution skill and capital intensities.
            NOx         SO2         CO
                                                                                                                        NOx          SO2          CO
 NOx        1           -           -
                                                                                              Skill Intensity           -0.37        -0.33        -0.36
 SO2        0.91        1           -
                                                                                              Capital Intensity         0.59         0.61         0.61
 CO         0.93        0.88        1
Note: Table reports Spearman’s rank correlation coe¢ cient.
      indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level.                                          Note:        indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level.
Table 4
Grams of lead per liter of gasoline


                            Country          Value         Country           Value          Country               Value       Country        Value       Country         Value
                           Argentina          0.00         Poland            0.045          Portugal              0.244       Croatia        0.42        Ethiopia         0.76
                            Austria           0.00     United Kingdom         0.05         Mauritania              0.25      Pakistan        0.42         Angola          0.77
                             Bolivia          0.00         Ireland            0.05        Cote d’Ivoire            0.26         Chile         0.43        Liberia         0.77
                              Brazil          0.00        Hungary             0.05           Greece                0.27      Indonesia        0.45       Uruguay          0.80
                            Canada            0.00          France            0.06           Jordan                0.30        Yemen         0.45       Bangladesh        0.80
                           Colombia           0.00         Panama             0.06           Russia                0.30       Morocco         0.50        Egypt          0.80
                           Costa Rica         0.00        Singapore           0.06            Spain                0.31       Tunisia        0.50         Gabon           0.80
                            Denmark           0.00         Taiwan             0.06           Turkey                0.33       Kuwait         0.53          Libya          0.80
                            Finland           0.00     Czech Republic        0.07         South Africa            0.35        Malawi          0.53     Madagascar        0.80
                           Guatemala          0.00        Malaysia            0.07          Ecuador                0.38       Jamaica        0.54          Mali           0.80
                              Japan           0.00           Italy            0.08          Bahrain                0.40         Peru         0.56         Benin           0.84
                           Nicaragua          0.00         Mexico             0.11           Kenya                 0.40      Romania          0.56     Burkina Faso      0.84
                        Slovak Republic       0.00          China             0.13            Laos                 0.40         Iraq          0.60       Burundi          0.84
                             Sweden           0.00          Israel            0.14          Mauritius              0.40       Senegal         0.60      Cameroon         0.84
                            Thailand          0.00       Philippines          0.14          Moldova                0.40        Oman           0.62         Chad           0.84
                            Norway            0.00         Bulgaria           0.14           Qatar                 0.40       Algeria        0.63          Cuba           0.84
                            Germany           0.00           Iran             0.19        Saudi Arabia             0.40        Ghana          0.63       Lebanon          0.84
                          Switzerland         0.02        Australia           0.19            Syria                0.40     Mozambique        0.65       Uganda          0.84
                          Netherlands         0.02        Paraguay            0.20    United Arab Emirates         0.40        Niger         0.65       Zimbabwe          0.84
                          Hong Kong           0.03        Sri Lanka           0.20          Vietnam                0.40       Nigeria        0.66       Venezuela         0.85
                            Belgium           0.04

      Note: Air pollution regulation is maximum lead content (in grams) per liter of gasoline in 1996 multiplied by the market share of leaded gasoline. Higher values indicate laxer air pollution
      regulation. Data are sourced from World Bank (Lovei, 1998), see the Data Appendix for further details.
Table 5
Ventilation coe¢ cient and environmental regulation
Dependent variable: Lax Environmental Regulation

                                                        1          2           3            4                  5             6            7            8              9

      Ventilation Coe¢ cient                        0.219***   0.211***    0.220***    0.218***          0.184***       0.218**      0.188**      0.217***      0.230***
                                                      (0.082)    (0.069)     (0.069)     (0.069)           (0.069)       (0.084)      (0.092)       (0.074)       (0.074)
      Income per capita                                        -0.624***   -0.617***   -0.628***         -0.680***     -0.680***      -0.202      -0.659***     -0.564***
                                                                 (0.058)     (0.059)     (0.058)           (0.054)       (0.068)      (0.305)       (0.061)       (0.072)
      Fertile Land per capita                                                0.063
                                                                             (0.081)
      Oil Abundance                                                                                      0.216***
                                                                                                           (0.058)
      Skill Abundance                                                                                                                -0.351**
                                                                                                                                       (0.153)
      Capital Abundance                                                                                                                -0.183
                                                                                                                                       (0.281)
      E¢ ciency Legal Institutions                                                                                                                              -0.246***
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.085)

      Observations                                     101        101         101           99                99            73           73            89            89

Note: The dependent variable is the level of laxity of Environmental Regulation in country       .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust standard errors in parenthesis.
*** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 6
Environmental regulation and comparative advantage in polluting goods
Dependent variable: Import Share
                                                                                  1             2              3            4

      Lax Air Pollution Regulation           Pollution Intensity           0.062***
                                                                              (0.013)
      Lax Air Pollution Regulation           NOx Intensity                               0.054***
                                                                                            (0.012)
      Lax Air Pollution Regulation           SO2 Intensity                                              0.062***
                                                                                                           (0.013)
      Lax Air Pollution Regulation           CO Intensity                                                             0.062***
                                                                                                                         (0.012)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                       Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                      Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
      Observations                                                             8,585         8,585          8,585         8,585

Note: The dependent variable is the relative import share of country        in industry ,  .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***
indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 7
Environmental regulation and comparative advantage in polluting goods - Baseline OLS results
Dependent variable: Import Share
                                                                                        1          2          3               4              5             6            7

      Lax Air Pollution Regulation                    Pollution Intensity          0.078***   0.083***   0.083***      0.079***      0.088***       0.080***      0.075***
                                                                                      (0.015)    (0.017)    (0.017)       (0.018)       (0.019)        (0.018)       (0.019)
      Skill Abundance            Skill Intensity                                              0.066***   0.068***      0.062***      0.067***       0.063***      0.057***
                                                                                                 (0.012)    (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.013)        (0.013)       (0.013)
      Capital Abundance               Capital Intensity                                       0.051***   0.053***      0.060***      0.054***       0.058***      0.070***
                                                                                                 (0.014)    (0.015)       (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.015)
      Income per capita              TFP growth                                                            -0.009
                                                                                                            (0.014)
      Income per capita              VA                                                                                  0.024                                    0.036**
                                                                                                                          (0.016)                                    (0.018)
      E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions                  Contract Intensity                                                                           0.043***      0.045***
                                                                                                                                                       (0.015)       (0.016)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                              Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                             Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
      Observations                                                                    6,205      6,205      6,205          6,205           5,780        5,780        5,780

Note: The regressions are estimates of (17). The dependent variable is the relative import share of country        in industry ,  .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust
standard errors in parenthesis. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 8
Environmental regulation and comparative advantage in polluting goods - Robustness OLS results
Dependent variable: Import Share
                                                                                             1          2          3               4              5             6            7

      Lax Air Pollution Regulation                         Pollution Intensity          0.062***   0.097***   0.083***      0.108***      0.107***       0.098***      0.091***
                                                                                           (0.013)    (0.018)    (0.017)       (0.023)       (0.023)        (0.022)       (0.022)
      Income per capita                 Pollution Intensity                                        0.055***                 0.050**        0.051**         0.041*        0.033
                                                                                                      (0.019)                  (0.023)       (0.023)        (0.021)       (0.022)
      Skill Abundance               Skill Intensity                                                           0.066***      0.070***      0.071***       0.070***      0.067***
                                                                                                                 (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.013)
      Capital Abundance                  Capital Intensity                                                    0.051***       0.033**      0.034**         0.034**      0.042***
                                                                                                                 (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.015)
      Fertile Land per capita                Pollution Intensity                                                                          0.030***       0.031***      0.030***
                                                                                                                                             (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)
      Oil Abundance             Oil Intensity                                                                                                            0.085***      0.086***
                                                                                                                                                            (0.006)       (0.007)
      E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions                       Contract Intensity                                                                                         0.039***
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.015)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                                  Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
      Observations                                                                         8,585      8,585      6,205          6,205           6,205        6,205        5,780

Note: The regressions are estimates of (17). The dependent variable is the relative import share of country             in industry ,  .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust
standard errors in parenthesis. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 9
Ventilation coe¢ cient and comparative advantage in polluting goods - Reduced form results
Dependent variable: Import Share
                                                                                       1          2          3           4            5              6           7            8           9

      Ventilation Coe¢ cient                  Pollution Intensity                 0.057***   0.057***   0.054***   0.045***     0.045***       0.046***    0.055***     0.049***    0.053***
                                                                                     (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.012)      (0.012)        (0.012)     (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.013)
      Income per capita               Pollution Intensity                                     0.017*      0.013                                  -0.015      -0.019       -0.024      -0.022
                                                                                                (0.010)    (0.010)                                (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.015)     (0.015)
      Oil Abundance           Oil Intensity                                                             0.057***                                                        0.076***    0.076***
                                                                                                           (0.020)                                                         (0.007)     (0.007)
      Skill Abundance             Skill Intensity                                                                               0.058***       0.056***    0.056***     0.055***    0.056***
                                                                                                                                   (0.011)        (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.012)
      Capital Abundance                Capital Intensity                                                                        0.023**        0.031***    0.042***     0.042***    0.042***
                                                                                                                                   (0.011)        (0.012)     (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.013)
      E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions                     Contract Intensity                                                                               0.049***     0.043***    0.045***
                                                                                                                                                              (0.014)      (0.013)     (0.013)
      Fertile Land per capita                 Pollution Intensity                                                                                                                   0.039***
                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.010)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                             Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                            Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
      Observations                                                                   12,750     12,750     12,580      8,075        8,075          8,075       7,140        7,140       7,140

Note: The regressions are estimates of (19). The dependent variable is the relative import share of country           in industry ,  .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust
standard errors in parenthesis. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 10
Ventilation coe¢ cient and environmental regulation - First stage results
Dependent variable: Environmental Regulation                                Pollution Intensity   

                                                                                    1          2           3           4           5           6               7           8            9

      Ventilation Coe¢ cient              Pollution Intensity                  0.219***   0.211***    0.218***    0.217***    0.191***    0.201***       0.206***     0.203***     0.213***
                                                                                  (0.018)    (0.015)     (0.018)      (0.018)    (0.020)     (0.019)         (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.019)
      Income per capita              Pollution Intensity                                  -0.624***   -0.680***   -0.656***               -0.671***      -0.632***   -0.635***    -0.632***
                                                                                             (0.013)     (0.015)      (0.017)                (0.016)         (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.019)
      Skill Abundance            Skill Intensity                                                                   0.035***   0.135***                    0.023***    0.023***    0.025***
                                                                                                                      (0.007)    (0.011)                     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)
      Capital Abundance               Capital Intensity                                                            -0.022**   -0.387***                     -0.015      -0.014       -0.013
                                                                                                                      (0.011)    (0.016)                     (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.012)
      E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions                 Contract Intensity                                                                                  0.088***    0.085***    0.084***
                                                                                                                                                             (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.015)
      Oil Abundance          Oil Intensity                                                                                                                            0.042***    0.042***
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.007)      (0.007)
      Fertile Land per capita             Pollution Intensity                                                                                                                      0.063***
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.022)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
      Observations                                                                8,585       8,585       6,205       6,205       6,205       5,780          5,780       5,780        5,780

      F-test on excluded instrument                                               152.5       199.7       144.3       142.8       93.1        111.9          117.8       115.2        125.6

Note: The regressions are estimates of (20). The dependent variable is the interaction of environmental regulation in country                        and pollution intensity in industry    (     ).
Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported, with robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
Table 11
Environmental regulation and comparative advantage in polluting goods
Two stage least square results
Dependent variable: Import Share

                                                                                           1          2          3          4          5               6                7          8           9

      Lax Air Pollution Regulation                       Pollution Intensity          0.237***   0.246***   0.193***   0.186***   0.207***      0.231***       0.238***      0.213***    0.232***
                                                                                         (0.057)    (0.058)    (0.062)    (0.063)    (0.071)       (0.072)        (0.072)       (0.069)     (0.066)
      Income per capita               Pollution Intensity                                        0.149***   0.105**    0.100**                  0.123**        0.129***       0.108**    0.122***
                                                                                                    (0.039)    (0.044)    (0.043)                  (0.050)        (0.048)       (0.045)     (0.043)
      Skill Abundance             Skill Intensity                                                                      0.067***   0.049***                     0.062***      0.062***    0.063***
                                                                                                                          (0.013)    (0.015)                      (0.013)       (0.013)     (0.013)
      Capital Abundance                Capital Intensity                                                               0.035**    0.099***                     0.044***      0.044***    0.045***
                                                                                                                          (0.014)    (0.030)                      (0.015)       (0.015)     (0.015)
      E¢ ciency of Legal Institutions                     Contract Intensity                                                                                   0.035**       0.031**      0.029*
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.015)       (0.015)     (0.015)
      Oil Abundance           Oil Intensity                                                                                                                                  0.078***    0.078***
                                                                                                                                                                                (0.008)     (0.008)
      Fertile Land per capita              Pollution Intensity                                                                                                                            0.025**
                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.012)

      Country …xed e¤ects                                                                 Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
      Industry …xed e¤ects                                                                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
      Observations                                                                       8,585      8,585      6,205      6,205      6,205          5,780          5,780         5,780      5,780

Note: The regressions are 2SLS estimates of equation (17). The dependent variable is the relative import share of country                     in industry ,    .   Standardized beta coe¢ cients are
reported, with robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent and * at the 10 percent.
