                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND URBAN GROWTH:
                 AN EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT WITH HISTORICAL MINES

                                          Edward L. Glaeser
                                          Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                           William R. Kerr

                                         Working Paper 18333
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18333


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to eglaeser@harvard.edu, skerr3@wellesley.edu, and wkerr@hbs.edu.
Glaeser and W. Kerr are affiliates of the NBER. We thank Ajay Agrawal, Hoyt Bleakley, Mercedes
Delgado, Xavier Giroud, Rick Hornbeck, Larry Katz, James Lee, John McHale, Debarshi Nandy, Tom
Nicholas, László Sándor, Curtis Simon, Will Strange, Adam Storeyguard, Bob Strom, and seminar
participants for very helpful comments; Alex Field, Alex Klein, and Gavin Wright for their guidance
with respect to historical data sources; Chris Hansen for assistance with the IVQR methodology; the
Sloan Foundation and The Taubman Center for State and Local Government for financial support;
and Kristina Tobio for excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Support for this
research at the Boston RDC from NSF (ITR-0427889) is also gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Edward L. Glaeser, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines
Edward L. Glaeser, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 18333
August 2012
JEL No. L0,L1,L2,L6,N5,N9,O1,O4,R0,R1

                                              ABSTRACT

Measures of entrepreneurship, such as average establishment size and the prevalence of start-ups, correlate
strongly with employment growth across and within metropolitan areas, but the endogeneity of these
measures bedevils interpretation. Chinitz (1961) hypothesized that coal mines near Pittsburgh led that
city to specialization in industries, like steel, with significant scale economies and that those big firms
led to a dearth of entrepreneurial human capital across several generations. We test this idea by looking
at the spatial location of past mines across the United States: proximity to historical mining deposits
is associated with bigger firms and fewer start-ups in the middle of the 20th century. We use mines
as an instrument for our entrepreneurship measures and find a persistent link between entrepreneurship
and city employment growth; this connection works primarily through lower employment growth
of start-ups in cities that are closer to mines. These effects hold in cold and warm regions alike and
in industries that are not directly related to mining, such as trade, finance and services. We use quantile
instrumental variable regression techniques and identify mostly homogeneous effects throughout the
conditional city growth distribution.


Edward L. Glaeser                                    William R. Kerr
Department of Economics                              Harvard Business School
315A Littauer Center                                 Rock Center 212
Harvard University                                   Soldiers Field
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                             and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu                                 wkerr@hbs.edu

Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu
1     Introduction
Economists and policy makers often argue that urban success depends upon a city’s level of en-
trepreneurship. This claim was famously made in Chinitz’s (1961) comparison of New York and
Pittsburgh, and it is more recently invoked by Saxenian (1994) when contrasting the regional
performance of Boston and Silicon Valley. More systematic empirical evidence con…rms these
famous case studies. For example, Glaeser et al. (1992) …nd a strong correlation between small
establishment size and subsequent employment growth across sectors within U.S. cities. Glaeser,
Kerr and Ponzetto (2010) also document the strength of this relationship when modelling entre-
preneurship through start-up employment shares. Similar conclusions are reached recently by
Delgado, Porter and Stern (2010a,b), Rosenthal and Strange (2003, 2010), and Gennaioli et al.
(2012).
    Figure 1 provides representative graphs from this work. These patterns are frequently taken
as evidence that entrepreneurship is an important ingredient for local job growth. While the
empirical association is quite visible, there are clearly many factors that jointly in‡uence initial
entrepreneurship levels and subsequent growth of cities (e.g., regional growth trends, local public
policies). Without identifying exogenous sources of variation for entrepreneurship, it is pre-
mature to make strong claims that entrepreneurship causes urban growth.1
    We tackle this problem by using an idea suggested in Chinitz’s original account. Chinitz
claimed that Pittsburgh’s dearth of entrepreneurs in the 1950s re‡ected its historical concen-
tration in steel, which in turn re‡ected proximity to large deposits of coal and iron ore (White,
1928). The steel industry has signi…cant returns to scale, and Chinitz argued that its pres-
ence crowded out more entrepreneurial activities. This left Pittsburgh with an abundance of
company men but few entrepreneurs. Moreover, Chinitz emphasized how this dampening of
entrepreneurship comes through both static factors (e.g., access to inputs for new businesses)
and dynamic factors (e.g., the transmission of skills and attitudes from parents to children).
Chinitz’s hypothesis was, in a sense, an early conception of the natural resource curse, which in
this case, operates through large, resource-intensive activities crowding out the entrepreneurial
activity which generates long-term growth.2
    We systematically investigate the connection between historical mineral and coal deposits
and modern entrepreneurship. There are returns to scale in many extractive industries and their
industrial customers, not just coal and steel. The process of bringing ores out of the earth is
a capital-intensive operation that often bene…ts from large-scale operations. Transforming and
transporting ores also typically requires large machines and production facilities. Therefore,
   1
     Further progress has been made in establishing causal links of entrepreneurial …nance to industry or city
growth (e.g., Kortum and Lerner, 2000; Samila and Sorenson, 2011). It is striking, however, that similar progress
has not been achieved for entrepreneurship overall. Agrawal et al. (2012) explore …rm size distribution and the
nature of innovation in cities, emphasizing a dual role of a large incumbent …rm and many start-ups.
   2
     If entrepreneurs generate positive externalities relative to employees of U.S. Steel, then this crowding out
can be socially harmful, but the Chinitz hypothesis can still operate without any market failures. van der Ploeg
(2011) surveys work in a related literature on natural resources and country success.


                                                       1
we hypothesize that cities with a historical abundance of nearby mineral and coal mines will
have developed industrial structures with systematically larger establishments and less entrepre-
neurship. These early industrial traits can in turn in‡uence modern entrepreneurship through
persistence and intergenerational transmissions that we elaborate on further below.
    We use the existence of mineral and coal deposits in 1900 as our measure of the returns
to mining around a city. These data come from the historical records of the U.S. Geological
Survey and economic censuses at the time. Figure 2 is a representative map. We demonstrate
that a city’s historical proximity to mineral and coal deposits is strongly correlated with larger
average establishment size for manufacturing in 1963 and subsequently. These deposits are
also associated with larger average establishment size in quite unrelated industries in the 1970s
and 1980s (initial years for sectors are determined by our Census Bureau data). While the
relationship is most pronounced in industries that have more occupational overlap with mining,
historical deposits are associated with larger establishment sizes throughout the city. These
patterns are very similar for other measures of modern entrepreneurship like local employment
in start-up …rms.
    With this background, we use historical mineral and coal deposits as instruments for modern
entrepreneurship. We continue to …nd a strong connection between a city’s initial entrepre-
neurship and subsequent economic growth. A one standard deviation decrease in average initial
establishment size for a city is associated with a 0.61-0.88 standard deviation higher employ-
ment growth between 1982 and 2002. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the initial
employment share of start-up …rms is associated with a 0.25-0.35 standard deviation increase in
urban employment growth over the next two decades. These ranges re‡ect variations in distance
bands around cities for the impact of mines. The instrumented elasticities for average initial
establishment size are similar to ordinary least squares estimates; the instrumented elasticities
for initial employment share of start-up …rms are larger than ordinary least squares estimates.
    Our primary concern with these results is that mineral and coal deposits are likely associ-
ated with other variables that can impact economic growth. Unionization is a prime candidate
(Holmes, 2006), but we can explicitly control for this variable. These correlations may also re‡ect
a general decline in U.S. employment in extractive industries or the decline of Rust Belt regions.
We address the …rst concern by separately considering industries that are quite di¤erent from
mining, such as trade, services, and …nance. We …nd that our results are, if anything, stronger
for these sectors of the economy. Proximity to mines in 1900 predicts larger establishments, less
entry, and less urban growth in trade, services, and …nance today.
    Sector decompositions do not address the possibility that our results simply re‡ect the general
decline of cities that were initially built around natural resources. The decline of the steel
industry in Pittsburgh did not just impact steel production, but also the …nancial and service
…rms that catered to that industry and its employees. We have two complementary approaches
to test this concern. Our …rst approach is to focus on the United States’ growing regions.


                                                2
Manufacturing does not predict strong urban decline in the warmer regions of the United States,
which have witnessed the most substantial urban growth over the past several decades, and
yet we still …nd that historical mines predict dampened employment growth. Service industries
that are highly agglomerated in a small number of areas are typically believed to be oriented
towards national and international sales, rather than the local market. We also continue to …nd
the negative connection between mines and employment growth e¤ects in highly agglomerated
industries that should be less dependent on local demand. These patterns continue to hold
as well in warmer areas, although some sensitivity to the spatial range of the instruments is
evident. We also show that our results are robust to including controls for the projected forward
employment growth of the city based upon its initial industry composition and national growth
trends for industries and the observed change in manufacturing employment for the city from
1963 to 1981.
    Our second approach is more technical in nature but less dichotomous than grouping cities
and industries. We implement the instrumental variable quantile regression method (IVQR) of
Chernozhukov and Hansen (2004a, 2005, 2006). This econometric technique e¤ectively estimates
the instrumental variable regressions at various points throughout the city growth distribution,
where growth is conditional on speci…ed covariates such as climate, initial housing prices, regional
…xed e¤ects, and similar. We show that the impact of initial establishment size on subsequent
employment growth is reasonably homogeneous throughout the conditional distribution. That is,
entrepreneurship is linked to stronger subsequent employment growth in cities that are growing
faster as well as those growing slower than what their initial traits would have predicted. To the
extent that it di¤ers by city growth, the connection of entrepreneurship to city growth is most
important among cities that are underperforming in their growth.
    In the last part of the paper, we consider several variations on our city growth measures
that take advantage of the micro-data. We show similar results when measuring employment
in 2002 contained in establishments that did not exist in 1982, …nding stronger elasticities
than our overall measures. We also quantify how higher initial entrepreneurship is linked to
greater employment shares for entrants since 1982 throughout the establishment size distribution,
with new employment being retained relatively more in larger establishments. Higher initial
entrepreneurship in 1982 is also associated with lower average establishment ages in 2002 for
the city, both generally and among the top 25 employers for the city. As we discuss later,
these extensions and others suggest that the up-or-out process outlined by Haltiwanger et al.
(2012) at the …rm level when linking young …rms to employment growth is also holding more
systematically at the city level for urban growth dynamics.
    These results and their stability suggest that mines in‡uenced modern entrepreneurship with
a much deeper foundation than U.S. regional evolution. Nevertheless, historical mineral and coal
deposits are an imperfect instrument. They will have some correlation with other local variables
besides entrepreneurship. Thus, our conclusions must be tentative. Yet empirical work on en-


                                                 3
trepreneurship and urban economics must begin identifying and exploiting exogenous sources
of local entrepreneurship. Historical mines are one such instrument, imperfect as they may be.
Our work represents a step towards identifying exogenous sources of variation in local entre-
preneurship and using that variation to examine whether the strong correlations between city
employment growth and entrepreneurship hold when removing the most worrisome endogeneity.
The general conclusion from this exercise is that entrepreneurship is systematically related to
local employment growth over the past three decades.
    The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the Chinitz hypothesis and related
literature. Section 3 introduces our data, and Section 4 establishes basic facts about entrepre-
neurship, average establishment size, and urban employment growth. Section 5 then describes
in greater detail the …rst stage relationships between historical mineral and coal deposits and
modern entrepreneurship. Section 6 presents the core instrumental variable results. Section 7
provides the extended employment growth results, and Section 8 concludes.

2       Entrepreneurship, Establishment Size and Mining
The core hypothesis of the literature on entrepreneurship and city growth is that some places
are endowed with a greater number of entrepreneurs than others and that this endowment of
entrepreneurial human capital in‡uences economic success. Chinitz (1961) …rst formulated this
hypothesis in his attempt to explain why post-war New York was experiencing more economic
success than post-war Pittsburgh. In a sense, this entrepreneurship hypothesis is a close cousin
of the literature relating local human capital levels to area development and growth.3 While the
latter human capital literature typically focuses on formal education as the measure of human
capital, entrepreneurial skill is another important form of human knowledge that seems a priori
as likely to explain area success as any other type of skill.
    The literature on entrepreneurship and local economic growth typically uses two di¤erent
measures of entrepreneurship, neither of which are perfect. Perhaps the most common choice is
average establishment size, which is readily available in public data sources like County Business
Patterns. Small establishments would seem to be a natural measure of the ratio of the number
of establishment heads, who may be entrepreneurs, to employees. Micro-data studies, on the
other hand, often emphasize that young and entering establishments generate more job growth
than small establishments.4 Thus, a second measure of entrepreneurship is the share of local
employment that is in new start-up …rms. While the latter metric captures more of the dynamic
nature of entrepreneurship, it also frequently requires access to con…dential micro-data. Never-
theless, these two measures are highly correlated with each other across cities, and both have
    3
    For example, Glaeser et al. (1995), Simon (1998), Simon and Nardinelli (2002), and Gennaioli et al. (2012).
    4
    For example, Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996), Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2012), and Hurst
and Pugsley (2012).




                                                      4
been shown to be correlated with local employment growth.5
     Glaeser et al. (1992) …nd a link between small establishment size and sectoral employment
growth between 1956 and 1988. Their basic approach is to look at city-industries— industrial
groups within cities— and they observe that city-industries with smaller average establishment
sizes grew more rapidly. Glaeser, Kerr and Ponzetto (2010) follow this work using the Longi-
tudinal Business Database and …nd that the correlation is extremely strong and robust. The
patterns hold with city and industry …xed e¤ects and across a broad range of industries and
regions. They also observe that areas with small establishment sizes do not seem to have higher
returns to entrepreneurship, which supports the idea that cities di¤er sharply in their supply of
entrepreneurs.6
     But while it is clear that some cities and city-industries have much larger average estab-
lishment sizes, and that employment growth is lower where establishments are bigger, it is less
clear why establishment sizes di¤er spatially. Glaeser, Kerr and Ponzetto (2010) interpret their
results as meaning that clusters of entrepreneurship exist, but they are unable to explain why
they exist where they do. Without adequate sources of exogenous variation in entrepreneurship,
it is impossible to be sure that the measured growth e¤ects of entrepreneurship really represent
the causal e¤ect of entrepreneurship or whether there are other factors that lead cities to have
both more growth and more entrepreneurship.
     Our approach to this problem starts with Chinitz’s claim that industrial history drives the
level of entrepreneurship in a city. Chinitz argues that New York’s historical garment industry—
the nation’s largest post-war industrial cluster— was a natural training ground for entrepreneurs.
The garment trade had few serious …xed costs or scale economies, and as a result there were a
large number of small entrepreneurs in the industry. Chinitz argued that this entrepreneurship
in turn in‡uenced neighboring industries.
     Indeed, there are many anecdotes about entrepreneurs who began in the garment industry
and then branched into other industries (or bred entrepreneurial children). For example, A. E.
Lefcourt was New York’s greatest skyscraper builder in the years before the Great Depression.
Lefcourt got his start in the garment trade, where he was able to scrape together enough capital
from his savings and by borrowing from his customers to buy a garment company from his boss
at the age of 25. The father of Sanford Weill, an entrepreneurial engine in New York’s …nance
industry from the 1960s to the 1990s, also started as a garment entrepreneur. These stories
support Chinitz’s contention that entrepreneurial human capital may actually be transmitted
from parent to child.
     By contrast, Chinitz depicts Pittsburgh as a city of company executives who did not want
   5
      Self-employment is a third possible measure of entrepreneurship. While it is correlated with average estab-
lishment size across metropolitan areas (Glaeser and Kerr, 2009), it is considered to be a very noisy measure and
has little correlation with economic growth. As such, we do not use it in this study.
    6
      Acs and Armington (2006) provide a broad overview of U.S. spatial patterns for entrepreneurship and eco-
nomic growth. Ghani, Kerr and O’Connell (2010) document similar patterns across regions and industries in
India. Miracky (1993) further extends the work of Glaeser et al. (1992).


                                                       5
nor could have inculcated entrepreneurial talents in their children. Chinitz suggests the roots of
this big company mentality came from Pittsburgh’s dominant steel industry. The steel industry
was dominated by a few large …rms, most notably U.S. Steel, which accounted for 66 percent of
ingot production in 1901 and 42 percent in 1925 (Stigler, 1925).7 U.S. Steel, of course, had its
roots in the scrappy start-ups of Andrew Carnegie and others, but by the early decades of the
20th century, it had become synonymous with corporate bigness. Chinitz (1961) then argues:

          My feeling is that you do not breed as many entrepreneurs per capita in families
      allied with steel as you do in families allied with apparel, using these two industries for
      illustrative purposes only. The son of a salaried executive is less likely to be sensitive
      to opportunities wholly unrelated to his father’s …eld than the son of an independent
      entrepreneur. True, the entrepreneur’s son is more likely to think of taking over his
      father’s business. My guess is, however, that the tradition of risk-bearing is, on the
      whole, a more potent in‡uence in broadening one’s perspective.

In Chinitz’s view, the “salaried executives”of U.S. Steel were just less likely to inculcate entre-
preneurial talents and inclinations in their children, which in turn made Pittsburgh less entre-
preneurial for years to come.
     Chinitz certainly seems to be right about intergenerational transmission of entrepreneurship
(Blau and Duncan, 1967; Niittykangas and Tervo, 2005). Hout and Rosen (2000) document that
"the primary family factor a¤ecting an individual’s self-employment status is the self-employment
status of his or her father." They show that self-employment rate for sons of self-employed fathers
is about twice as high as the self-employment rate for sons of employees. The intergenerational
transmission of entrepreneurial human capital makes it possible that industrial history could
still impact the level of entrepreneurship today. The likelihood of this persistence is supported
by empirical studies that show that entrepreneurs are more likely to be from their region of birth
than wage workers, and that local entrepreneurs operate stronger businesses.8
     Chinitz further documents a number of reasons why the broader ecosystem of entrepreneur-
ship can be depressed by large incumbent …rms. In addition to the intergenerational mechanism,
Chinitz discusses social standing more broadly, suggesting that an "aura of second-class citizen-
ship" surrounds entrepreneurship in cities dominated by big …rms. Chinitz also notes capital
constraints: small …rms are more likely to redeploy capital in their local area than large …rms,
and …nancial institutions are also more likely to serve small …rms in cities with more small
…rms. These patterns have been subsequently observed in multiple entrepreneurial …nance stud-
ies. Chinitz further emphasizes labor constraints, as large …rms are more likely to locate out of
the center city, which makes spousal employment harder. Finally, and perhaps most famously,
   7
     Stigler’s famous piece on U.S. Steel emphasizes that the creation of this company brought massive returns
to investors because of its ability to exploit monopoly power.
   8
     For example, Figueiredo, Guimaraes and Woodward (2002), Michelacci and Silva (2007), and Dahl and
Sorenson (2007). See also Whyte (1956).

                                                      6
Chinitz emphasizes access to intermediate goods. Small …rms have many needs that must be
satis…ed by the local economy. Large incumbent …rms often source inputs internally or at a dis-
tance. This can depress external supplier development. Moreover, similar to capital providers, it
then becomes harder for new entrants to gain the attention of existing suppliers that are serving
large …rms in the area. These additional factors also make it harder for entrepreneurship to get
underway in a city with large incumbent …rms.
    To …nd exogenous variation in a city’s industrial past, we turn to mineral and coal mines. The
U.S. Geological Survey has been documenting the existence of such deposits for over a century,
and we are able to determine whether deposits exist near any given city. We hypothesize that
these deposits were generally associated with bigger establishments and …rms, just as coal mines
were with U.S. Steel in Pittsburgh, and that those bigger establishments crowded out smaller
enterprises and entrepreneurship.
    Why would mines generally be associated with larger establishments? Mining itself appears
to have substantial returns to scale, probably because of the large …xed investments required
to drill, mine and ship heavy products like ore and coal. In 2008, County Business Patterns
documents that the average establishment size across the entire United States is fewer than 16
people. By contrast, the average coal mining establishment has 74 people. The average iron ore
mining establishment has 209 workers, and the average establishment in copper, nickel, lead,
and zinc mining has 193 workers. It certainly appears that mining itself is conducive to large
establishments, perhaps even more so than the documented accounts for coal mining.9
    Pittsburgh’s example suggests that manufacturing establishments that then use the products
of mines are also large, perhaps because industries that use large amounts of coal or ores have
large scale economies associated with big plants. In 2008, the average establishment in primary
metal manufacturing had 85 employees, which is more than double the 40 employee national
average for manufacturing as a whole. As such, it is plausible that an abundance of mineral and
coal deposits led to large establishments in a particular area and that these large establishments
meant that typical workers became skilled at working in big …rms, not at starting their own
companies.10
    Our identi…cation strategy builds on the exogenous spatial distribution of mineral and coal
deposits in 1900. We …rst link these deposits to average establishment sizes and entrepreneurship
in the 1960s and onwards. If Chinitz is right that big …rms reduce the stock of entrepreneurial
capital, then these deposits should lead to larger average establishment sizes in closely related
industries, such as primary metal manufacturing, and also in less-related sectors like services and
…nance. We then investigate whether the places and sectors that have large average establishment
   9
     In 1919, the average employee counts are similarly high: all mines (77), anthracite coal mines (508), bitumi-
nous coal mines (82), and iron ore mines (158). Calculations are made using the 1930 Statistical Abstract of the
United States, Table 733.
  10
     Related evidence on spin-outs includes Elfenbein et al. (2010), Gompers et al. (2005), and Klepper and
Sleeper (2005).



                                                        7
sizes— because of proximity to mineral and coal deposits— experience less growth during the
modern era.
    Along these lines, it is important to note that proximity to historical mines provided past
bene…ts to cities. Indeed, cities may have been founded precisely to exploit these deposits. As
a simple calculation, regressions of log average household income and log city population from
the 1950 Census of Population on coal production per capita in 1901 within 500 miles (Day,
1901; Haines, 2005) yields coe¢ cients of 0.047 (0.010) and 0.335 (0.063), respectively, when
controlling for regional …xed e¤ects. These positive elasticities have since dissipated, to where
a similar exercise using the 2000 Census of Population yields coe¢ cients of 0.005 (0.009) and
-0.009 (0.140), respectively. We seek to identify the extent to which this historical legacy from
mining in‡uenced local rates of entrepreneurship that appear very important for recent urban
growth.

3    Data Description and Empirical Approach
This section describes our core data sources and empirical methodology. We develop our urban
growth and entrepreneurship metrics through con…dential data housed by the US Census Bureau.
Our primary data source is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD provides
annual observations for every private-sector establishment with payroll from 1976 onward. The
only excluded sector is agriculture, forestry and …shing. In addition, we draw some statistics
from the Census of Manufacturers, which extends back to 1963. Unfortunately, data for other
sectors are only available starting in 1976.
    The Census Bureau data are an unparalleled laboratory for studying the industrial structure
of U.S. …rms. Sourced from U.S. tax records and Census Bureau surveys, the micro-records
document the universe of establishments and …rms rather than a strati…ed random sample or
published aggregate tabulations. In addition, the LBD lists physical locations of establishments
rather than locations of incorporation, circumventing issues related to higher legal incorporations
in states like Delaware.
    The comprehensive nature of the LBD also facilitates complete characterizations of entre-
preneurial activity by cities, industries, types of …rms, and so on. Each establishment is given
a unique, time-invariant identi…er that can be longitudinally tracked. This allows us to identify
the year of entry for new start-ups or the opening of new plants by existing …rms. We de…ne
entry as the …rst year in which an establishment has positive employment. Second, the LBD
assigns a …rm identi…er to each establishment that facilitates a linkage to other establishments
in the LBD. This …rm hierarchy allows us to separate new start-ups from facility expansions by
existing multi-unit …rms.
    During a representative year, 1997, the data include 108 million workers and 5.8 million
establishments. During the 1990s, there were on average over 700,000 entering establishments


                                                8
each year that jointly employed more than seven million workers. The average start-up included
ten workers, and notably there were very few entering mining establishments during this period
(less than 0.5% of entrants).
    Our core estimation examines urban growth and entrepreneurship from 1982-2002. We have
manufacturing data going back to 1963, but we focus primarily on the period for which our data
covers all sectors of the U.S. economy.11 This will enable us to run regressions of the form
              Employmentc;2002
         ln                          =     ln(Entrepreneurshipc;1982 ) + Other Controlsc + "c ;            (1)
              Employmentc;1982
where c indexes cities. We will use this same empirical design with industrial subsets of metropol-
itan areas. Our controls are taken from the urban growth literature and include initial employ-
ment, census division controls, and city-level variables like average January temperature, the
share of adults with college degrees, initial housing prices, and similar.
    The coe¢ cient describes the correlation of initial entrepreneurship and subsequent employ-
ment growth for the city. As in much of the previous research in this area, we focus on growth of
employment rather than growth in wages, since wage di¤erences across areas should be limited
by the mobility of workers across space.12 Entrepreneurs may, in addition, be able to succeed by
limiting the wages received by the workers, so per capita wage growth is not necessarily a sign
of local entrepreneurial success.
    Our core measures of entrepreneurship are average establishment size in 1982 and the share
of employment in start-ups in 1982-1986. We take the average over several years for the second
metric to smooth out business cycles and the data collection patterns of the Census Bureau,
but this is not an important factor. Average establishment size is de…ned as the number of
employees divided by the number of establishments. It includes both single-unit …rms and
multi-unit establishments. We de…ne the share of employment in start-ups on an annual basis
using the entry rate of new single-unit …rms. This approach quanti…es gross entry levels, rather
than the net entry that would be observed by looking at changes in establishments between two
points.
    Table 1a provides summary statistics for cities and entrepreneurship related to our sample.
Throughout this paper, we conduct our analysis at the metropolitan area level, but we use the
convention of referring to metropolitan areas as cities to ease exposition. We likewise refer to
industries within metropolitan areas as city-industries.13
  11
     We start our estimations in 1982, rather than in 1976, to be conservative. The period before 1982 includes
a substantial amount of economic change and restructuring. Including this period leads to stronger results than
those we present below, but we want to be conservative in our approach. Also, the LBD currently extends to
2007. We …nd very similar results when looking at total city employment growth until 2007. The Census Bureau,
however, moves from the SIC industry classi…cation system to the NAICS system in 2002. As this transition
complicates many of our sector-level decompositions, we end the sample period in 2002.
  12
     Standard models that assume a spatial equilibrium predict that increases in productivity increase employ-
ment. Wages rise with either increases in productivity or with decreases in local amenities, but the connection
between productivity and wage changes depends on the elasticity of housing supply. Moreover, if declining
industries …re their younger, lower-wage workers …rst, we can see rising average wages in declining sectors.
  13
     We de…ne cities by mapping counties in the LBD to Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas (PMSAs). We

                                                      9
    The average city had about 230 thousand employees in 1982 among sectors covered by the
LBD. We will generally consider two large subsectors of the economy: "mining, construction
and manufacturing" (which should be directly in‡uenced by mining opportunities) and "trade,
…nance and services" (which should not make any direct use of coal or mineral ores). On av-
erage, a little less than three-quarters of city employments are in trade, …nance and services.
The average city experiences employment growth of 0.36 log points, or 44 percent, from 1982-
2002. Re‡ecting national industrial trends, this employment growth is much higher in trade,
…nance and services (0.49) than in mining, construction and manufacturing (0.06). The average
establishment has 19 employees, with substantially larger establishment sizes in mining, con-
struction and manufacturing (34) than in trade, …nance and services (16). About three percent
of employees in a city are in entering …rms over the 1982-1986 period.
    Table 1b shows the correlation between these di¤erent measures of entrepreneurship. The
…rst column shows the correlation between average establishment size and other measures of
entrepreneurship. The …rst two rows show the connection between overall establishment size
and establishment size within the two subsectors. The correlation between the overall measure
and the …rst ore-oriented subsector variable is 0.62; the correlation with average establishment
size in trade, …nance and services is 0.74. The second column shows that the correlation in
average establishment size between the two subsector-level variables is more modest at 0.14
(although statistically signi…cant at a 10% level).
    The third row in the …rst column shows the robust correlation between our two measures
of entrepreneurship. Average establishment size in a city has a -0.49 correlation with the city’s
share of employment in start-up ventures. That is, cities with smaller establishments also have
more employment in entering establishments. The fourth column shows the relationship holds
when instead counting the share of establishments in a city that are start-ups. The …nal row
shows that we …nd almost identical results to average establishment size when instead looking
at the employment share in establishments with fewer than 20 employees, which is to be ex-
pected. The strong correlation between start-up employment and average establishment size is
the topic of Glaeser, Kerr and Ponzetto (2010), who take it to suggest the existence of clusters
of entrepreneurship.
    The next two columns show the relationship between average employment size in the two
industrial groups and other measures of initial entrepreneurship. Average establishment size in
mining, construction and manufacturing is robustly correlated with start-up shares in the other
variables. The correlation between average establishment size in trade, …nance and services
and the start-up shares is much weaker. Our empirical results focus on average establishment
exclude cities in Alaska and Hawaii due to our spatial instrument variable estimations. We also exclude some
small PMSAs that are not separately identi…ed in the Census of Population (required for explanatory variables).
Results below are robust to instead considering Consolidated MSAs. CMSAs are subdivided into PMSAs for
very large metropolitan areas (e.g., Chicago has six PMSAs within its CMSA). A PMSA is de…ned as a large
urbanized county or a cluster of counties that demonstrate strong internal economic and social links in addition
to close ties with the central core of the larger area.


                                                      10
size and employment shares in start-up …rms. We …nd very similar results when using these
additional variants.

4      OLS Relationship of Entrepreneurship and Local Growth
4.1     City Growth Regressions
We quantify the basic relationship between local entrepreneurship and subsequent urban em-
ployment growth. Equation (1) is our core empirical speci…cation, but we also report results for
growth in total payroll and wages. Panel A in Table 2 shows results using average establishment
size in 1982 as our measure of entrepreneurship, while Panel B uses the initial share of employ-
ment in start-ups. Estimations are unweighted, have 291 observations, and report bootstrapped
standard errors. We …nd smaller standard errors when clustering by the nine census divisions.
To guard against excessive outliers, we winsorize variables at their 2% and 98% values.
    The …rst regression in Panel A shows the strong negative relationship between employ-
ment growth over 1982-2002 at the metropolitan area level and initial establishment size. A
one standard-deviation increase in 1982 establishment size is associated with a 0.57 standard-
deviation decrease in the growth of employment over the ensuing 20 years. Panel B …nds that
one standard-deviation increase in the share of initial employment in start-ups is associated with
a 0.2 standard-deviation increase in urban employment growth over the next 20 years. These
e¤ects are economically large and statistically signi…cant, which is why it makes sense to further
re…ne and test these correlations between entrepreneurship and local job growth.14
    The second column shows that these coe¢ cient estimates are essentially unchanged by in-
cluding controls for the log level of initial employment in the city, its square, and …xed e¤ects for
the nine census divisions. This stability suggests that the correlations are not simply a product
of mean reversion or di¤erences in U.S. regional growth.
    The third column shows that these coe¢ cients are also robust to including standard controls
for city growth from the urban growth literature: mean January and July temperatures, the
1970 share of workers with college degrees, the 1970 population level and density of the city, and
1970 housing prices. These factors control for documented phenomena like population growth
over the last three decades in warm places and the rise of the skilled city. The fact that these
controls have so little impact on our entrepreneurship measures suggests that these measures
are unlikely to be proxying for core attributes of the urban area.15
    Columns 4-6 repeat these results using payroll growth as the dependent variable. Some of the
  14
     These results are quite robust to how the growth metric is de…ned, such as measuring growth relative to
average city employment over 1982-2002 (e.g., Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh, 1996). Similarly, non-parametric
approaches that include indicator variables for quintiles of average establishment size demonstrate regular e¤ects
with the most substantial change occurring between the second and third quintiles.
  15
     The results are further robust to additional covariates like Saiz’s (2010) geographic features of cities or using
hedonic regressions to model climate amenities. We lose several cities in these extension due to data availability,
however, so we focus on the narrower set of controls.



                                                         11
coe¢ cients are slightly smaller, but the overall picture remains the same. Metropolitan areas
with more initial employment in start-ups or smaller average establishment size experienced
faster payroll growth between 1982 and 2002. Other local controls have little e¤ect on the core
results.
    In line with the symmetry of employment and payroll growth, Columns 7-9 con…rm that
initial entrepreneurship is not associated with subsequent wage growth nor declines. Entrepre-
neurship generates more job growth for cities, but not faster earnings growth for those employed.
One interpretation of these results is that a spatial equilibrium exists across cities, and this equi-
librium limits the tendency of any city’s wages to rise much faster than its peers (Glaeser and
Gottlieb, 2009). A second interpretation is that entrepreneurs have very lean operations that
minimize labor costs, putting downward pressure on wage growth for workers. This latter e¤ect
could be due, for example, to entrepreneurs operating in more competitive environments.

4.2    Sample Decompositions
Table 3 examines patterns of employment growth within various subsets of our data, and Figures
3 and 4 provide a graphical analysis. The …rst column of Panel A repeats the total employment
growth …nding for initial average establishment size. Panel B then allows the treatment e¤ect
to di¤er by two broad regions of the United States. We group cities into cold cities, de…ned by
having a mean January temperature less than 34 degrees, and warm cities. This cut-o¤ point
is approximately the median January temperature in the sample. Colder cities have a longer
industrial history, experienced slower growth (or in some cases decline) over our time period, and
include the complete Rust Belt. Entrepreneurship has a stronger association with city growth in
colder regions of the United States. While the di¤erence is statistically signi…cant, its economic
magnitude is small relative to overall e¤ect. Panels C and D show a similar pattern for start-up
employment shares.
    Column 2-7 of Table 3 then repeat these speci…cations using various outcome variables. We
de…ne entrepreneurship at the city level, and we consider the types of industries in the cities
where the employment growth is occurring. Column 2 examines employment growth in mining,
construction and manufacturing. The results for average establishment size remain strong; the
results for start-up employment shares become smaller and statistically insigni…cant. Column 3
shows that both measures are signi…cant for trade, …nance and services, although the start-up
employment share has again lost some of its economic magnitude. At the city level, average
establishment size appears the more robust correlate of subsequent employment growth across
sectors.
    Columns 4-6 separate employment growth by the degree of industrial agglomeration. We
split industries by their national level of agglomeration as measured by the Ellison and Glaeser
(1997) index. That index looks at the lumpiness of employment across space, correcting for
the overall spatial distribution of economic activity and the tendency of industries with big

                                                 12
establishments to be more highly concentrated geographically. Our results are strongest for the
most agglomerated industries, and we have con…rmed these patterns hold when de…ning industry
agglomeration through the Duranton and Overman (2005) index. These results suggest that
entrepreneurship may be most important for industries that have the most powerful interactions
among clustered …rms. They also suggest that our results extend well beyond the growing
demand of home markets. The last column shows a similar impact for highly agglomerated
industries within trade, …nance, and services.16

4.3     City-Industry Growth Regressions
While the correlation between entrepreneurship and urban employment growth for cities is quite
strong and robust to covariates, our con…dence in this link is also based upon its strength across
industries within cities. Table 4 illustrates these connections. We de…ne industries at the two-
digit level of the Standard Industrial Classi…cation system, and we continue to consider the
metropolitan area in this analysis. To focus on meaningful variation, we require that industries
have 100 employees throughout the period. This results in 12,178 observations. We continue to
bootstrap standard errors.
    Panels A and B again provide the results using average establishment size and start-up
employment share, respectively. We re…ne our initial employment controls to be city-industry
speci…c. We further include industry x census division …xed e¤ects in all speci…cations. These
…xed e¤ects account for the overall employment growth rate and entrepreneurship levels of each
industry and region. The …rst column models the basic city growth covariates also used in Table
3. Columns 2-8 instead include city …xed e¤ects that restrict variation to within-city di¤erences.
We thus look for connections of initial entrepreneurship to subsequent employment growth after
removing overall patterns by city and by region-industry.
    The correlation between our entrepreneurship measures and subsequent employment growth
is typically smaller at the city-industry level. In the …rst column, we …nd that a one standard-
deviation decrease in average establishment size is associated with a 0.19 standard-deviation
increase in subsequent employment growth for the city-industry. A one standard-deviation in-
crease in the share of employment in start-ups is associated with a 0.05 standard-deviation
increase in subsequent employment growth. These e¤ects are statistically signi…cant and eco-
nomically meaningful. The second column shows that these e¤ects are only slightly diminished
when we switch from city growth controls to city …xed e¤ects.
    These results suggest that the employment-entrepreneurship link is quite strong within cities,
but that the e¤ects are somewhat weaker than at the metropolitan area level. One explanation
for the weakening of the e¤ect is that perhaps entrepreneurship is proxying for other city-level
  16
     Appendix Table 1 shows that the patterns hold when splitting our sample into two time periods. The results
are stronger during 1982-1992 than during 1992-2002, although the di¤erences between the two periods are not
statistically distinct.



                                                      13
attributes. Another explanation is that there are cross-industry spillovers from entrepreneurship,
as suggested by Chinitz’s hypothesis about a local culture of entrepreneurship.17
    Columns 3-8 consider subsamples of the city-industry data; estimations include the most
stringent city and industry x census division …xed e¤ects. The …rst two columns again separate
industry groups. The relationship between entrepreneurship and employment growth is robustly
present in both groups, being stronger for mining, construction and manufacturing than for
trade, services and …nance. These results con…rm our earlier …ndings for cross-metropolitan
area employment growth, and they show power where the aggregate growth e¤ect was weaker.18
Columns 5 and 6 show similar results in cold and warm regions. Columns 7 and 8 …nd similar
results by decade. Overall, these city-industry disaggregations and other unreported tests show
the deep empirical association between initial entrepreneurship and subsequent growth. This
association is more stable across decompositions at the city-industry level than at the city level.

5      Historical Mines and Modern Entrepreneurship
5.1     Historical Mines Data
While these patterns are provocative, the potential endogeneity of initial entrepreneurship re-
mains worrisome. An abundance of start-ups in a particular city may re‡ect unmeasured city
level attributes that make both entrepreneurship and future job growth more feasible. The
concentration of entrepreneurship in particular city-industries could signal greater opportunities
within that local economic sector or unobserved policy interventions. While the econometric
tests reported above create a high bar for these alternative explanations, there is still a need to
identify in this literature an exogenous source of variation in entrepreneurship. To address these
issues, we now turn to the historical presence of mines close to each city.
    We develop our instruments on the location of mines using several sources. Our primary data
source on the geographic distribution of historical mines is the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
database. This survey provides data on present and past mines, including their discovery dates
and latitude-longitude spatial locations. We focus on mines that were known to exist in 1900.
We believe that this survey provides a relatively complete survey of mineral and ore availability
at the start of the 20th century. Deposits were a great source of wealth, and the government
took its surveying responsibilities seriously. Congress established the USGS in 1879 and chose
prominent early directors like Clarence King and John Wesley Powell to lead the organization.
While it is possible that mineral and ore deposits were more likely to be discovered in areas
  17
      Evidence for these cross-industry links have been identi…ed in micro-data studies of the Chinitz e¤ect like
Rosenthal and Strange (2003, 2010), Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Glaeser, Kerr and Ponzetto (2010), and Drucker
and Feser (2012). Hanlon (2012) and Helsley and Strange (2012) provide recent evidence on inter-industry
linkages more broadly. Saxenian (1994), Davidsson (1995), Hofstede (2001), Lamoreaux, Levenstein and Sokolo¤
(2004), Landier (2006), and Falck, Fritsch and Heblich (2009) are examples of work on entrepreneurial culture.
   18
      There is a subtle but important di¤erence between the industry disaggregations in Tables 3 and 4. In Table
3, we maintain the same city-level entrepreneurship metrics to predict employment growth for both groups. In
Table 4, the entrepreneurship measures are city-industry speci…c by de…nition.

                                                       14
that were more heavily inhabited or used for manufacturing during the 1800s, maps from the
era certainly suggest that the USGS was doing a good job of surveying the entire country.19
    The exact spatial locations of mines allow us to count mines that were known to exist in 1900
in spatial rings around cities. We design these spatial rings to be between 250 and 500 miles,
and we provide below an analysis of price data from the time that leads us to these distance
horizons. Our …rst instrument is the logarithm of the count of mines within 500 miles of the
geographic centroid of the city in 1900. Cities have on average 943 mines in this spatial range,
ranging from a minimum of ten to a maximum of 2966. We …nd very similar results to those
reported below when weighting mine counts by the number of di¤erent types of ores that each
mine extracts. We use the logarithm to allow for concavity in the impact of total mine counts.
A few cities are not within 250 miles of a known mine in 1900. For this distance band, we add
one to the count of mines before taking the logarithm.20
    These initial instruments model the broad availability of natural deposits around cities, as
mining and extractive industries broadly speaking are associated with larger establishment sizes.
We complement this instrument with two additional metrics that describe the character of local
deposits for the showcase example of the steel industry in the Chinitz hypothesis. Our …rst is
an indicator variable for whether coal and iron ore is the dominant mining product of a state
in 1928.21 We take this measure from the 1930 Statistical Abstract of the United States, Table
739. We use this alternative source because the USGS data do not capture very well historical
coal deposits, which were a very important spatial factor in industry location choice. Our …nal
historical measure is the count of iron ore mines within 100 miles of the city in 1900. More than
a third of cities do not have an iron ore mine within 100 miles, and we thus use the levels of
this variable directly. The three di¤erent designs of the instruments (i.e., log count, indicator
variables, mines count) also allow for capturing di¤erent aspects of the relationship.

5.2     Modern Mines Data
While the historical aspects of our data are important for introducing exogeneity to modern
entrepreneurship, an alternative concern is that data quality is compromised by using information
from the earlier period. The most important aspect of this liability for our current work is that
the USGS data do not list the discovery date for most mines, and we have no way of assessing
whether unreported dates are generally older or not (e.g., knowledge of the mine stretches so
   19
      In the 1800s, prospecting often preceded industry, as it had, for example, in the California Gold Rush or the
later Black Hills Gold Rush. Long before the upper peninsula of Michigan was well settled, the state government
sent pioneering geologist Douglass Houghton to survey the area. Houghton would help establish the copper and
iron ore deposits in the region. Likewise, a 1908 report already identi…es the four largest coal deposits to be in
Colorado, Montana, North Dakota and Wyoming, followed by West Virginia and Illinois, despite the fact that
formal extraction at the time in Pennsylvania was an order of magnitude higher than any other state. See 1910
Statistical Abstract of the United States, Table 12, and 1930 Statistical Abstract of the United States, Table 767.
   20
      These data are available and described at http://tin.er.usgs.gov/mrds/about.php. Appendix Tables 2a and
2b provide additional descriptive statistics on our mining data.
   21
      States in this category are AL, CO, IL, IN, KY, MD, MI, MN, ND, PA, TN, VA, WA, and WV.



                                                        15
far back that a discovery date is unknown). Especially with instruments based upon natural
resources, an argument can be made to utilize the raw capacity and inherent mineral wealth of
a region, rather than knowledge of it at a particular point in history.
    To address this issue, we report below additional results that use current information. For
our two instruments developed from the USGS data, log count of total mines and local iron
ore mine counts, we simply adjust the metric construction to build o¤ all known mines in the
database regardless of discovery date. For this purpose, we also develop a new instrument that
utilizes the nature of coal deposits in a local area.
    During the 1970s energy crisis, the USGS initiated a large-scale project to build a national
coal information database that contains much deeper information about coal deposits throughout
the country.22 This database again includes latitude-longitude spatial locations, and it has a
special feature that the types of coal are identi…ed for mines. This is valuable information as
coal deposits vary in grade and their spatial distribution. Anthracite coal, a particularly hard
and compact form, is the most valuable but often quite di¢ cult to supply. Bituminous coal,
also known as black coal, is softer and less valuable than anthracite, but still widely mined,
transported, and used in industrial applications. On the other hand, lignite coal, also known as
brown coal, is of very low grade and often fails to be economical to mine and transport.
    Figure 2 shows that these di¤erences in coal type were known in 1900, but we do not have
discovery dates that would facilitate instruments using coal grades circa-1900. We use this
information, however, to create an alternative modern instrument that is an indicator variable
for anthracite and bituminous coal being the predominant form of coal in a 150-mile spatial
band around the city. The indicator variable takes a zero value if no modern coal deposits are
within the band or if most deposits are lignite. Unlike our historical measure of whether coal
and iron were the top state product in 1928, this modern instrument does not utilize realized
production rates. We also use these data in two supplementary applications discussed next.

5.3       Selection of Spatial Rings
We now return to our selection of the spatial ring used for the total count of mines instrument.
An important starting point is the identi…cation that mineral deposits can in‡uence cities over
at least moderate spatial horizons. This reach descends in large part from the durable nature of
minerals that aids in shipping them. By the early 20th century, transportation within the United
States had reached a reasonable stage of development. Railroads and water transportation were
strong by 1900 (e.g., Field 2011, Duran 2010), and the average price per ton-mile had declined
from 6.2 cents in 1833 to 0.7 cents in 1900 (Carter et al., 2006). In the late 1800s, the cost of
10 miles of wagon transport was roughly equivalent to the cost of 375-475 miles of railroad or
water transport, and the U.S. transportation network aided resource ‡ows to cities beyond their
immediate vicinity (Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2012). The relocation of some steel production
 22
      These data are available and described at http://energy.er.usgs.gov/products/databases/CoalQual/intro.htm.


                                                       16
from Pittsburgh to Bu¤alo in the early 20th century re‡ected in part the ease of moving coal
from Pennsylvania to New York and Bu¤alo’s location on the shipping routes for iron coming
from the west. These and related facts indicate that mines do not need to be immediately
proximate to cities to in‡uence their industrial structures.23
    Unfortunately, while these basic concepts are known, the historical record for actual ship-
ments of minerals and coal is very sparse and insu¢ cient for detailed assessments. Our best
evidence comes from coal price data across 47 cities in our sample for 1925-1930 reported in the
1940 Statistical Abstract of the United States, Table 772. This table separately lists prices of
anthracite and bituminous coal. For most cities, prices are only given for a single type of coal
re‡ecting that the city relied almost exclusively on that coal variant. We thus consider the price
data in two ways. The …rst is a simple indicator variable by coal type for whether a price is
given; the second is the log price of a coal variant conditional on a price being listed.
    Tables 5a and 5b report results of regressions of these outcome variables on the spatial
distributions of anthracite and bituminous coal deposits around each city, respectively. We
utilize the modern coal database for these measures given the lack of historical records on coal
variants. We report four distance horizons of 0-50, 50-100, 100-250, and 250-500 miles. The
explanatory variable is the count of deposits within these bands, with counts normalized to
have unit standard deviation for interpretation. We pool the data from all six years, clustering
standard errors by city and including year …xed e¤ects. We test with and without regional …xed
e¤ects; we …nd similar patterns if also controlling for water access to Great Lakes or the ocean.
We have 261 observations where at least one price is listed, 133 where an anthracite price is
listed, and 216 where a bituminous price is listed.
    In Table 5a, we …nd that mines up to 250 miles distance from a city are important for
explaining whether anthracite coal was in use and its price level. On the other hand, anthracite
mines from 250-500 miles only exhibit a strong association for log prices when controlling for
region e¤ects. In Table 5b, there is not a clear pattern for whether a bituminous price is listed
in Columns 1 and 2. On the other hand, Columns 3 and 4 …nd a strong association for regional
deposits of 100-500 miles lowering bituminous coal prices in the cities.
    Our assessment from these various data points is that the spatial band for total mine counts
should be at least 250 miles. The above price rings are built o¤ of coal, which is a heavy
product compared to many other minerals. Thus, the fact that the deposit in‡uence is evident
to 500 miles for coal prices suggests that this spatial range is likely to be true for many other
minerals. We thus test below setting the bands for total mine counts at 250 and 500 miles.
  23
     The economic history accounts of whether natural advantages or market access determined the spatial place-
ment of large-scale manufacturing by 1900 are mixed. See Krugman (1991), Kim (1995), and Klein and Crafts
(2009). Related work on industry location and natural advantages includes Ellison and Glaeser (1999), Kim
(1999), Rosenthal and Strange (2001, 2004), Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Combes et al. (2010), Holmes and Lee
(2012), Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010), Kerr and Kominers (2010), and Storeyguard (2012). Our work is closely
related to the path dependency study of Bleakley and Linn (2012) around historical portage sites. Dippel (2012)
considers historical mines placements in the context of Native American integration and economic development.



                                                      17
As our estimations include …xed e¤ects for the nine census divisions, we only identify o¤ of
city di¤erences in proximity to historical mining deposits within each region. Levels di¤erences
across the nine census divisions account for about a quarter of the total variation across cities
at 500 miles. This regional explanatory power is similar when using a 100 or 250 mile radius.

5.4    Historical Mines and Modern Entrepreneurship
Table 6 shows that our mining metric strongly predicts entrepreneurship late in the 20th century.
Column headers indicate outcome variables, and the regressions also control for census division
…xed e¤ects, initial employment, and city growth covariates. Panel A reports estimates with the
log count of mines within 500 miles as the central explanatory variable. As the covariates are
the same variables that will be included in our …nal regressions, Columns 3 and 6 thus represent
…rst-stage relationships.
    The …rst regression in Panel A shows the connection between the number of mines and the
average establishment size in manufacturing in 1963. We do not have data for a wider range
of industries during that year. As the number of mines increases by one standard deviation,
the average establishment size in manufacturing increases by 0.21 standard deviations. This
relationship is both statistically signi…cant and economically relevant. The t-statistic is about
three. We have also con…rmed that mines in 1900 are associated with weaker entrepreneurship
for manufacturing in the 1960s.
    Column 2 shows the strong relationship between historical mines and mining activity at the
start of our time period. A one standard-deviation increase in the number of mines is associated
with a 1.16 standard-deviation increase in mining employment near the city over 1976-1980.
These deposits certainly still matter for the industrial composition of an area.
    Column 3 looks at the relationship between historical mining deposits and average establish-
ment size in 1982, the relevant year for our instrumental variables estimations. The estimated
elasticity is 0.075, which means that as the number of mines increases by one standard deviation,
average establishment size increases by about 0.08 standard deviations. The t-statistic of this
e¤ect is more than six. Unreported regressions …nd that the similar e¤ect for 1992 weakens by
about a quarter but remains quite signi…cant.
    The fourth and …fth columns show the relationship to average establishment size in the two
sectors. The estimated elasticity is three times higher in mining, construction and manufacturing
than in trade, …nance and services. A one log point increase in the number of mines raises average
establishment size in closely related sectors by more than ten percent and in unrelated sectors
by four percent. Both estimates are statistically signi…cant. The …nal regression shows that
historical mining deposits are also predictive of the city’s start-up employment share in 1982.
The overall elasticity estimate is -0.16.
    Panel B extends the estimation in Panel A to also include an indicator variable for whether
coal and iron ore was the top mineral product of the state. This starts to model the types of

                                               18
mines that surround a city. This indicator variable is also very predictive of increases in average
establishment size and reduced entry rates. This suggests that coal and iron ore deposits are
especially important for large-scale operations conditional on the number of mines surrounding
a city.
    Panel C reports results using the log count of mines with 250 miles by itself. The elasticities
at this spatial level are about half of those using the 500-mile spatial bands, and the coe¢ cients
are more precisely estimated. The most substantive change is the weaker link of mines to
establishment size in trade, …nance and services. Panel D alternatively reports results by two
distance rings of 0-100 and 100-500 miles estimated jointly. As more than a quarter of cities
do not have a mine within 100 miles, we use a levels regression that allows for zero values.
Coe¢ cients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for visual clarity. For most of the outcome
variables, the presence of mines within 100 miles matters two- and threefold more than mines
over 100-500 miles.24 On the other hand, similar to Panel C, the very localized presence of mines
does not predict average establishment size in unrelated sectors of trade, …nance and services.
This e¤ect comes mostly through mines in the larger spatial area around the city.
    Finally, Panel E examines concentrations of anthracite/bituminous deposits using current
data. There are visible connections between coal grade composition, mining sector development,
and modern establishment size. In another test, we regress the average establishment size of a
city in 1982 on the count of anthracite/bituminous deposits within 150 miles, the count of lignite
deposits within 150 miles, and our standard covariates. A one standard-deviation increase in
anthracite/bituminous deposits is associated with a 0.030 (0.006) increase in log average estab-
lishment size, while the elasticity for lignite is 0.007 (0.007). The elasticities are similarly 0.029
(0.006) and 0.007 (0.008) when using each mine type individually. This test, while admittedly
crude, con…rms that the nature of deposits is important for our assessment. It also provides some
con…dence that the use of minerals is important, rather than spurious features of the geographic
landscape (e.g., rugged mountain terrain).
    These regressions ensure that the problem with our instruments will typically not be in their
…rst-stage …t. Mines in 1900 are strongly related to establishment size and entrepreneurship
at the beginning of our regression time period. Our larger concern is that mines could easily
be correlated with employment growth for reasons other than initial entrepreneurship. We will
address this concern after presenting our core instrumental variables results.
  24
     These patterns also hold when using more disaggregated bands, suggesting mostly regular declines in the
impact of mines on industrial structures with greater distance. When using three distance bands of 0-100 miles,
100-250 miles, and 250-500 miles, the coe¢ cients for average establishment size are 0.016, 0.022, and 0.009,
respectively. Those for birth shares are -0.075, -0.045, and -0.024. All estimates are statistically signi…cant.




                                                      19
6     Instrumental Variables Results
6.1     City Growth Estimations
Table 7 describes our key second-stage results of entrepreneurship and local growth using prox-
imity to mines in 1900 as instruments. Panel A considers average establishment size in 1982
as the core independent variable, while Panel B models initial entrepreneurship through the
local employment share in start-ups. Regressions control for census division …xed e¤ects, initial
employment, and city growth covariates. We report bootstrapped standard errors.25
    Column 1 begins with a single instrumental variable regression using the log count of mines
in 1900 as the instrument, …nding that the e¤ect of average establishment size on subsequent
growth increases substantially when using mines as an instrument. The relevant ordinary least
squares coe¢ cient is -0.69, and this instrumental variables estimate is -0.97, which means that a
standard-deviation increase in a city’s average establishment size is associated with a standard-
deviation decrease in employment growth over 1982-2002. For Panel B’s employment share in
start-ups, the coe¢ cient increases from 0.16 to 0.45. Both estimates have t-statistics greater
than 2.5. The associated diagnostic tests indicate that the instrument performs well for the full
sample.
    Column 2 adds a second instrument of the indicator variable for dominant product type, and
Column 3 further expands to the triple instrument speci…cation that also includes the count of
iron ore mines with 100 miles as an instrument. The additional instruments modestly reduce
the coe¢ cients and sharpen the precision of the estimates. These results suggest instrumented
elasticities of about -0.9 for average establishment size and 0.4 for start-up employment shares,
respectively. The various diagnostic tests continue to perform well, with the one exception
that the over-identi…cation test for the triple instrument in Panel B is rejected at a 10% level.
While di¤erences shrink when using multiple instruments, it is still the case that the measured
elasticities are higher than in ordinary least squares.
    Columns 4 and 5 repeat Columns 1 and 3, respectively, using the 250-mile spatial band rather
than the 500-mile spatial band. The impact of this change is to lower the estimated second-
stage elasticities to be comparable to ordinary least squares estimates. The instrumented e¤ect
of average establishment size is -0.52 to -0.61, smaller than the ordinary least squares coe¢ cient
of -0.69, while it is 0.25 for start-up employment, larger than the ordinary least squares coe¢ cient
of 0.16. Tests do not reject that these coe¢ cients are the same.
    Combining these approaches, Column 6 reports results using four instruments that include
both 250- and 500-mile spatial bands. These results sit in-between those of Columns 3 and 6.
Going forward, we report our results using the two bands individually as they bound this joint
   25
      Similar to least squares, we …nd smaller standard errors when clustering our instrumental variable regressions
by region. Bester et al. (2011) demonstrate how clustering by large, contiguous groups of approximately similar
size with substantial interiors relative to boundaries can appropriately model spatial decay dependency. We also
…nd smaller standard errors when using spatial decay frameworks like Drukker et al. (2011).



                                                        20
e¤ect. We view the 500-mile band as making the maximum case for entrepreneurship’s role, and
the 250-mile band as making the minimum case based upon historical mines. Finally, Column
7 shows very similar results when using instruments based upon modern data.26
    The overall patterns from Table 7 suggest that instrumental variables estimates are compa-
rable to or higher than ordinary least squares estimates. What can account for this feature?
A …rst, relatively mundane, explanation is that the instrumental variables are correcting for
measurement error in the regressors that downward biases ordinary least squares estimates. Our
regressors are measured at a point in time at the start of the sample period, and thus they may
be sensitive to idiosyncratic blips in city features. The employment share in start-ups seems
the more exposed metric to this issue, and this perhaps explains why its relative increases in
instrumented elasticities compared to ordinary least squares estimates are stronger that those
for average establishment size.
    A second explanation is that the endogenous aspects of average establishment size and new
start-ups actually work against city growth, while the exogenous aspects— captured by the long-
run supply of entrepreneurs— have an even stronger positive e¤ect than the ordinary least squares
estimates indicate. According to this view, negative aspects of an area kill o¤ large …rms and
employment in older establishments, making average establishment size smaller and the start-
up share larger. This is particularly important if urban decline pushes displaced workers into
sub-optimal entrepreneurship that is not growth enhancing. By allowing only the variation that
comes from the long-run supply of entrepreneurs to in‡uence our estimates, the instrumental
variables estimates correctly show a larger elasticity of long-run growth with respect to entre-
preneurship.
    A less positive, third interpretation is that mines are positively associated with other aspects
of the city that are connected with longer term decline. According to this view, the orthogonality
condition needed for the instrumental variables estimation is violated by a correlation with
omitted variables and this correlation causes the instrumental variables estimates to be arti…cially
high. The over-identi…cation tests are one econometric assessment of this concern, and our key
results usually pass these tests. We further focus the rest of this paper on this potential problem
using sample decomposition and quantile instrumental variable techniques.
    Before starting with the sample decompositions, we explicitly test one alternative story.
Holmes (2006) …nds a very striking connection between local dependence on mines and unionism.
Similar to our analysis, Holmes notes the extent to which unionism "spills out coal mines and
steel mills into other establishments in the neighborhood, like hospitals and supermarkets." The
analysis identi…ed the potential channels of a common local infrastructure for unionism and
contagious attitudes among families and friends toward labor organization.27 To ensure that
  26
     To conserve space, we only report employment results for the instrument variable speci…cations. We continue
to …nd that employment and payroll growth closely track each other. Disaggregating the 1982-2002 employment
growth into …ve-year intervals, growth e¤ects are evident in each sub-interval except 1992-1997. We also …nd
similar results using LIML estimators.
  27
     We thank Curtis Simon for sharing this lyric: "My daddy was a miner, And I’m a miner’s son, And I’ll stick

                                                      21
unionism is not driving our results, we develop from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003) estimates
of 1982 union membership rates for 214 cities in our sample. Across these cities, our base
instrumented elasticity is -0.594 (0.326). This elasticity ranges between -0.600 (0.296) and -
0.525 (0.346) after including the union control depending upon how it is entered. Thus, while
unionism and entrepreneurship are surely connected and both in‡uenced by historical mining
legacies, this alternative channel does not appear to be solely driving our results.

6.2     Sample Decomposition
Appendix Tables 3a and 3b provide decompositions of e¤ects using the 500-mile band instru-
ments. Appendix Tables 4a and 4b provide similar results for the 250-mile band instruments. In
both cases, the table format mirrors that used in Table 3 with a total e¤ect and then allowing
a di¤erence in treatment e¤ects between warm and cold places. For convenience, Figure 3 plots
the ordinary least squares e¤ects and instrumental variable e¤ects using both distance bands
for average establishment size. Likewise, Figure 4 plots the various e¤ects for the start-up entry
shares.
    Examining Figure 3, a …rst observation is that the general patterns evident in Table 7 persist
between the two distance bands. Using the 500-mile band leads to larger e¤ects than least squares
that are statistically di¤erent from zero with all of our di¤erent decompositions. On the other
hand, the 250-mile band estimates more closely mirror the least squares results. The e¤ects
are statistically di¤erent from zero for trade, …nance, and services sectors and for industries
with moderate-to-high levels of agglomeration. On the other hand, the e¤ect is not statistically
signi…cant for mining, construction, and manufacturing.
    This weaker performance for mining, construction, and manufacturing compared to trade,
…nance, and services sectors is quite intriguing. The former is the part of the economy where
we would think that the direct e¤ect of mines is likely to be most severe, while the latter is less
prone to a direct e¤ect of mines on growth. These results suggest to us that omitted variables
related to sector demand declines are not driving the results. While it is certainly reasonable
that declines in manufacturing or mining sectors that are tightly connected to historical mines
would also depress local employment in other industries due to weak demand, it is hard to believe
that this demand-side spillover e¤ect would be larger for those other industries than for mining
itself.
    Likewise, the variation across industries by their level of agglomeration is insightful as spatial
industrial concentration is one measure of the extent to which an industry is focused on supplying
the local market. Industries that focus on supplying local customers (e.g., barbers, restaurants)
tend to be ubiquitous and therefore non-agglomerated. On the other hand, industries that focus
on serving a global market have less reason to spread themselves out and therefore tend to
be more agglomerated (e.g., movie production, automobile manufacturers, investment bankers).
with the union, Till every battle is won." from "Which Side are You On?" by Florence Reese.


                                                    22
The e¤ects we …nd are most pronounced in agglomerated sectors.
    This logic pushes us to focus on the most highly agglomerated industries within the trade,
services, and …nance sector. These agglomerated industries seem least likely to be directly
in‡uenced by any decline in local manufacturing or mining associated with the direct e¤ect of
mines. The results here depend on the spatial band. With a 500-mile band, we continue to …nd a
strong role for entrepreneurship and local growth in these specialized sectors. With the 250-mile
band, we do not …nd a strong relationship. This di¤erence relates back to Table 6’s …nding
that moderately distant mines appear to have more important e¤ects for the trade, services, and
…nance sector than very proximate mines.28
    Figure 4 extends this framework to the start-up entry shares. The basic patterns across sec-
tors mirror those of Figure 3. One continues to …nd substantial and statistically signi…cant e¤ects
with the 500-mile band instruments, while the 250-mile band instruments are only statistically
signi…cant in the case of highly agglomerated industries.
    Within Appendix Tables 3a-4b, Panel B presents results where we allow for e¤ects to di¤er
by warm and cold regions. We undertake this split as we suspect ex ante that the omitted
variables correlations are most severe in colder areas where industrial decline has been acute. As
this logic suggests, the estimated coe¢ cients are generally higher in the colder regions than in
warmer cities, where manufacturing decline has been far less pronounced. The more substantive
message from this decomposition, however, is that di¤erences between warm and cold areas are
fairly small. This stability provides comfort that our results are not simply following from the
decline of the Rust Belt or similar.29

6.3     City Growth Projections
The D panels of Figures 3 and 4 show our primary employment growth results when including
dynamic controls. Appendix Tables 5a and 5b provide the underlying estimations. These controls
model the projected path of the city during the 1982 to 2002 period due to the city’s industry
composition (e.g., is the city home to industries generally growing or contracting).
    We …rst test including the project forward employment growth of the city due to its industry
composition. We calculate the projected forward growth by interacting the initial 1982 industry
distribution of the city at the two-digit SIC level with the employment growth nationally of the
industry from 1982 to 2002 outside of the focal city. Introducing this control lowers the role
of initial entrepreneurship somewhat. On the other hand, introducing a similar control based
   28
      We also …nd a similar emphasis when linking average establishment size by sector with that sector’s employ-
ment growth. These results again highlight that most of the growth e¤ects that we are capturing come outside of
sectors traditionally dependent upon mines. While we believe that average establishment size across the whole
city is the more appropriate metric, it is comforting to …nd similar patterns when focusing just on the trade,
…nance and services sectors.
   29
      In broader terms, our growth covariates capture many features that are known to increase city attractiveness
and urban growth. We …nd similar results when using hedonic housing price regressions similar to Glaeser et al.
(2010) to measure amenities of cities.



                                                       23
upon establishments count distributions and their forward projection raises the role of initial
entrepreneurship somewhat.
    We next test a variation of the above approach. It could be that what matters more for
a city than its own predicted path is its relative rank to other nearby cities. To test this, we
develop 18 cells that are the interaction of the nine Census regions with whether or not a city has
an above-average growth projection in 1982. We then introduce …xed e¤ects for these cells so
that we compare amongst cities within a region with similar growth projections. This approach
yields very similar results to our primary estimations.
    Finally, we have manufacturing data that goes back to the 1963 Census of Manufacturers.
We include a control for the log growth in manufacturing employment or establishments for the
city from 1963 to 1981. This again has little e¤ect on our estimated coe¢ cients. Overall, these
results suggest that the link of initial entrepreneurship to employment growth is not re‡ecting
simple trend di¤erences in city growth prospects due to industry composition.

6.4     Instrumental Variable Quantile Regressions
We complement the decomposition exercises, which focus on di¤erentiating treatment e¤ects
by …xed traits of cities or industries, with a second analysis that considers whether the e¤ects
of entrepreneurship vary between rapidly and slowly growing cities. Because this approach
conditions on the growth outcome variable, rather than a …xed trait, it requires a more careful
procedure that combines causal inference and heterogeneous treatment e¤ects. The instrumental
variable quantile regression method (IVQR) of Chernozhukov and Hansen (2004a, 2005, 2006)
proves very suitable for our current empirical setting. We provide here a qualitative introduction,
with the appendix and referenced papers providing a technical description.
    One can think of IVQR as beginning with a determination of the conditional growth rate
of a city. The conditional aspect means that one has controlled for important covariates that
systematically determine whether cities are growing fast or slowly, so that one is looking at
the unexplained growth above and beyond these basic traits.30 The procedure then estimates
local instrumental variable treatment e¤ects for various points in the conditional distribution by
weighting nearby points of the distribution more than distant points. Thus, when estimating the
instrumental variable elasticity for the 25th quantile of the growth distribution, the procedure
places greater emphasis on the empirical links between mines, entrepreneurship, and growth
among other slow growing cities. The experiences of fast growing cities, on the other hand,
would receive more weight when estimating e¤ects at the 75th quantile.
    Figures 5 and 6 providing graphical depictions of the IVQR results, with exact values for
  30
    This methodology has a demanding assumption of rank invariance (or similarity) that makes the inclusion
and correct speci…cation of the covariates very important. Rank invariance requires that treatment status not
disturb the cities’ underlying ranks in the conditional growth distribution. Aspects of spatial distribution of
urban growth— like the very strong regularities for faster growth of warm cities or skilled cities over the last few
decades— are amenable for this setting. The R2 squared value of city growth on the initial growth covariates is
0.43.


                                                        24
selected quantiles given in Appendix Table 6. Starting with average establishment size in Figure
5, the quantile regression plot in Panel A shows remarkable homogeneity across the conditional
growth distribution in how entrepreneurship connects with city growth. The lower quantiles on
the left hand side of each graph indicate entrepreneurship’s role among cities that are growing
slower than their regional location, climate, 1970s housing prices, and so on would predict. Those
on the right are growing faster. The di¤erences appear quite limited, and Wald tests do not
reject that the coe¢ cients are the same at the 15th and 85th percentiles of the distribution.
The instrumented elasticities when using the 500-mile bands also display homogeneity and are
always statistically signi…cant. When using the 250-mile bands, statistically signi…cant e¤ects
are mostly evident in quantiles up to the median of the distribution, but not in very fast growing
cities. Figure 6’s depiction of the impact of start-up employment leads to similar conclusions.
    The homogeneity of our e¤ects across the conditional growth distribution that this procedure
identi…es is very important. Our central concern has been that the historical presence of mines
depressed city growth due to factors unrelated to reduced modern entrepreneurship. These
results suggest that our overall treatment e¤ects in Table 7 are not coming from abnormalities
in one part of the growth distribution, but instead are much more broad-based. If anything, we
…nd that entrepreneurship’s role may be more important for employment growth in cities that
are underperforming expectations, but the di¤erences are not statistically signi…cant.

7    Extended Employment Growth Results
This section provides several extensions to our work to further clarify entrepreneurship’s role
in city growth. Table 8a reports these analyses using average establishment size, and Table 8b
considers start-up employment shares. In both tables, Panel A presents least squares results,
Panel B presents results using the triple instruments and the 500-mile band, and Panel C presents
results using the triple instruments and the 250-mile band.
    The …rst column tests a rede…nition of our employment growth variable. Thus far, we have
considered total city growth from 1982 to 2002. Column 1 makes use of the micro-data to identify
the employment in 2002 of establishments born since 1982. We then measure the log ratio of the
net employment generated in new establishments to the initial city size in 1982. This measure
thus removes any growth associated with incumbent enterprises in 1982. The elasticities with
this measure are quite strong and robust across the instrument designs. This exercise identi…es
the higher direct employment contribution from the new entrants.
    Columns 2-4 take a second perspective. We now calculate the share of employment overall and
broken down by establishment size in 2002 in the city that is from entrants born after 1982. By
considering shares of activity in 2002, we are no longer considering the growth of city employment
itself but instead the composition of establishments in 2002. Column 2 of both tables shows
that cities with greater entrepreneurship in 1982 have a larger share of their 2002 employment


                                               25
contained in new enterprises. In the instrumented regression, a 10% increase in 1982 average
establishment size is associated with a 1.4% decrease in the city’s new-entrant employment
share in 2002; similarly, a 10% increase in initial birth employment shares is associated with a
1% increase in the city’s new-entrant employment share. Columns 3 and 4 partition this e¤ect
by 2002 establishment size, …nding that higher initial entrepreneurship especially connects to a
greater new-entrant share among establishments with more than 100 employees in 2002.
    As an alternative, Column 5 models the average age of establishments in 2002 for the city. We
calculate ages from the LBD’s start in 1976, giving a maximum of 26 years old. We weight estab-
lishment ages by the 2002 employment in establishments (results are very similar unweighted).
In the least squares framework, a 10% increase in average initial establishment size is associated
with a 2% older age pro…le in 2002; a higher birth employment share predicts in a similar way
a lower average age for 2002. Column 6 shows that this younger age e¤ect is present when
isolating just the unweighted average age of the top 25 employers for 2002 in each city. These
age e¤ects is even sharper when instrumenting using historical mines placements. Thus, higher
initial entrepreneurship of the city is associated with a younger establishment age pro…le of the
city in 2002, even for top employers.31
    On the whole, these patterns support the primary link established for initial entrepreneur-
ship and city growth. Expanded employment is generated in new establishments, and cities with
higher initial entrepreneurship show lower age structures, even among their top employers, two
decades later. Haltiwanger et al. (2012) describe an important up-or-out dynamic that connects
young …rms to …rm-level employment growth. These patterns suggest a similar process is oc-
curring at the city level, with successful start-ups expanding to become larger establishments
and thereby generating employment growth. Evidence of these dynamics sit more closely with
industrial legacies like the Chinitz hypothesis and entrepreneurship’s role than if, for example,
the employment growth came solely through older incumbents or endless replications of very
small …rms.

8      Conclusion
The correlation between measures of entrepreneurship— such as the share of local employment
in new start-ups or the average establishment size— and subsequent urban employment growth
is quite robust both across and within cities. One concern with these measures is that they may
capture other aspects of the local environment besides entrepreneurship. This paper tried to
push forward on these issues by looking for the historical roots of small establishment sizes and
  31
     Unreported regressions analyze the forward evolution of incumbent …rms in 1982 as a function of their local
initial entrepreneurship. The least squares and instrument results both …nd that survival prospects for 1982
incumbents are decreasing in initial entrepreneurship for the city. Least squares …nds incumbent establishments
that survive in places with higher initial entrepreneurship tend to also grow more, but the instrumental variable
regressions do not support these results. The localized link of entry and exit rates is observed, for example, by
Dunne et al. (1988), Davis et al. (1996), and Kerr and Nanda (2009).



                                                       26
higher entry rates.
    We followed the intuition of Chinitz (1961), who argues that industries dependent upon
mineral and coal deposits, like steel, involve large companies that create executives, not entre-
preneurs. We use the presence of mineral and coal deposits in 1900 to provide us with variation in
the level of resource-intensive industries. These deposits are associated with larger establishment
sizes and lower birth employment shares in the 1960s and onwards. Using this spatial proximity
for instruments, we continue to …nd a signi…cant link between our measures of entrepreneurship
and urban employment growth.
    The big concern with this variable is that it is quite plausibly correlated with aspects of the
local economy other than entrepreneurship, such as manufacturing decline. We tried to control
for these factors with city-level variables, region …xed e¤ects, and so on, but we recognize that
our measures are far from perfect. We focused then on industries that were not directly related
to mining, and on industries that were highly concentrated spatially, which suggests that they do
not depend on a local market. We also focused on warmer cities, which should be less sensitive
to the decline of the Rust Belt, and we modeled city growth projections. Our core results remain
unchanged. Finally, using quantile instrument variable techniques, we identi…ed that our e¤ects
are present in both cities exceeding and underperforming growth expectations based upon their
initial traits.
    The weight of this evidence suggests that entrepreneurship is playing an important role
in modern urban growth. While we have tried to systematically address concerns about the
correlation between our instrument and the error term, we remain overall cautious about our
results. We hope that our work prompts other researchers to identify sources of exogenous
variation in urban entrepreneurship, within the United States or outside of it. The patterns in
Figure 1 are exceptionally strong and the backbone for many policy initiatives. It is remarkable
how little we know about what lies behind this relationship, especially given how widely-held
the belief is that entrepreneurship is important for economic performance.




                                                27
References
 [1] Acs, Zoltan, and Catherine Armington, Entrepreneurship, Geography and American Eco-
     nomic Growth (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006).
 [2] Agrawal, Ajay, Iain Cockburn, Alberto Galasso, and Alexander Oettl, "Why are Some
     Regions More Innovative than Others? The Role of Firm Size Diversity", NBER Working
     Paper 17793 (2012).
 [3] Bester, C. Alan, Timothy Conley, and Christian Hansen, "Inference with Dependent Data
     using Cluster Covariance Estimators", Journal of Econometrics 165:2 (2011), 137-151.
 [4] Blau, Peter, and Otis Dudley Duncan, The American Occupational Structure (New York,
     NY: Wiley, 1967).
 [5] Bleakley, Hoyt, and Je¤rey Lin, "Portage and Path Dependence", Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 127 (2012), 587-644.
 [6] Carter, Susan, Scott Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
     Wright, Historical Statistics of the United States Volume 4 (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 2006).
 [7] Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, "The E¤ects of 401(k) Participation on the
     Wealth Distribution: An Instrumental Variables Quantile Regression Analysis", Review of
     Economics and Statistics 86 (2004a), 735-751.
 [8] Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, "Instrumental Variables Quantile Regres-
     sion", MIT Department of Economics Working Paper (2004b).
 [9] Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, "An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Ef-
     fects", Econometrica 73:1 (2005), 245-261.
[10] Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, "Instrumental Quantile Regression Inference
     for Structural and Treatment E¤ect Models", Journal of Econometrics 132:2 (2006), 491-
     525.
[11] Chinitz, Benjamin, "Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh", American
     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 51:2 (1961), 279-289.
[12] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux, "Esti-
     mating Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker E¤ects" in Glaeser,
     Edward (ed.) Agglomeration Economics (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
[13] Dahl, Michael, and Olav Sorenson, "Home Sweet Home: Social Capital and Location
     Choice", Working Paper (2007).
[14] Davidsson, Per, "Culture, Structure and Regional Levels of Entrepreneurship", Entrepre-
     neurship & Regional Development 7:1 (1995), 41-62.
[15] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction (Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).
[16] Day, David, Mineral Resources of the United States: Calendar Year 1900 (Washington, DC:
     Government Printing O¢ ce, 1901).


                                            28
[17] Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, "Clusters and Entrepreneurship",
     Journal of Economic Geography 10:4 (2010a), 495-518.
[18] Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, "Clusters, Convergence and Economic
     Performance", CES Working Paper 10-34 (2010b).
[19] Dippel, Christian, "Forced Coexistence and Economic Development: Evidence from Native
     American Reservations", Working Paper (2012).
[20] Donaldson, Dale, and Richard Hornbeck, "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
     "Market Access" Approach", Working Paper (2012).
[21] Drucker, Joshua, and Edward Feser, "Regional Industrial Structure and Agglomeration
     Economies: An Analysis of Productivity in Three Manufacturing Industries", Regional
     Science and Urban Economics 42:1-2 (2012), 1-14.
[22] Drukker, David, Ingmar Prucha, and Rafal Raciborski, "A Command for Estimating
     Spatial-Autoregressive Models with Spatial-Autoregressive Disturbances and Additional
     Endogenous Variables", The Stata Journal 1:1 (2011), 1-13.
[23] Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, "Patterns of Firm Exit and Entry
     in U.S. Manufacturing Industries", Rand Journal of Economics 19 (1988), 495-515.
[24] Duran, Xavier, "A Model of Formation of Pro…t Expectations of Theodore Judah and
     the Expected Private Pro…tability of the First Transcontinental Railroad", Working Paper
     (2010).
[25] Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, "Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
     Data", Review of Economic Studies 72 (2005), 1077-1106.
[26] Elfenbein, Daniel, Barton Hamilton, and Todd Zenger, "The Small Firm E¤ect and the
     Entrepreneurial Spawning of Scientists and Engineers", Management Science 56:4 (2010),
     659-681.
[27] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
     Industries: A Dartboard Approach", Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997), 889-927.
[28] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, "The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does
     Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?", American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
     ceedings 89 (1999), 311-316.
[29] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, "What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
     Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns", American Economic Review 100:2 (2010), 1195-
     1213.
[30] Falck, Oliver, Michael Fritsch, and Stephan Heblich, "Bohemians, Human Capital, and
     Regional Economic Growth", Jena Economic Research Papers 2009-049 (2009).
[31] Field, Alexander, "The Adversity/Hysteresis E¤ect: Depression Era Productivity Growth
     in the U.S. Railroad Sector", in Lerner, Josh, and Scott Stern (eds.), NBER Rate and
     Direction of Inventive Activity 50th Anniversary Conference Volume (2011).
[32] Figueiredo, Octávio, Paulo Guimaraes, and Douglas Woodward, "Home-Field Advantage:
     Location Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs", Journal of Urban Economics 52:2 (2002),
     341-361.

                                             29
[33] Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, "Hu-
     man Capital and Regional Development", Quarterly Journal of Economics (2012), forth-
     coming.
[34] Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O’Connell, "South Asia— Entrepreneurship,
     Growth, and Job Creation", in Ghani, Ejaz (ed.), Reshaping Tomorrow: Positioning South
     Asia for the Big Leap (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011).
[35] Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb, "The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies
     and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States", Journal of Economic Literature 47:4 (2009),
     983-1028.
[36] Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, José Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, "Growth in Cities",
     Journal of Political Economy 100:6 (1992), 1126-1152.
[37] Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, "Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship:
     How Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?" Journal of Economics & Man-
     agement Strategy 18:3 (2009), 623-663.
[38] Glaeser, Edward, William Kerr, and Giacomo Ponzetto, "Clusters of Entrepreneurship",
     Journal of Urban Economics 67:1 (2010), 150-168.
[39] Glaeser, Edward, José Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, "Economic Growth in a Cross-
     section of Cities", Journal of Monetary Economics 36:1 (1995), 117-143.
[40] Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, "Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
     Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999", Journal of Finance 60:2
     (2005), 577-614.
[41] Haines, Michael, "Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
     1790-2002", ICPSR 2896 (2005).
[42] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large
     vs. Young", Review of Economics and Statistics (2012), forthcoming.
[43] Hanlon, Walker, "Industry Connections and the Geographic Location of Economic Activ-
     ity", Working Paper (2012).
[44] Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, "Coagglomeration", Working Paper (2012).
[45] Hirsch, Barry, and David Macpherson, "Union Membership and Coverage Database from
     the Current Population Survey: Note", Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56:2 (2003),
     349-354.
[46] Hofstede, Geert, Culture and Organizations (London, UK: Harper Collins, 2001).
[47] Holmes, Thomas, "Geographic Spillover of Unionism", FRB Minneapolis Working Paper
     368 (2006).
[48] Holmes, Thomas, and Sanghoon Lee, "Economies of Density versus Natural Advantage:
     Crop Choice on the Back Forty", Review of Economics and Statistics 94:1 (2012), 1-19.
[49] Hout, Michael, and Harvey Rosen, "Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race",
     Journal of Human Resources 35:4 (2000), 670-692.


                                              30
[50] Hurst, Eric, and Ben Pugsley, "What Do Small Businesses Do?", Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity (2012), forthcoming.
[51] Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1970).
[52] Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, "The Longitudinal Business Database", CES Working
     Paper (2002).
[53] Kerr, William, and Scott Kominers, "Agglomerative Forces and Cluster Shapes", NBER
     Working Paper 16639 (2010).
[54] Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, "Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations, Fi-
     nancing Constraints, and Entrepreneurship", Journal of Financial Economics 94 (2009),
     124-149.
[55] Klepper, Steven, and Sally Sleeper, "Entry by Spino¤s", Management Science 51:8 (2005),
     1291-1306.
[56] Kim, Sukkoo, "Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic Activi-
     ties: The Trends in U. S. Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860-1987", Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 110:4 (1995), 881-908.
[57] Kim, Sukkoo, "Regions, Resources, and Economic Geography: Sources of U.S. Regional
     Comparative Advantage, 1880-1987", Regional Science and Urban Economics 29:1 (1999),
     123-137.
[58] Klein, Alexander, and Nicholas Crafts, "Making Sense of the Manufacturing Belt: Deter-
     minants of U.S. Industrial Location, 1880-1920", Working Paper (2009).
[59] Koenker, Roger, and Gilbert Bassett, "Regression Quantiles", Econometrica 46:1 (1978),
     33-50.
[60] Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, "Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to In-
     novation", RAND Journal of Economics 31:4 (2000), 674-692.
[61] Krugman, Paul, "History and Industry Location: The Case of the Manufacturing Belt",
     American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 81:2 (1991), 80-83.
[62] Lamoreaux, Naomi, Margaret Levenstein, and Kenneth Sokolo¤, "Financing Invention Dur-
     ing the Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920", NBER Working Paper
     10923 (2004).
[63] Landier, Augustin, "Entrepreneurship and the Stigma of Failure", Working Paper (2006).
[64] Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (London, UK: MacMillan and Co., 1920).
[65] Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva, "Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?", Review of
     Economics and Statistics 89:4 (2007), 615-633.
[66] Miracky, W., "Economic Growth and Business Cycles in Cities: The Role of Locational
     Externalities", Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1993.
[67] Niittykangas, Hannu, and Hannu Tervo, "Spatial Variations in Intergenerational Transmis-
     sion of Self-Employment", Regional Studies 39:3 (2005), 319-332.



                                             31
[68] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomer-
     ation Economies", in J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of
     Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2119-2171.
[69] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglom-
     eration", Review of Economics and Statistics 85:2 (2003), 377-393.
[70] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "Small Establishments/Big E¤ects: Agglomera-
     tion, Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship", in Glaeser, Edward (ed.) Agglomera-
     tion Economics (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
[71] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "The Determinants of Agglomeration", Journal of
     Urban Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.
[72] Saiz, Albert, "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply", Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 125:3 (2010), 1253-1296.
[73] Samila, Sampsa, and Olav Sorenson, "Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship and Economic
     Growth", Review of Economics and Statistics 93:1 (2011), 338-349.
[74] Saxenian, AnnaLee, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
     Route 128 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).
[75] Simon, Curtis, "Human Capital and Metropolitan Employment Growth", Journal of Urban
     Economics 43:2 (1998), 223-243.
[76] Simon, Curtis, and Clark Nardinelli, "Human Capital and the Rise of American Cities,
     1900-1990", Regional Science and Urban Economics 32:1 (2002), 59-96.
[77] Stigler, George, "The Dominant Firm and the Inverted Umbrella", Journal of Law and
     Economics 8 (1965), 167-172.
[78] Stock, James, and Motohiro Yogo, "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regres-
     sion", in Identi…cation and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas
     Rothenberg, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
[79] Storeyguard, Adam, "Farther on Down the Road: Transport Costs, Trade and Urban
     Growth in sub-Saharan Africa", Working Paper (2012).
[80] van der Ploeg, Frederick, "Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing?", Journal of Economic
     Literature 49:2 (2011), 366-420.
[81] White, Langdon, "The Iron and Steel Industry of the Pittsburgh District", Economic Ge-
     ography 4:2 (1928), 115-139.
[82] Whyte, William, The Organizational Man (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania
     Press, 1956).
[83] Wooldridge, Je¤rey, "Score Diagnostics for Linear Models Estimated by Two Stage Least
     Squares", in Econometrics and Quantitative Economics: Essays in Honor of Professor C.
     R. Rao (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), 66–87.




                                             32
Appendix of IVQR Methodology
    Let capital letters denote random variables, and lowercase letters the values these random
variables take. We use data for n observations on a continuous outcome variable Y , an en-
dogenous variable D, one or more instruments Z, and covariates X. In our setting, Y is the
log employment growth of the city, D is the initial average establishment size of the city (or
the start-up employment share), and Z are our instruments based upon historical proximity to
mines.
    We are interested in the potential outcomes Yd indexed against the endogenous variable d. In
particular, we look at the conditional quantiles of the potential outcomes, fQYd ( jx); (0; 1)g,
where indicates the quantile index and is strictly increasing. The aim is to identify the causal
e¤ect of D on Y holding unobserved heterogeneity among cities (UD ) constant at UD = . UD
is a rank variable that captures the heterogeneity among cities that are similar in terms of their
observed characteristics. The causal e¤ect of interest can simply be expressed as QYd ( p x)
QYd0 ( p x). These estimated e¤ects will di¤er across quantiles if the e¤ect of the endogenous
variable D on Y is heterogeneous.
    Endogeneity arises as D and U are correlated. With endogeneity, the standard quantile
regression estimates (Koenker and Bassett, 1978) will be biased and a model with instrumental
variables is required. If we have an instrument Z that is orthogonal to the potential outcome
other than through its correlation with the endogeneous variable, we can estimate the causal
e¤ect of D on Y over the entire distribution of Y .
    Chernozhukov and Hansen (2004a) explain the IVQR model as follows. First, given X = x
the potential outcomes are expressed Y = q (d; x; Ud ), where the th quantile q (d; x; ) is strictly
increasing and left-continuous in . Second, given X = x, fUd g is independent of Z. Third,
given X = x and Z = z, the potential treatment Dz = (z; x; V ) for any unknown function ( )
and random vector V . This is the selection equation. Fourth, for each d and d0 , given (V; X; Z),
Ud is equal in distribution to Ud0 . This is the rank similarity assumption, required to interpret
the estimates as e¤ects for individual cities at each part of the distribution.32 Finally, we need
to observe Y = q(D; X; UD ); D = (Z; X; Y ), X and Z.
    The model can be estimated using a Matlab procedure as follows. The …nite sample quantile
regression (QR) objective function
                               X      is
    (1)      Qn ( ; ; ; ) :=         (Yc Dc0      Xc0    Zc0 ) Vc .
    Above, c indexes the observation unit (city), D is the endogenous variable, X is the vec-
tor of exogenous covariates, Zc = f (Xc ; Zc ) is the vector of instrumental variables and Vc :=
V (Xc ; Zc ) > 0 is a weight. For a given value ( ) of the structural parameter, we will run the
standard quantile regression to obtain
    (2)      (b ( ; ) ; b ( ; )) = arg min Qn ( ; ; ; ).
  32
     The rank similarity assumption requires that a city’s proximate position in the non-treated distribution is
the same (or very similar) to its position in the treated distribution. Achieving rank similarity typically requires
conditioning on other important covariates.


                                                        33
    To obtain an estimate for ( ), we …nd the value of that minimizes the absolute value of
the instrumental variable, b ( ; ). In other words,
    (3)     b ( ) = arg inf [Wn ( )], Wn ( ) := n b ( ; )0 A b ( ) [b ( ; )],
where A b = A ( ) + op (1) and A ( ) is positive de…nite, uniformly in        2 A. Setting A ( )
                                                             p
equal to the inverse of the asymptotic covariance matrix of n (b ( )          ( )), the parameter
estimates are obtained from
    (4)     b ( ) := b ( ) ; b ( ) := b ( ) ; b (b ( ) ; ) .
In short, this is the …nite-sample instrumental variable quantile regression (IVQR) using the
inverse estimation procedure described in Chernozhukov and Hansen (2004a and 2004b).
    In the context of our city growth estimation, Y is a measure of employment growth between
1982 and 2002, D the average establishment size in 1982 (or the start-up employment share in
1982), and Z are the measures of mine proximity at the beginning of the 20th century. The
empirical conditional quantile model can be expressed as
    (5)     Qyc j x ( ) = ( ) + ( ) Dc + Xc0 ( ) + ( )r + c ,
where the subscript c refers to city and r to census division. The vector of covariates (Xc )
includes the initial employment controls and city growth covariates discussed in section 4.




                                               34
Fig. 1: City growth and initial entrepreneurship
Cross-sectional plots of urban growth 1982-2002 vs. initial traits
Fig. 2: Representative map of mineral and coal deposits, 1910
Fig. 3a: Base estimations of average establishment size effects
            Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 3b: Average establishment size effects for OLS and IV
          Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 3c: Average establishment size effects with warm/cold IV split
              Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 3d: Average establishment effects with extended growth controls
               Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 4a: Base estimations of start-up employment share effects
            Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 4b: Start-up share effects for OLS and IV
   Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 4c: Start-up share effects with warm/cold IV split
        Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 4d: Start-up share effects with extended growth controls
           Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
Fig. 5: Quantile IV estimations of average establishment size effects
                            Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
          A. Quantile regression estimates                           B. IVQR using historical mines and 500-mile band




  Slow conditional                           Fast conditional         Slow conditional                        Fast conditional
     city growth                               city growth               city growth                            city growth




C. IVQR using historical mines and 250-mile band                D. IVQR using historical mines and 250- and 500-mile bands




  Slow conditional                           Fast conditional         Slow conditional                        Fast conditional
     city growth                               city growth               city growth                            city growth
Fig. 6: Quantile IV estimations of start-up employment share effects
                             Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals
           A. Quantile regression estimates                           B. IVQR using historical mines and 500-mile band




   Slow conditional                           Fast conditional         Slow conditional                        Fast conditional
      city growth                               city growth               city growth                            city growth




 C. IVQR using historical mines and 250-mile band                D. IVQR using historical mines and 250- and 500-mile bands




   Slow conditional                           Fast conditional         Slow conditional                        Fast conditional
      city growth                               city growth               city growth                            city growth
            Table 1a: LBD descriptive statistics for cities, circa 1982
                                                                  Mean              Standard deviation

City size 1982
  Total employment                                               231,655                  411,379
  Mining, construction, & manufacturers                            28%
  Trade, finance, & services                                       72%
  Low agglomeration sectors                                        57%
  Medium agglomeration sectors                                     16%
  High agglomeration sectors                                       26%
Log employment growth 1982-2002
  Overall                                                         0.361                    0.247
  Mining, construction, & manufacturers                           0.058                    0.358
  Trade, finance, & services                                      0.493                    0.239
  Low agglomeration sectors                                       0.440                    0.233
  Medium agglomeration sectors                                    0.358                    0.297
  High agglomeration sectors                                      0.307                    0.404
Average establishment size
  Overall, 1982                                                    19.8                     3.5
  Overall, 2002                                                    19.9                     2.8
  Mining, construction, & manufacturers, 1982                      34.1                     14.2
  Trade, finance, & services, 1982                                 15.8                      3.2
Start-up share of local firm activity
  Employment, 1982                                                3.1%                     1.6%
  Employment, 2002                                                3.3%                     1.3%
  Establishment counts, 1982                                      9.7%                     2.2%
  Establishment counts, 2002                                      8.2%                     1.7%
Notes: Descriptive statistics from the Longitudinal Business Database for 1982. Jarmin and Miranda
(2002) describe the construction of the LBD. Sectors not included are agriculture, forestry and fishing,
public administration, the US postal service, and private households. Start-up shares are calculated for
the five-year period following the indicated date.
                     Table 1b: Correlations of entrepreneurship metrics across cities, circa 1982
                                                               Average establishment size                         Start-up             Start-up
                                                       Overall          Mining,             Trade,                share of             share of
                                                                    construction, &      finance, &              local firm           local firm
                                                                     manufacturers         services             employments             counts

Average establishment size
  Mining, construction, & manufacturers                  0.62
  Trade, finance, & services                             0.74                0.14
Start-up share of local firm employments                -0.49               -0.55               -0.15
Start-up share of local firm counts                     -0.41               -0.63               -0.08                0.74
Share of empl. in small establishments                  -0.98               -0.62               -0.71                0.50                0.41
Notes: See Table 1a. Small establishments are defined to be those with 20 or fewer employees. All correlations are significant at a 10% level except
the relationship between average size in trade, finance, and services and the start-up share of local firm counts.
                             Table 2: Entrepreneurship and growth estimations at city level, 1982-2002
                                                Log employment growth                        Log payroll growth                        Log wage growth
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                                   A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size               -0.566       -0.598        -0.693        -0.435       -0.478        -0.640        0.073         0.018        -0.054
in city at start of period                  (0.078)      (0.072)       (0.082)       (0.092)      (0.120)       (0.122)       (0.041)       (0.063)      (0.036)
Initial employment controls                                Yes          Yes                         Yes           Yes                        Yes           Yes
Census division fixed effects                              Yes          Yes                         Yes           Yes                        Yes           Yes
City growth covariates                                                  Yes                                       Yes                                      Yes

                                                                   B. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment             0.200        0.200         0.161         0.200        0.196         0.150         0.016         0.029        0.019
in city at start of period                  (0.037)      (0.053)       (0.056)       (0.046)      (0.060)       (0.065)       (0.017)       (0.016)      (0.020)
Initial employment controls                                Yes          Yes                         Yes           Yes                        Yes           Yes
Census division fixed effects                              Yes          Yes                         Yes           Yes                        Yes           Yes
City growth covariates                                                  Yes                                       Yes                                      Yes
Notes: Estimations describe the OLS relationship between entrepreneurship and city growth. City growth is calculated as the log ratio of employments at the end of
the period to the beginning of the period. Regressions are unweighted, report bootstrapped standard errors, and have 291 observations. Initial employment controls
are log employment levels at start of period and their squared values. City growth covariates include log January temperature, log July temperature, log 1970 share
of workers with bachelor's education or higher, log 1970 population density, log 1970 population, and log 1970 housing prices. Nine census divisions are used in
the fixed effects. A 2% winsorization is employed on variables. Appendix Table 1 repeats these estimations by time period.
                      Table 3: Sample decomposition of city level estimations for log employment growth
                                              Total           Mining,            Trade,             Level of industry agglomeration                High agglom.
                                           employment       construction        finance,           Low          Medium           High                 trade,
                                             growth           & mfg.           & services                                                            finance,
                                                              sectors            sectors                                                            & services
                                                (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                 A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size                 -0.693           -0.400            -0.462           -0.387           -0.316            -0.842           -0.467
in city at start of period                    (0.110)          (0.187)           (0.110)          (0.110)          (0.144)           (0.210)          (0.164)

                                                                              B. Panel A with warm/cold city interaction
Log average establishment size                 -0.726           -0.466            -0.519           -0.441           -0.369            -0.874           -0.492
in city at start of period                    (0.124)          (0.184)           (0.107)          (0.125)          (0.144)           (0.221)          (0.156)
x indicator variable for warm city             0.037            0.073             0.063            0.061            0.059             0.035            0.027
(January temperature >34)                     (0.019)          (0.079)           (0.015)          (0.020)          (0.020)           (0.064)          (0.019)

Linear combination for warm cities             -0.689           -0.393            -0.456           -0.380           -0.310            -0.839           -0.465
                                              (0.112)          (0.197)           (0.100)          (0.110)          (0.145)           (0.227)          (0.150)

                                                                 C. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment               0.161            0.069             0.113            0.092            0.112             0.214            0.135
in city at start of period                    (0.053)          (0.079)           (0.045)          (0.052)          (0.024)           (0.084)          (0.040)

                                                                              D. Panel C with warm/cold city interaction
Log start-up share of employment               0.169            0.093             0.134            0.114            0.130             0.221            0.142
in city at start of period                    (0.045)          (0.075)           (0.040)          (0.048)          (0.038)           (0.073)          (0.041)
x indicator variable for warm city             -0.019           -0.053            -0.045           -0.047           -0.038            -0.013           -0.016
(January temperature >34)                     (0.030)          (0.022)           (0.019)          (0.015)          (0.018)           (0.023)          (0.016)

Linear combination for warm cities             0.150            0.041             0.088            0.067            0.092             0.207            0.126
                                              (0.056)          (0.083)           (0.042)          (0.049)          (0.035)           (0.083)          (0.036)
Notes: See Table 2. Regressions include Initial employment controls, Census division fixed effects, and City growth covariates. Warm cities are defined to be the
143 cities with January temperatures above the median for the United States of 34 degrees.
                                Table 4: Entrepreneurship and growth regressions at city-industry level, 1982-2002
                                             Total            Total            Mining,            Trade,         Cold cities      Warm cities       1982-1992        1992-2002
                                           employment       employment       construction,       finance,        Jan. temp         Jan. temp          period           period
                                                                               & mfg.           & services          <34               >34
                                                (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                          A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size                -0.192           -0.165           -0.291            -0.120           -0.158           -0.175            -0.104           -0.095
in city-industry at start of period           (0.015)          (0.015)          (0.015)           (0.017)          (0.022)          (0.018)           (0.008)          (0.008)
Initial employment controls                     Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Region x industry fixed effects                 Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
City growth covariates                          Yes
City fixed effects                                               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

                                                                          B. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment               0.054            0.042            0.055             0.039            0.036            0.049             0.027            0.019
in city-industry at start of period           (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.011)           (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.010)           (0.004)          (0.004)
Initial employment controls                     Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Region x industry fixed effects                 Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
City growth covariates                          Yes
City fixed effects                                               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Notes: See Table 2. Estimations describe the OLS relationship between entrepreneurship and city-industry growth. Industries are defined at the two-digit level of the SIC system.
Region x industry fixed effects use the nine census divisions. Initial employment controls are city-industry specific. City-industries must have 100 employees throughout the 1977-
2002 period to be included in the full sample, for 12,178 observations.
          Table 5a: Coal prices and distance from mines in 1925-1930, anthracite
                                                          Indicator variable for             Log price of anthracite
                                                          anthracite price listed                 coal in city
                                                            (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
Count of anthracite mines 0-50 miles                      0.067             0.051             -0.043            -0.052
                                                         (0.026)           (0.011)           (0.017)           (0.009)
Count of anthracite mines 50-100 miles                    0.053             0.062             -0.021            -0.018
                                                         (0.015)           (0.018)           (0.010)           (0.011)
Count of anthracite mines 100-250 miles                   0.163             0.186             -0.032            -0.041
                                                         (0.027)           (0.031)           (0.016)           (0.013)
Count of anthracite mines 250-500 miles                   0.062             0.089             -0.009            -0.025
                                                         (0.060)           (0.074)           (0.021)           (0.006)
Year fixed effects                                         Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Census division fixed effects                                                Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                               261               261               133               133
Notes: Estimations describe the OLS relationship between anthracite coal prices observed in cities in 1925-1930 and
their distances from mines. Included city-year observations list an anthracite price, a bituminous price, or both. Price
data are available for 47 cities in our sample. Columns 1 and 2 present linear probability models that an anthracite price
is listed. Columns 3 and 4 consider the log price of anthracite coal when listed. Explanatory variables are anthracite
mine counts by spatial bands from cities; counts are transformed to have unit standard deviation for interpretation.
Regressions are unweighted and cluster standard errors by city.


         Table 5b: Coal prices and distance from mines in 1925-1930, bituminous
                                                          Indicator variable for            Log price of bituminous
                                                         bituminous price listed                  coal in city
                                                            (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
Count of bituminous mines 0-50 miles                      0.027             0.006             -0.043            -0.036
                                                         (0.013)           (0.017)           (0.012)           (0.013)
Count of bituminous mines 50-100 miles                    0.026             0.134             -0.053            0.012
                                                         (0.023)           (0.040)           (0.020)           (0.032)
Count of bituminous mines 100-250 miles                   0.044             -0.019            -0.121            -0.128
                                                         (0.039)           (0.028)           (0.027)           (0.035)
Count of bituminous mines 250-500 miles                   0.026             0.049             -0.142            -0.124
                                                         (0.042)           (0.039)           (0.049)           (0.035)
Year fixed effects                                         Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Census division fixed effects                                                Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                               261               261               216               216
Notes: See Table 5a. The analysis is repeated for bituminous coal.
                             Table 6: Historical mining deposits and the development of industrial structures
                                             Log average         Log average               Log average establishment size in city, 1982             Log start-up
                                            establishment       employments in             Total        Mining, constr.,     Trade, finance,        employment
                                            size in manuf.      mining near city                        & manufacturing        & services           share in city
                                                 1963             1976-1980                                  sectors             sectors               1982
                                                  (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                                                                              A. Log mine counts within 500 miles of city, 1900
Log mine counts within 500 miles                 0.213               1.163                 0.075               0.142               0.042                -0.161
of city, 1900                                   (0.045)             (0.054)               (0.011)             (0.022)             (0.010)              (0.021)

                                                   B. Panel A including indicator variable for coal or iron ore being top mineral product of state, 1928
Log mine counts within 500 miles                 0.204               1.149                 0.071               0.133               0.037                -0.154
of city, 1900                                   (0.039)             (0.049)               (0.009)             (0.022)             (0.011)              (0.023)
(0,1) Coal or iron ore is the top                0.126               0.187                 0.062               0.116               0.060                -0.096
mineral product of the state, 1928              (0.069)             (0.058)               (0.017)             (0.041)             (0.018)              (0.044)

                                                                             C. Log 1 + mine counts within 250 miles of city, 1900
Log 1 + mine counts within 250                   0.087               0.476                 0.034               0.066               0.010                -0.073
miles of city, 1900                             (0.020)             (0.047)               (0.006)             (0.014)             (0.007)              (0.014)

                                                                 D. Count of mines within distance rings of city, 1900 (coefficients x100)
Mine counts within 100 miles                     0.085               0.328                 0.026               0.065               0.000                -0.091
of city, 1900                                   (0.027)             (0.060)               (0.007)             (0.019)             (0.008)              (0.019)
Mine counts within 100-500 miles                 0.039               0.198                 0.011               0.020               0.009                -0.030
of city, 1900                                   (0.008)             (0.015)               (0.002)             (0.006)             (0.002)              (0.006)

                                                E. Indicator variable for coal composition within 150 miles that favors anthracite or bituminous, present
(0,1) Composition of coal within 150             0.378               1.143                 0.095               0.234               0.031                -0.207
miles favors anthracite or bituminous           (0.069)             (0.145)               (0.018)             (0.047)             (0.020)              (0.049)
Notes: See Table 2. Regressions include Initial employment controls, Census division fixed effects, and City growth covariates. Appendix Tables 2a and 2b provide
descriptive statistics regarding mining counts. Coal or iron ore is the top mineral product in 1928 for AL, CO, IL, IN, KY, MD, MI, MN, ND, PA, TN, VA, WA, and WV.
                                           Table 7: City level IV estimations of employment growth
                                                                                      Instruments employed in estimation:
Log count of mines 500 miles, 1900                  Yes              Yes               Yes                                                 Yes
(0,1) coal or iron ore top product, 1928                             Yes               Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Count of iron miles 100 miles, 1900                                                    Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Log 1+count of mines 250 miles, 1900                                                                 Yes            Yes                    Yes
Log count of mines 500 miles, present                                                                                                                       Yes
Coal composition 150 miles, present                                                                                                                         Yes
Count of iron miles 100 miles, present                                                                                                                      Yes
                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)
                                                                      A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size                     -0.967           -0.930            -0.878           -0.517            -0.608           -0.783           -0.831
in city at start of period                        (0.311)          (0.280)           (0.251)          (0.325)           (0.232)          (0.241)          (0.258)
First stage partial R squared                      0.151            0.186             0.193            0.106            0.175             0.208            0.162
F test statistic in first stage                    0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias                         <10%             <10%              <10%             <10%             <15%              <15%             <15%
Over-identification test p-value                                    0.689             0.357                             0.624             0.124            0.457
Exogeneity test p-value                            0.168            0.177             0.281            0.470            0.642             0.585            0.471

                                                                      B. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment                   0.450            0.455             0.352            0.245             0.245            0.335            0.362
in city at start of period                        (0.144)          (0.156)           (0.119)          (0.155)           (0.124)          (0.125)          (0.137)
First stage partial R squared                      0.114            0.128             0.157            0.078            0.129             0.154            0.129
F test statistic in first stage                    0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias                         <10%             <15%              <15%             <10%             <15%              <20%             <15%
Over-identification test p-value                                    0.901             0.083                             0.083             0.069            0.341
Exogeneity test p-value                            0.004            0.002             0.024            0.440            0.376             0.043            0.034
Notes: See Tables 2 and 6. Outcome variable is log employment growth for cities. Instruments are indicated by column titles. Regressions are unweighted, report
bootstrapped standard errors, and have 291 observations. Regressions include Initial employment controls, Census division fixed effects, and City growth covariates.
The maximum 2SLS relative bias reports the minimum bias that can specified and still reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are weak. This level is determined
through the minimum eigenvalue statistic and Stock and Yogo's (2005) 2SLS size of nominal 5% Wald test. The null hypothesis in Basmann's over-identification tests is
that the instruments are valid. The null hypothesis in Wu-Hausman exogeneity tests is that the instrumented regressors are exogenous.
                               Table 8a: Extended city outcomes using average establishment size
                                            Log employment
                                              in 2002 from           Employment share in 2002 of entrants since                  Log average age of
                                             entrants since               1982 by size category in 2002                     establishments in city in 2002
                                            1982 relative to            All           >100           <=100                       All           Top 25
                                            city size in 1982                      employees       employees                                  employers
                                                    (1)                   (2)               (3)               (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                                                      A. OLS relationship using average establishment size
Log average establishment size                    -0.937                 -0.139           -0.133            -0.051               0.202            0.140
in city at start of period                       (0.134)                (0.030)          (0.044)           (0.018)              (0.046)          (0.077)

                                                                  B. IV relationship with triple instrument using 500-mile band
Log average establishment size                    -1.208                 -0.216           -0.265            -0.133               0.365            0.460
in city at start of period                       (0.293)                (0.059)          (0.090)           (0.042)              (0.085)          (0.130)
First stage statistics                                  Partial R squared 0.193; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value                  0.596               0.938            0.878          0.213            0.943        0.194
Exogeneity test p-value                           0.188               0.080            0.067          0.007            0.011        0.003

                                                                  C. IV relationship with triple instrument using 250-mile band
Log average establishment size                    -0.951                 -0.206           -0.292            -0.053               0.344            0.536
in city at start of period                       (0.284)                (0.061)          (0.086)           (0.034)              (0.075)          (0.153)
First stage statistics                                    Partial R squared 0.175; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value                  0.756                 0.892            0.933          0.895            0.856        0.394
Exogeneity test p-value                           0.951                 0.147            0.038          0.942            0.036        0.001
Notes: See Tables 2 and 7. Outcome variables are indicated by column headers. Column 1 reports the log net employment growth by entrants in 2002
compared to 1982 city size. Columns 2-4 consider employment shares in 2002 of entrants since 1982 by establishment size category in 2002. Columns 5
and 6 report average establishment ages in 2002 for cities with a maximum age of 26 years. The instruments are the log count of mines within 250 or 500
miles, 1900, as indicated; a (0,1) indicator variable for coal or iron ore being the top mineral product in the state, 1928; and the count of iron ore mines
within 100 miles of the city, 1900. Regressions include Initial employment controls, Census division fixed effects, and City growth covariates.
                            Table 8b: Extended city outcomes using start-up employment share
                                    Log employment
                                      in 2002 from         Employment share in 2002 of entrants since           Log average age of
                                     entrants since             1982 by size category in 2002              establishments in city in 2002
                                    1982 relative to          All           >100           <=100                All           Top 25
                                    city size in 1982                    employees       employees                           employers
                                           (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)               (5)             (6)
                                                            A. OLS relationship using start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment         0.216                0.034          0.029           0.025             -0.062          -0.059
in city at start of period              (0.085)              (0.016)        (0.023)         (0.007)           (0.019)         (0.021)

                                                        B. IV relationship with triple instrument using 500-mile band
Log start-up share of employment         0.497                0.095          0.111           0.058             -0.160          -0.194
in city at start of period              (0.150)              (0.027)        (0.038)         (0.018)           (0.051)         (0.064)
First stage statistics                         Partial R squared 0.157; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value         0.140               0.720            0.502          0.139            0.593        0.093
Exogeneity test p-value                  0.007               0.003            0.014          0.018            0.001        0.007

                                                        C. IV relationship with triple instrument using 250-mile band
Log start-up share of employment         0.403                0.095          0.126           0.026             -0.158          -0.237
in city at start of period              (0.140)              (0.028)        (0.048)         (0.018)           (0.043)         (0.074)
First stage statistics                           Partial R squared 0.175; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value         0.251                 0.712            0.440          0.997            0.593        0.175
Exogeneity test p-value                  0.109                 0.009            0.009          0.939            0.004        0.001
Notes: See Table 8a.
               App. Table 1: Basic entrepreneurship and city employment growth regressions by time period
                                             1982-2002                            1982-1992                           1992-2002
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)       (9)
                                                        A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size      -0.566     -0.598        -0.693      -0.385      -0.407      -0.432      -0.216         -0.280    -0.339
in city at start of period         (0.078)    (0.072)       (0.082)     (0.056)     (0.075)     (0.113)     (0.049)        (0.057)   (0.044)
Initial employment controls                    Yes           Yes                      Yes        Yes                        Yes       Yes
Census division fixed effects                  Yes           Yes                      Yes        Yes                        Yes       Yes
City growth covariates                                       Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes

                                                        B. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment    0.200      0.200         0.161       0.099       0.128       0.110       0.123          0.087     0.065
in city at start of period         (0.037)    (0.053)       (0.056)     (0.030)     (0.047)     (0.038)     (0.023)        (0.048)   (0.050)
Initial employment controls                    Yes           Yes                      Yes        Yes                        Yes       Yes
Census division fixed effects                  Yes           Yes                      Yes        Yes                        Yes       Yes
City growth covariates                                       Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes
Notes: See Table 2.
           App. Table 2a: Descriptive statistics on known mineral mines, 1900
                             Mean      Minimum Maximum                        Maximum City

Total mine counts recorded as discovered by 1900
  Total 0-100 miles            56           0              683         Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
  Total 0-250 miles           270           0             1,022   Greensboro-Winston-Salem-High Point, NC
  Total 0-500 miles           946          10             2,966           Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT
  100-250 miles               214           0              990                Charleston, WV
  250-500 miles               676           6             2,282               Provo-Orem, UT
Mines related to iron ore recorded as discovered by 1900
  Total 0-100 miles            13           0             232          Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
  Total 0-250 miles            67           0             321                  Roanoke, VA
  Total 0-500 miles           244           2             630              Cleveland-Akron, OH
  100-250 miles                54           0             314                 Charleston, WV
  250-500 miles               177           0             621                  Toledo, OH
Mines not related to iron ore recorded as discovered by 1900
  Total 0-100 miles            43           0              451         Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
  Total 0-250 miles           203           0              837                   Reno, NV
  Total 0-500 miles           701           6             2,629          Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT
  100-250 miles               159           0              676                Charleston, WV
  250-500 miles               499           4             2,030               Provo-Orem, UT
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from USGS database.


               App. Table 2b: Descriptive statistics on coal deposits, present
                             Mean      Minimum Maximum                        Maximum City

Total coal deposit counts
  Total 0-100 miles           100           0             1,492       Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH
  Total 0-250 miles           623           0             3,374        Parkersburg-Marietta, WV-OH
  Total 0-500 miles          2,077          0             4,994              Louisville, KY-IN
  100-250 miles               522           0             3,030           Dayton-Springfield, OH
  250-500 miles              1,454          0             4,584              Terre Haute, IN
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from USGS database.
      App. Table 3a: Sample decomposition of IV estimations for average establishment size with 500-mile band
                                               Total            Mining,            Trade,              Level of industry agglomeration                 High agglom.
                                            employment        construction        finance,            Low          Medium           High                  trade,
                                              growth            & mfg.           & services                                                              finance,
                                                                sectors            sectors                                                              & services
                                                  (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                   A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size                  -0.878            -0.481            -0.696            -0.502            -0.593            -1.778            -0.942
in city at start of period                     (0.251)           (0.287)           (0.271)           (0.251)           (0.239)           (0.346)           (0.330)
First stage statistics                                       Partial R squared 0.193; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <10%
Over-identification test p-value                0.357             0.656          0.272             0.207        0.816           0.707                       0.181
Exogeneity test p-value                         0.281             0.748          0.186             0.507        0.231           0.001                       0.068

                                                                                B. Panel A with warm/cold city interaction
Log average establishment size                  -0.899            -0.506            -0.731            -0.533            -0.613            -1.791            -0.995
in city at start of period                     (0.218)           (0.297)           (0.235)           (0.296)           (0.263)           (0.354)           (0.281)
x indicator variable for warm city              0.062             0.074             0.105             0.093             0.059             0.038             0.158
(January temperature >34)                      (0.055)           (0.090)           (0.066)           (0.077)           (0.071)           (0.135)           (0.133)

Linear combination for warm cities              -0.836            -0.432            -0.626            -0.440            -0.554            -1.753            -0.837
                                               (0.230)           (0.284)           (0.250)           (0.309)           (0.254)           (0.342)           (0.300)
First stage statistics                                        Shea partial R squared 0.197 and 0.070; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <20%
Over-identification test p-value                0.264            0.609           0.362           0.244        0.974          0.437                          0.297
Exogeneity test p-value                         0.581            0.197           0.421           0.789        0.567          0.006                          0.084
Notes: See Table 7. Outcome variables are log employment growth in city as indicated by column headers. The instruments are the log count of mines within 500
miles, 1900; a (0,1) indicator variable for coal or iron ore being the top mineral product in the state, 1928; and the count of iron ore mines within 100 miles of the
city, 1900.
      App. Table 3b: Sample decomposition of IV estimations for start-up employment share with 500-mile band
                                        Total        Mining,         Trade,           Level of industry agglomeration           High agglom.
                                     employment    construction     finance,         Low          Medium           High            trade,
                                       growth        & mfg.        & services                                                     finance,
                                                     sectors         sectors                                                     & services
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)
                                                       A. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment        0.352         0.186          0.260           0.179          0.236          0.761           0.344
in city at start of period             (0.119)       (0.113)        (0.120)         (0.121)        (0.099)        (0.157)         (0.160)
First stage statistics                            Partial R squared 0.157; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value       0.083           0.475          0.045             0.070        0.475           0.290         0.036
Exogeneity test p-value                0.024           0.315          0.078             0.285        0.243           0.000         0.082

                                                                  B. Panel A with warm/cold city interaction
Log start-up share of employment        0.454         0.267          0.378           0.277          0.315          0.903           0.516
in city at start of period             (0.148)       (0.156)        (0.128)         (0.146)        (0.136)        (0.179)         (0.179)
x indicator variable for warm city      -0.108        -0.085         -0.125          -0.103         -0.083         -0.150          -0.181
(January temperature >34)              (0.062)       (0.070)        (0.047)         (0.046)        (0.071)        (0.107)         (0.093)

Linear combination for warm cities      0.346         0.182          0.253           0.174          0.232          0.753           0.335
                                       (0.125)       (0.123)        (0.112)         (0.132)        (0.110)        (0.149)         (0.170)
First stage statistics                            Shea partial R squared 0.125 and 0.083; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <20%
Over-identification test p-value       0.288         0.658           0.371           0.255        0.962          0.651             0.310
Exogeneity test p-value                0.015         0.424           0.037           0.208        0.321          0.000             0.017
Notes: See App. Table 3a.
      App. Table 4a: Sample decomposition of IV estimations for average establishment size with 250-mile band
                                               Total            Mining,            Trade,              Level of industry agglomeration                 High agglom.
                                            employment        construction        finance,            Low          Medium           High                  trade,
                                              growth            & mfg.           & services                                                              finance,
                                                                sectors            sectors                                                              & services
                                                  (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                   A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size
Log average establishment size                  -0.608            -0.174            -0.432            -0.324            -0.445            -1.161            -0.316
in city at start of period                     (0.232)           (0.314)           (0.247)           (0.255)           (0.270)           (0.386)           (0.345)
First stage statistics                                       Partial R squared 0.175; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value                0.624             0.259          0.293             0.348        0.701           0.044                       0.213
Exogeneity test p-value                         0.642             0.397          0.874             0.734        0.600           0.302                       0.584

                                                                                B. Panel A with warm/cold city interaction
Log average establishment size                  -0.624            -0.192            -0.458            -0.347            -0.459            -1.170            -0.355
in city at start of period                     (0.235)           (0.346)           (0.231)           (0.245)           (0.282)           (0.468)           (0.368)
x indicator variable for warm city              0.066             0.075             0.108             0.096             0.060             0.040             0.165
(January temperature >34)                      (0.055)           (0.111)           (0.063)           (0.062)           (0.073)           (0.152)           (0.137)

Linear combination for warm cities              -0.557            -0.117            -0.350            -0.251            -0.399            -1.130            -0.189
                                               (0.248)           (0.329)           (0.243)           (0.242)           (0.273)           (0.469)           (0.399)
First stage statistics                                        Shea partial R squared 0.180 and 0.070; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <20%
Over-identification test p-value                0.956            0.140           0.821           0.703        0.589          0.013                          0.497
Exogeneity test p-value                         0.760            0.581           0.739           0.739        0.934          0.631                          0.321
Notes: See Table 7. Outcome variables are log employment growth in city as indicated by column headers. The instruments are the log count of mines within 250
miles, 1900; a (0,1) indicator variable for coal or iron ore being the top mineral product in the state, 1928; and the count of iron ore mines within 100 miles of the
city, 1900.
      App. Table 4b: Sample decomposition of IV estimations for start-up employment share with 250-mile band
                                        Total        Mining,         Trade,           Level of industry agglomeration           High agglom.
                                     employment    construction     finance,         Low          Medium           High            trade,
                                       growth        & mfg.        & services                                                     finance,
                                                     sectors         sectors                                                     & services
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)
                                                       A. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment        0.245         0.071          0.151           0.101          0.182          0.549           0.085
in city at start of period             (0.124)       (0.143)        (0.129)         (0.119)        (0.136)        (0.194)         (0.191)
First stage statistics                            Partial R squared 0.129; F statistic 0.000; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <15%
Over-identification test p-value       0.238           0.254          0.126             0.183        0.508           0.074         0.155
Exogeneity test p-value                0.376           0.989          0.681             0.921        0.557           0.031         0.706

                                                                  B. Panel A with warm/cold city interaction
Log start-up share of employment        0.342         0.142          0.266           0.198          0.262          0.672           0.234
in city at start of period             (0.132)       (0.195)        (0.112)         (0.132)        (0.169)        (0.227)         (0.208)
x indicator variable for warm city      -0.092        -0.068         -0.109          -0.092         -0.076         -0.117          -0.142
(January temperature >34)              (0.052)       (0.075)        (0.044)         (0.043)        (0.081)        (0.107)         (0.096)

Linear combination for warm cities      0.251         0.074          0.157           0.106          0.186          0.554           0.093
                                       (0.116)       (0.156)        (0.101)         (0.112)        (0.143)        (0.190)         (0.216)
First stage statistics                            Shea partial R squared 0.102 and 0.082; Maximum 2SLS relative bias <20%
Over-identification test p-value       0.811         0.162           0.989           0.606        0.727          0.071             0.560
Exogeneity test p-value                0.235         0.945           0.362           0.609        0.629          0.043             0.228
Notes: See App. Table 4a.
                         App. Table 5a: Extended controls in IV estimations for average establishment size
                                                 Base          Including log     Including log    Including     Including              Including log     Including log
                                             employment          projected         projected    fixed effects fixed effects            manufacturing     manufacturing
                                                growth          employment       establishment for regions     for regions              employment       establishment
                                              estimation        growth from       growth from    x projected   x projected              growth from       growth from
                                                               1982 to 2002      1982 to 2002 employment establishments                1963 to 1981      1963 to 1981
                                                              due to industry   due to industry growth above growth above
                                                                distribution      distribution     average       average
                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                            A. OLS relationship using average establishment size
Log average establishment size                   -0.693            -0.642             -0.690            -0.681            -0.715            -0.686             -0.685
in city at start of period                      (0.082)           (0.109)            (0.106)           (0.104)           (0.090)           (0.097)            (0.108)

                                                                                     B. IV relationship with 500-mile band
Log average establishment size                   -0.878            -0.698             -0.936            -0.882            -0.873            -0.855             -0.883
in city at start of period                      (0.251)           (0.234)            (0.229)           (0.230)           (0.249)           (0.270)            (0.254)
First stage partial R squared                    0.193             0.165             0.135              0.194             0.186             0.182             0.156
F test statistic in first stage                  0.000             0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias                       <10%              <15%              <15%               <15%              <15%              <15%              <15%
Over-identification test p-value                 0.357             0.218             0.490              0.389             0.293             0.365             0.357
Exogeneity test p-value                          0.281             0.771             0.258              0.325             0.433             0.879             0.324

                                                                                     C. IV relationship with 250-mile band
Log average establishment size                   -0.608            -0.399             -0.641            -0.561            -0.550            -0.581             -0.587
in city at start of period                      (0.232)           (0.254)            (0.287)           (0.218)           (0.213)           (0.246)            (0.246)
First stage partial R squared                    0.175             0.148             0.117              0.180             0.183             0.165             0.149
F test statistic in first stage                  0.000             0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias                       <15%              <15%              <20%               <15%              <15%              <15%              <15%
Over-identification test p-value                 0.624             0.382             0.432              0.582             0.587             0.578             0.543
Exogeneity test p-value                          0.642             0.229             0.867              0.385             0.304             0.579             0.637
Notes: See Tables 2 and 7. Outcome variables are log employment growth in city. The instruments are the log count of mines within 250 or 500 miles, 1900, as
indicated; a (0,1) indicator variable for coal or iron ore being the top mineral product in the state, 1928; and the count of iron ore mines within 100 miles of the city,
1900.
                      App. Table 5b: Extended controls in IV estimations for start-up employment share
                                       Base       Including log     Including log    Including     Including     Including log   Including log
                                   employment       projected         projected    fixed effects fixed effects   manufacturing   manufacturing
                                      growth       employment       establishment for regions     for regions     employment     establishment
                                    estimation     growth from       growth from    x projected   x projected     growth from     growth from
                                                  1982 to 2002      1982 to 2002 employment establishments       1963 to 1981    1963 to 1981
                                                 due to industry   due to industry growth above growth above
                                                   distribution      distribution     average       average
                                       (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                              A. OLS relationship using start-up employment share
Log start-up share of employment      0.161          0.134             0.154          0.141          0.168           0.156           0.151
in city at start of period           (0.056)        (0.042)           (0.056)        (0.037)        (0.033)         (0.052)         (0.046)

                                                                      B. IV relationship with 500-mile band
Log start-up share of employment      0.352          0.266             0.346          0.346          0.341           0.348           0.357
in city at start of period           (0.119)        (0.124)           (0.132)        (0.114)        (0.126)         (0.142)         (0.147)
First stage partial R squared         0.157          0.125             0.112         0.158           0.149          0.139           0.116
F test statistic in first stage       0.000          0.000             0.000         0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias            <15%           <15%              <20%          <15%            <15%           <15%            <20%
Over-identification test p-value      0.083          0.060             0.092         0.066           0.058          0.082           0.081
Exogeneity test p-value               0.024          0.175             0.059         0.034           0.049          0.037           0.048

                                                                      C. IV relationship with 250-mile band
Log start-up share of employment      0.245          0.135             0.229          0.216          0.212           0.235           0.237
in city at start of period           (0.124)        (0.126)           (0.142)        (0.107)        (0.106)         (0.121)         (0.133)
First stage partial R squared         0.129          0.100             0.095         0.148           0.147          0.116           0.100
F test statistic in first stage       0.000          0.000             0.000         0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000
Maximum 2SLS relative bias            <15%           <20%              <20%          <15%            <15%           <20%            <20%
Over-identification test p-value      0.083          0.195             0.187         0.263           0.273          0.233           0.222
Exogeneity test p-value               0.376          0.991             0.460         0.582           0.611          0.440           0.448
Notes: See App. Table 5a.
                                            App. Table 6: Quantile instrumental variable regressions
                                                                              Quantiles of the conditional growth distribution                            p-value for
                                                Mean               0.15            0.25             0.5            0.75                    0.85         constant effects
                                                  (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)                 (7)
                                                         A. Measuring entrepreneurship through average establishment size -- quantile regression
Log average establishment size                  -0.693            -0.701            -0.729            -0.820            -0.819            -0.633              0.725
in city at start of period                     (0.087)           (0.152)           (0.142)           (0.099)           (0.108)           (0.116)

                                                                           B. Panel A with IVQR using 500-mile band instruments
Log average establishment size                  -0.878            -0.769            -1.095            -1.114            -1.118            -1.121              0.866
in city at start of period                     (0.269)           (0.449)           (0.487)           (0.490)           (0.383)           (0.476)

                                                                           C. Panel A with IVQR using 250-mile band instruments
Log average establishment size                  -0.608            -1.074            -0.802            -0.983            -0.648            -0.658              0.715
in city at start of period                     (0.232)           (0.486)           (0.471)           (0.559)           (0.592)           (0.541)

                                                         D. Measuring entrepreneurship through start-up employment share -- quantile regression
Log start-up share of employment                0.161             0.119             0.158             0.195             0.247             0.240               0.185
in city at start of period                     (0.040)           (0.055)           (0.057)           (0.079)           (0.085)           (0.080)

                                                                           E. Panel D with IVQR using 500-mile band instruments
Log start-up share of employment                0.352             0.360             0.436             0.362             0.375             0.311               0.846
in city at start of period                     (0.119)           (0.217)           (0.198)           (0.232)           (0.192)           (0.212)

                                                                           F. Panel D with IVQR using 250-mile band instruments
Log start-up share of employment                0.245             0.271             0.430             0.338             0.287             0.183               0.963
in city at start of period                     (0.099)           (0.237)           (0.214)           (0.241)           (0.296)           (0.294)
Notes: See Table 7. Outcome variable is the conditional log employment growth for cities at various quantiles. Growth rates are estimated conditional on the Initial
employment controls, Census division fixed effects, and City growth covariates. The instruments are the log count of mines within 250 or 500 miles, 1900; a (0,1)
indicator variable for coal or iron ore being the top mineral product in the state, 1928; and the count of iron ore mines within 100 miles of the city, 1900. Instruments
are indicated by panel titles. Regressions are unweighted, report bootstrapped standard errors, and have 291 observations. Column 7 reports the p-value from a Wald
test where the null hypothesis in that the effects at the 15th and 85th quantiles are equal.
