                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DOES THE EFFECT OF POLLUTION ON INFANT MORTALITY DIFFER BETWEEN
     DEVELOPING AND DEVELOPED COUNTRIES? EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO
                                 CITY

                                        Eva O. Arceo-Gomez
                                            Rema Hanna
                                           Paulina Oliva

                                        Working Paper 18349
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18349


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




We thank Jon Hill and Katherine Kimble for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to David
Card, Janet Currie, Olivier Deschenes, Heather Royer, Heidi Williams, Catherine Wolfram and Lucas
Davis for helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at CEPR Development Meetings Pre-Conference,
the ARE Berkeley Seminar, the Environment and Human Capital Conference, and the UC Santa Barbara
Labor Lunch. We especially thank Marta Vicarelli for providing us with the temperature data. This
project was funded in part by the Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies and UCMexus.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Eva O. Arceo-Gomez, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed
Countries? Evidence from Mexico City
Eva O. Arceo-Gomez, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva
NBER Working Paper No. 18349
August 2012
JEL No. O1,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

Much of what we know about the marginal effect of pollution on infant mortality is derived from developed
country data. However, given the lower levels of air pollution in developed countries, these estimates
may not be externally valid to the developing country context if there is a nonlinear dose relationship
between pollution and mortality or if the costs of avoidance behavior differs considerably between
the two contexts. In this paper, we estimate the relationship between pollution and infant mortality
using data from Mexico. We find that an increase of 1 parts per billion in carbon monoxide (CO) over
the last week results in 0.0032 deaths per 100,000 births, while a 1 g/m3 increase in particulate matter
(PM10) results in 0.24 infant deaths per 100,000 births. Our estimates for PM10 tend to be similar
(or even smaller) than the U.S. estimates, while our findings on CO tend to be larger than those derived
from the U.S. context. We provide suggestive evidence that a non-linearity in the relationship between
CO and health explains this difference.


Eva O. Arceo-Gomez                                            Paulina Oliva
CIDE – División de Economía                                   Department of Economics
Carretera México-Toluca 3655, Lomas de Santa Fe               2127 North Hall
México, D.F. 01210                                            University of California
eva.arceo@cide.edu                                            Santa Barbara, CA 93106
                                                              and NBER
Rema Hanna                                                    oliva@econ.ucsb.edu
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Rema_Hanna@hks.harvard.edu
I. INTRODUCTION
Pollution is a grave concern in much of the developing world, with levels that are often orders of
magnitude higher than in developed countries. Using comparable data, Greenstone and Hanna
(2011) document air pollution levels that are five to seven times higher in India and China than
in the United States. This may translate into many lost lives: The OECD estimates that almost
1.5 million individuals die from exposure to particulates each year, many more than who die
from malaria or unclean water. With pollution levels predicted to rise, the OECD claims that this
figure may exceed 3.5 million people per year by 2050, with most of these deaths occurring in
rapidly industrializing countries, such as India and China (OECD Outlook, 2011).
        Much of what we know about the causal relationship between pollution and infant health
comes from developed country settings (for example, see Greenstone and Chay, 2003; Currie
and Neidell, 2005).1 However, there are two important reasons why these estimates may have
limited external validity to the developing country context. First, they may be limited if there is
a non-linear dose-response relationship between pollution and infant mortality. If we expect, for
example, that marginal changes in pollution are more damaging at higher levels of air pollution,
using developed country estimates would cause us to grossly underestimate the effect in many
developing countries. However, if there is an inflection point through which pollution needs to
fall beneath before health gains can be realized, using developed country estimates could
alternatively lead us to overestimate the effect. Similarly, due to a host of factors (i.e. disease
environments, access to health care), infant mortality rates are significantly higher in many
developing countries. As such, it is possible that pollution may exert a larger effect on infants if
they are already weakened by these other factors, or alternatively, it is possible that a marginal
increase in pollution may be negligible if these other factors supersede the pollution effect.
        Second, the effect of pollution on health may be highly dependent on behavior (for
example, see Neidell and Moretti, 2011; Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2009; Deschenes, Greenstone
and Shapiro, 2012). Avoidance behavior may be costlier in the developing world, given less
access to health care and lower quality housing stock, which would imply that a marginal
decrease in pollution may have a larger overall health impact in the developing world. However,

1
  Exceptions include Jayachandran (2006), who explores the impact of smoke from forest fires in Indonesia on
infant health; Greenstone and Hanna (2011) who estimate the effect of mandated catalytic converters on infant
mortality rates in India, but have a noisy estimate of the policy impact due to limited data; and Tanaka (2012), who
measures the effect of more stringent environmental regulation in China.


                                                                                                                  1
the effect could also be smaller if, for example, individuals have permanently adapted to bad
pollution by keeping infants indoors or wearing breathing masks regularly.2 Given these two
potential factors, applying estimates of the marginal effect of pollution that are derived from the
United States to developing countries may be highly misleading for policy. Furthermore, given
the theoretical ambiguity regarding the bias that these estimates would produce, it is difficult to
assess the direction in which we would be wrong.
        The shortage of this type of analysis for developing countries stems from two main
challenges.     First, data constraints tend to be more severe in developing countries.                       Quite
frequently, disaggregated data on infant births and deaths are not accurately recorded or
computerized. Even when the data are available, the validity of the data may be questionable as
there is substantial selection as to which births and deaths are registered. Moreover, there are
fewer stations systematically measuring pollution levels in developing countries, and so there is
potentially less variation in pollution to exploit.
        Second, there is a simultaneity problem in estimating the relationship between pollution
and health. This problem is typically addressed by one of two methods. First, one can use a
policy instrument to tease out exogenous variation in pollution. However, despite the fact that
environmental regulations in developing countries often look similar to those in the United
States, they are often riddled with implementation and enforcement problems that result in more
limited impacts, resulting in a weak first stage. For example, Greenstone and Hanna (2011)
experience this problem when using environmental regulations in India as an instrument for
pollution.3 The second methodology typically used is a fixed effects model that controls for
time-invariant differences across locations and overall trends (see, for example, Currie and
Neidell, 2005). This type of empirical model can be challenging when using data from the
developing world, as the measurement error that may arise from using sparser pollution data than
in the United States may be exacerbated by the inclusion of fixed effects.4
        In this study, we aim to address these problems and estimate the impact of pollution on
infant mortality in a developing country context. To do so, we construct weekly, municipality-
2
  As higher pollution is more visible, avoidance behaviors may be more likely since the costs of learning about
pollution levels may be lower.
3
  One exception is Tanaka (2012), which studies the effect of more stringent regulation in China on infant mortality.
4
  As Currie and Neidell (2005) discuss, measurement error has also been noted in the United States context as well.
Schlenker and Reed (2011) and Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011) find larger impacts of pollution on health when
using an instrumental variables strategy as compared to fixed effects methods using United States data, which both
claim is consistent with classical measurement error being exacerbated with the fixed effects methodology.

                                                                                                                   2
level measures of pollution and mortality for 48 municipalities across Mexico City between the
years 1997 to 2006. Mexico City is a highly relevant context in which to study this relationship.
On average, it experiences both the high levels of pollution and mortality that are common in
many developing countries. However, given the high variance in pollution levels, the range of
pollution also encompasses a range similar to that observed in the United States. These two facts
will allow us to estimate the marginal effect of pollution at a range that is typical for developing
countries, and then to compare this estimate to the marginal effect at the ranges used in the
previous estimates for the United States.
        We first employ a fixed effects technique, controlling for time-invariant characteristics of
municipalities, week fixed effects, and municipality-specific year trends. Using this method, we
find no impact of pollution on mortality. However, despite access to very high quality pollution
measures, station coverage is sparse:           depending on the pollutant and year, our pollution
measures are derived from between 10 to 26 stations. Given that fixed effects models are
particularly sensitive to classical measurement error, our estimates may be severely biased
downward.
        Instead, we exploit the meteorological phenomenon of thermal inversions. An inversion
occurs when a mass of hot air gets caught above a mass of cold air, trapping pollutants.
Conditional on temperature, inversions themselves do not represent a health risk per se other
than the accumulation of pollutants. As such, we can use the number of inversions in a given
week to instrument for pollution levels that week. We find that each additional inversion leads
to a 3.5 percent increase in particulate matter measuring 10µm or less (PM10) and a 5.4 percent
increase in carbon monoxide (CO), conditional on municipality fixed effects, municipality-
specific time trends, polynomials in temperature and weather controls.
        With the instrumental variables strategy, we find robust evidence of pollution on infant
mortality. Our estimates imply that 1 µg/m3 increase in 24-hour PM10 results in 0.24 infant
deaths per 100,000 births. Similarly, 1 ppb increase in the 8-hour maximum for CO results in
0.0032 per 100,000 births.5 We find no significant effect on neonatal deaths (children 28 days
and younger). As a test of the causal pathway, we then separate deaths into those that are likely
to be pollution related (i.e. respiratory and cardiovascular disease) versus those that are less


5
  As we illustrate below, these results are robust to different definitions of mortality, different controls for
seasonality, the inclusion of outliers and different weather and temperature controls.

                                                                                                              3
likely to be pollution related (i.e. digestive, congenital, accidents, homicides, etc.). We find
statistically and policy significant effects of pollution on both neonatal and infant deaths from
respiratory and cardiovascular disease. As we would expect if we had indeed isolated the effect
of pollution from other factors (i.e. income, health preferences), we find no effect of pollution on
deaths from other causes.
         Finally, we compare our estimates to those derived in the United States setting.
Specifically, we compare our estimates to Currie and Neidell (2005) [CN], Knittel, Miller, and
Sanders (2011) [KMS], Chay and Greenstone (2003) [CG], and Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder
(2009) [CNS].6 We find larger marginal effects of CO on infant mortality than CN and CNS;
we also find larger point estimates that KMS, but they do not observe a significant effect of CO
on infant mortality. We provide suggestive evidence that this is driven by non-linearities in the
effect of CO: constraining the Mexico City pollution data to be within the range of CO values
observed in the United States results in estimates that are roughly the same magnitude as CN.
For PM10, our results are near identical to CG’s results, despite the fact that the mean level of
pollution in their setting is roughly half of that in Mexico City. This is consistent with the fact
that we do not observe a non-linear effect for PM10 within our sample.7
         The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we describe our empirical methods and
data, while we provide our findings in Section III. Section IV provides a discussion of our
estimates with those from the United States context. Section V concludes.


II. EMPIRICAL METHOD, DATA, AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
In this section, we first discuss some of the existing empirical methods for estimating the
relationship between air pollution and infant mortality. We then detail our empirical strategy in
Section II.B. Finally, we describe the data that we collected for this project.


II.A. Existing Empirical Methodologies
Our objective is to estimate the relationship between pollution (                   ) in a municipality (m) in a
given week (w) and mortality per 100,000 live births (                 ), or the parameter       :


6
  Note that other papers in the US context explore the effect of pollution on child and infant health (for example, see
Lleras-Muney, 2010). We only include papers that study comparable infant mortality outcomes.
7
  Although as we discuss more in depth below, we are highly cautious about this result because we have problems of
power in our first stage for PM10. Thus, we only take this evidence as very suggestive.

                                                                                                                     4
                               Equation 1:
where       captures all unobserved determinants of mortality. There are many reasons to believe
the identification assumption does not hold in this case. For example, areas with low levels of
pollution may be richer, and thus have lower levels of mortality regardless of pollution. One
method to solve the endogeneity problem would be to estimate a fixed effects model:
                         Equation 2:
where       is a set of municipality fixed effects that control for permanent differences across
municipalities, such as time-invariant socioeconomic characteristics. Similarly,                is a set of
week fixed effects, which controls for common factors (e.g. city-wide economic shocks) in a
given week that could affect both pollution levels and infant mortality. The fixed effects model
represents a substantial improvement over the standard cross-sectional regression. However, two
concerns remain. First,        may still be subject to bias if there are unobservable, time-varying
differences across municipalities.       One way to account for this is to include municipality-
specific, linear time trends. However, this may not capture sharp or non-monotonic changes in
omitted pollution and infant mortality determinants, such as road improvements that could result
in fewer traffic jams and faster access for emergency vehicles, or similarly, protests and
demonstrations that results in disrupted travel patterns. Second, classical measurement error in
the pollution variable will bias       downwards. Fixed effects estimators exacerbate measurement
error, biasing     further towards zero. As compared to developed country settings, this may be
particularly problematic in developing countries, where pollution-monitoring stations are sparse:
for example, as we discuss below, we exploit data from 10 to 26 stations.


II.B. Exploiting Thermal Inversions in an Instrumental Variables Framework
We consider an instrumental variables strategy, which will likely minimize bias from both
endogeneity and classical measurement error.              Specifically, we exploit a meteorological
phenomenon: the existence of thermal inversions. Inversions are a common occurrence in many
cities around the world, ranging from Mumbai, Los Angeles, San Paulo, Salt Lake City,
Santiago, Vancouver, Prague, etc.8 Air temperature in the troposphere usually falls with altitude
at about 6.5 degrees Celsius per 1,000 meters. However, sometimes there is a mass of hot air on

8
 The great smog of 1952 in the UK was caused by an inversion episode and was blamed for upwards of 12,000
deaths (Bell and Davis, 2001). This incident sparked greater interest in environmental regulation in the UK.

                                                                                                          5
top of a mass of cold air; this is called a thermal inversion. There are typically three reasons why
this can occur: First, radiation inversions are generated in clear nights when the ground and the
air in touch with the ground are cooled faster than higher air layers. The conditions for radiation
inversions are more frequent in the winter: under clear conditions, the earth's infrared emissions
warm the higher layers of air. The cold ground temperatures cool causing the air that is close to
the ground to remain at a lower temperature than the air above. Second, inversions by subsidence
occur from vertical air movements when a layer of cold air descends between a layer of hot air.
Third, inversions can also be produced when layers of air at different temperatures move
horizontally and a layer of cold air develops below a layer of hot air (Jacobson, 2002).
        The thermal inversion does not represent a health risk in itself, but when it occurs in
conjunction with high levels of vehicle and industrial emissions, it may result in the temporary
accumulation of pollutants.9 Specifically, when emissions are released in the atmosphere, they
rise and can get trapped in the inversion (see Figure 1). As the sun energy equates the
temperatures of the cold and hot air masses, the "lid" effect disappears (the inversion “pops”),
and the pollutants rise again. Inversions may have substantial effects on the concentration levels
of certain types of pollutants, particularly primary pollutants (CO, particulate matter, NO, NOx,
and SOx, VOC) that may be released in the morning rush hours when the inversions typically
occur (Jacobson, 2002). Out of the primary pollutants, we would, therefore, expect the largest
effects for pollutants in which vehicles comprise a large share of their emissions. For example,
in Mexico City, 98 percent of CO emissions came from vehicles in 1998, and therefore, we
expect that a large share is released in the morning commute hours. In contrast, we may expect
weaker effects for pollutants like particulate matter, in which 36 percent is released by vehicles,
or SO2, in which only 21 percent is.
        Inversions may have muted effects on secondary pollutants (O3, NO2, sulfuric acid),
which require time to mix from the primary pollutants, and therefore, may only appear later in
the day when it is likely that the inversions have already “popped” (Jacobson, 2002). Moreover,
inversions may inhibit the formation of these pollutants in other ways. For example, in the
particular case of O3, given that the chemical reactions that result in O3 require warmth and



9
 See for example, Secretaría del Medio Ambiente del Distrito Federal, "Informe Climatológico Ambiental del Valle
de México," 2005.

                                                                                                              6
sunlight, the thick layers of pollution associated with thermal inversions may interfere with O3
formation.10
         We can, therefore, formally test whether inversions increase the concentrations of
different types of pollutants (Equation 3) and, if so, we can use the number of thermal inversions
in a given week (           to instrument for pollution in Equation 4:
             Equation 3:                                 ∑             ℎ

              Equation 4:                                 ∑             ℎ

Note that         varies at the week level, and therefore, week fixed effects are no longer identified
and errors may also be correlated within weeks.11 We therefore control for municipality-specific
week trends (w) and allow for errors to be clustered at the week level.                       We also include for
municipality fixed effects (           to control for time-invariant characteristics across municipalities,
and year fixed effects (         to account for city-wide year trends, such as recessions.12
         Importantly, we include a flexible set of controls for temperature and weather conditions
(ℎ           ) that includes a fourth polynomial in mean temperature, a third degree polynomial in
minimum and maximum temperatures during the week, a second degree polynomial in
precipitation, cloud cover and humidity measures. Controlling for temperature is important for
the exclusion restriction to hold, since inversions have a clear seasonal pattern and temperature
may independently affect infant mortality (Deschenes and Greenstone, 2011).13 Figure 2, Panel
A shows the average number of thermal inversions per week for each month of the year (bars), as
well as the average temperatures for each month of the year (spikes) measured by the right axis.
As expected, given the conditions necessary for a radiation inversion, a large share of the
inversions occurs in the winter (November-March). However, inversions also occur in months
with relatively high temperatures (April, May and October), which will allows us to disentangle
the effects of temperature on infant mortality from that of air pollution.

10
   Ozone Formation, EPA, http://www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/gooduphigh/bad.html#6
11
   Note that as we exploit week-to-week variation within municipalities in this setting, sorting across different
municipalities due to differential pollution should not be a large concern. Moreover, Hanna and Oliva (2011) show
that sorting is nonetheless not a large concern within Mexico City as very few households move across census
blocks, which are an even smaller geographic unit than municipalities.
12
   As we illustrate below, our results are robust to different configurations of the control variables, such as omitting
controls for minimum and maximum temperatures during the week, omitting municipality-specific time trends and
including seasonal effects.
13
   In addition, including precipitation, cloud cover and humidity is also essential as it is possible that an inversion
can lead to a thunderstorm if moisture is trapped in the inversion.

                                                                                                                      7
            Note three additional specification details. First, all regressions are clustered at the week
level, which is the level of variation of our instrument. However, our estimates are robust to
alternative modeling assumptions for the error term; for example, our reduced form results
remain unchanged if we employ Conley standard errors to adjust for geospatial correlations (see
Appendix Table 1).               Second, all regressions are weighed by the number of births in the
respective cohort (Appendix 1 also shows that the results are not sensitive to the weights). Third,
we can also try to disentangle the effects of different pollutants on infant health by taking
advantage of the fact that the inversion effect may vary based on the geographical features of a
location, such as its altitude. Specifically, this will allow us to create multiple instruments for
the pollution variables.
            Finally, in addition to estimating the marginal effect of a change in average pollution, we
explore whether there is a non-linear dose-response relationship between pollution and infant
mortality. We estimate our IV model using a linear spline in pollution with a single node that
roughly corresponds to the range in each pollutant in Currie and Neidell (2005). In particular,
we use a cutoff of one standard deviation above the mean pollutant value in Currie and Neidell
(2005) to generate the splines.14 This allows us to assess whether our results differ from
previous studies in the United States due to non-linearities in the health-mortality relationship.


II.C. Data
We compiled a comprehensive dataset on pollution measures, weather conditions, and mortality
for Mexico City for the years 1997-2006. Each data source is described in detail below.


Neonatal and Infant Mortality
We constructed the mortality measures from data that we obtained for the Mexico City
Metropolitan Area (MCMA) from the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud Pública). We
utilize two sources. First, we compiled data from death certificates, including information on
day of death, gender of the child, municipality of residence, age of the child at death, and cause
of death.         Second, to compute mortality rates, we additionally gained access to the birth
certificate registry, which contains information on date of birth and municipality of residence.



14
     We additionally test the robustness of the results to different definitions of the splines.

                                                                                                       8
        We then computed weekly, municipality-level neonatal mortality rates (those that are 28
days of age and younger) and infant mortality rates (those that are one year old and younger).
To do so, for each week-municipality observation, we calculate the number of births in the last
28 days and in the last year.15 Mortality rates are then calculated by dividing the total number of
deaths in each week-municipality by the total number of live births in the corresponding age
group and then multiplying by 100,000. Thus, our coefficients can be interpreted as the number
of deaths in a week per 100,000 children born alive in the respective age cohort.


Pollution
Pollution data are notoriously absent in many developing countries. When available, they are
often only cross-sectional, or of mixed quality. In this paper, we are able to take advantage of a
relatively rich, panel dataset that is available for Mexico City, namely the Automatic Network of
Atmospheric Monitoring (RAMA). Measures are available for particulate matter under 10
micrometers (PM10), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO) and ozone (O3). These data
are considered to be of high quality, and, as Davis (2008) points out, “[t]hese measures are
widely used in scientific publications...” However, it is important to note that they are drawn
from relatively few stations: PM10 is available for 10 stations from 1997 to 1999, and from 16
stations starting in 2000, SO2 is drawn from 26 stations, CO is drawn from 24 stations and O3 is
drawn from 21 stations.
        From these data, we construct weekly measures of pollution for each of the 56
municipalities in Mexico City using the inverse of the distance to nearby stations as weights (see
Currie and Neidell (2005) for description of the methodology). Out of the 56 municipalities in
Mexico City for which we have infant mortality data, we include the 48 that are within 15
kilometers of a station. There is a tradeoff between constraining the sample to municipalities
that are even closer to at least one station for greater precision of the pollution measure and
increasing the distance cutoff to include more municipalities. As shown in Appendix Table 2,
our results are robust to different definitions of this cutoff.
        We use the hourly measures of pollution to calculate the maximum daily 8-hour average
for CO and average this over the week, the maximum daily 24-hour average for PM10 and


15
   Since 0.03 percent of the births certificates have missing month and day of birth, we adjust weekly estimates of
births by dividing un-dated births equally among all weeks of the year.

                                                                                                                 9
average this over the week, and then weekly averages for SO2 and for O3.16 All of these daily
measures are then averaged over the week.


Thermal Inversions
Thermal inversions are recorded by the Meteorological Unit of the local Ministry of
Environment. They conduct screenings almost every day, which consist of measuring hourly
temperatures at different altitudes using an aerostatic balloon.17 The existence of an inversion is
determined upon finding non-monotonic temperature gradients. Records are kept on the time
and temperature of the inversion rupture, so that one can also compute the number of hours an
inversion lasted, as well as the thickness of its layer. We aggregate the data to the weekly level
by computing the number of thermal inversions in a given week. To test non-linear effects of
pollution on infant mortality, we can also create indicator variables for 1, 2-3 and 4-7 thermal
inversions per week.


Temperature and Weather
We obtained temperature and weather variables as additional controls in our specification.
Hourly temperature measures are available from 24 stations in the RAMA network, and daily
level measures of humidity, precipitation and cloud measures are available daily from 219 local
weather stations. Using the same methodology to compute weekly, municipality-level measures
of pollution, we use this information to compute the temperature and weather controls.


II.D. Data Description
We describe the data in Table 1. In Panel A and B, we provide information on neonatal
mortality rates (for children that are 28 days and younger) and infant mortality rates (those that
are one year and younger) respectively. In addition to the means for the weekly measures used
in the regression analysis (Column (1)), we additionally include the mean across municipalities
in a given year per 100,000 births for ease of comparison with the U.S. figures (Column (4)).18

16
   We use these measures for ease of comparison with Currie and Neidell (2005) and Knittel et al. (2011). However,
our results are robust to alternative measures of pollution.
17
   Of the 3,652 days within our sample period, we have data on whether an inversion occurred for 95 percent of
these days. We drop the weeks in which we are missing inversion data.
18
   Note that the weekly measure for infant deaths in Column 1 appears smaller than that of neonatal mortality,
despite the fact that the later also includes neonatal deaths. The difference in magnitudes is mainly due to scaling:

                                                                                                                  10
Over the period of study, yearly mortality rates are more than double in Mexico City than in the
United States: The neonatal mortality rate is 1183, while the U.S. rate is 460. Similarly, the
infant mortality rate in Mexico City was 1986, while the comparable US figures was 698.
        Note that, we also provide mortality estimates, by cause of death. We can test whether
the effect of pollution on mortality is driven by deaths that we expect to be related to pollution.
We define this comparison in two ways. First, we can compare all internal deaths with all
external deaths (i.e., accident, homicides). This is a very strict definition, in that it assumes that
pollution affects all internal deaths, including for example those from digestive diseases, which
may or may not be affected by pollution. Moreover, there are relatively fewer deaths from
external sources (61.37 per 100,000), with relatively less variation, and so we may not capture an
effect with the same sample size due to power concerns. Therefore, we also compare diseases
that are more likely to be directly attributed to pollution (i.e., respiratory and cardiovascular
disease) versus those that are less likely to be directly attributed to pollution (digestive,
congenital, accidents, homicides, etc.).
         In Panel C, we provide means for particulate matter of 10µm or less (PM10), carbon
monoxide (CO), ozone (O3), and sulfur dioxide (SO2), as well as summary information on
inversions.19 Despite falling pollution levels in Mexico City, the average is still quite high. For
example, the mean level of PM10 is about 67µm as compared to 39.45µm observed in California,
as documented by Currie and Neidell (2005). Inversions are fairly frequent: on average, there
are 1.7 inversions in a municipality-week. Conditional on an inversion occurring that week,
there is an average of 2.77 inversions in a municipality-week.


III. RESULTS
III.A. Correlations in Pollution and Health
Before we turn to the quasi-experimental approaches, we first describe the evolution of pollution
and infant mortality over time. In Figure 3, we graph average weekly neonatal (Panel A) and
infant mortality rates (Panel B) against each of the four air pollutants over time. Mexico City has

neonatal mortality rates are computed by dividing the number of deaths occurred in a single week within the 28 day
cohort by the number of live births corresponding to that cohort. Hence, the denominator for the neonatal mortality
figure is necessarily smaller than the denominator for the infant mortality figure. Column 4 shows mortality rates on
a yearly basis. This column is computed by multiplying Column 1 by 4 (or 52/13) in the case of neonatal mortality
and by 12 in the case of infant mortality.
19
   Given the presence of outliers in the data, we trim the top and bottom 1 percent of values. The primary results
remain largely unchanged if we do not trim the outliers as shown in Columns 5 and 6 of Appendix Table 4.

                                                                                                                  11
been successful in reducing pollution city-wide over the 1997 to 2006 time period, with all four
air pollutants falling sharply over this period (Molina and Molina, 2002).         As the figures
illustrate, mortality rates are also falling and, in some cases, the rates closely track pollution
changes.
       Table 2 quantifies these patterns. Specifically, we estimate Equation 1 for neonatal
mortality (Column (1)) and infant mortality (Column (2)).      As the figure illustrates, we find a
large, significant, positive correlation, which is robust to the inclusion of flexible controls for
temperature and weather variables (Columns (3) and (4)). The magnitudes are fairly large: for
example, as shown in Column 4, a one µg/m3 increase in PM10 (1.5 percent increase) is
associated with 0.131 more infant deaths per 100,000 births per week, a one ppb (about 0.037
percent increase) in CO is linked to 0.003 more deaths, and a one ppb increase in O3 (a 3 percent
increase) is associated with 0.171 more deaths.


III.B. First Stage Estimates
We begin by examining the relationship between the occurrence of an inversion and each of the
four pollutants (PM10, CO, O3, and SO2), which comprises the first stage of our instrumental
variables strategy. In Figure 4, we graph the average pollutant level by number of inversions.
As the figure illustrates, we observe a strong, and fairly linear, relationship between the number
of inversions the last week and PM10 and CO levels. In contrast, there does not appear to be an
obvious relationship between the number of inversions and either O3 or SO2.
       We provide the corresponding regression analysis in Table 3. Specifically, we present
coefficient estimates from Equation 3. As suggested by the figure, inversions have a large and
significant effect on PM10 and CO. One additional inversion in the last week results in a 2
µg/m3, or 3.4 percent, increase in PM10 (Column 1). Similarly, one additional inversion results
in a 153 ppb, or 5.6 percent, increase in CO (Column 2). The effects on PM10 and CO are both
significant at the 1 percent level. There are no significant effects of thermal inversions on SO2
and O3 (Columns 3 and 4). These overall findings are consistent with the theoretical predictions
discussed in Section II.


III.C. Causal Estimates of Pollution on Infant Mortality and Health



                                                                                                12
In Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, we provide the coefficient estimates of the effect of each
pollutant on neonatal and infant mortality, respectively, from estimating Equation 2 (the fixed
effects model). Note that we additionally include municipality-specific week trends in this
model.20 In Columns (3) and (4), we provide our IV estimates for the individual effects of PM10
and CO on mortality; here, we report the coefficient estimates from Equation 4.21 As there is no
first stage result for SO2 or O3, we do not estimate an IV estimate for these pollutants.
         Using a fixed effects strategy, we find no observable effects of pollution on mortality
(Columns (1) and (2)). As compared to the cross-sectional analysis with controls that is shown
in Columns (3) and (4) in Table 2, the fixed effects estimates, for the most part, tend to be small
in magnitude and much less precisely estimated. This is consistent with classical measurement
error.
         Instead, we turn to our instrumental variables strategy. Here, we find large effects of
pollution on infant mortality, but smaller and non-significant effects on neonatal mortality. In
the case of infant mortality, a one µg/m3 increase in PM10 over the week leads to 0.23 deaths per
100,000 births, while a one ppb increase in CO leads to 0.032 deaths.22 This implies that a 1
percent increase in PM10 over a year leads to a 0.42 percent increase in infant mortality, while a 1
percent increase in CO results in a 0.23 percent increase. These findings are consistent with the
fact that death by respiratory diseases, which are likely affected by pollution exposure, are higher
share of total deaths for infants than for those under 28 days, and may reflect underlying
differences in ambient air exposure (i.e. infants may be more likely to be taken outside during the
day than newborns).
         One concern is that models that estimate the effect of pollution on infant death within a
short timeframe, such a week, overstate the effect. This bias would occur if pollution simply
accelerates infant deaths by a short time period rather than causing additional deaths


20
   As Appendix Table 3A shows, the results do not qualitatively change if we drop the municipality week trends
(Columns (1) and (2)), include fewer temperature controls (Columns (3) and (4)), or drop the week fixed effects so
that the estimate is more comparable to Currie and Neidell (2005) (Columns (5) and (6)).
21
   Appendix Table 3B explores the robustness of the IV estimates to different control variables. As shown in
Columns (1) and (2), the effects on neonatal and infant mortality are qualitatively similarly if we do not include the
municipality-week trends, which suggest the inversions are for the most part uncorrelated with the trends in
mortality that are unrelated to pollution. Relaxing the temperature controls (Columns (3) and (4)) leads to larger
estimates for infant mortality, but the effects are still not significant for neonatal mortality. Including a more
flexible time trend (Columns (5) and (6)) also results in qualitatively similar results.
22
   Note that Table 4 reports effects of CO in terms of neonatal/infant deaths associated with one part per billion,
which corresponds to an increase in CO concentration of 0.037 percent.

                                                                                                                   13
(“harvesting”). We do not find evidence of this. We can see this in two ways. First, the effect
on neonatal deaths is much smaller in magnitude than infant deaths. Due to the scaling, we need
to multiply the infant mortality estimates to compare the neonatal and infant mortality estimates.
When doing this, it becomes apparent that the effects on neonatal mortality are not only
insignificant, but also 50 percent smaller in magnitude. The fact that we find smaller effects of
air pollution on children below the age of 28 days suggests that air pollution is not accelerating
death of already vulnerable children, but is causing death of children with otherwise long life
expectancies. Second, in Appendix Table 4A and 4B, we present the results of our analysis
when we aggregate the data to the month level rather than at the week level. If harvesting is an
issue of concern with our estimates, we would expect smaller effects when using data aggregated
at the month level. However, this is not the case.23
        It is important to note that our IV results are very robust to changes in the model
specification, providing a high level of confidence in this strategy. In Appendix Table 5, we first
test whether our results are driven by changes in the denominator of the left hand side variable,
i.e., the number of births. This would be the case if pollution shocks have an impact in the
number of live births in the current week, which are included in the denominator. We perform
this check by estimating our IV model with the log of deaths as a dependent variable and the log
of births as an additional control variable. The results of this specification, reported in Columns
(1) and (2), can be compared with our main results divided by the average mortality rate. We
find that the results of the log specification for infant mortality are slightly smaller, but not
significantly different than our main estimates, and they are still significant at the 10 percent
level (the effects on neonatal remains insignificant across both models). Thus, it is unlikely that
the results are driven by changes in births.24
        Second, we explore whether the seasonality in thermal inversions is driving our results.
This could be the case if our temperature and weather variables are not fully controlling for
climatic differences across seasons, or if the flu or other epidemics have similar timing with

23
   To make the magnitudes of infant mortality coefficients comparable across Appendix Table 4B and our main
results (Table 4), it is useful to compute the yearly mortality effects associated with both (i.e., multiplying
coefficients in Table 4 (Column 2) by 52 and the coefficients in Appendix Table 4B (Column 2) by 12). The
coefficients from monthly aggregated data appear about three times as large as the coefficients from weekly
aggregated data. Note, however, that only the coefficients from the CO IV regression are reliable since the first
stage for PM10 is lost when aggregating data at such a coarse level (See Appendix Table 4A).
24
   Note that in Columns (3) and (4) of Appendix Table 5, we also show the estimates had we not dropped the top and
bottom 1 percent of values in pollution and show that the results are not sensitive to their inclusion.

                                                                                                               14
thermal inversions, but are not fully controlled for by our temperature and weather variables.
We do this in several ways. First, we can control for mortality in the second largest city of
Mexico, Guadalajara, which shares similar weather patterns as Mexico City, but does not
experience inversions. As Appendix Figure 1 illustrates, Guadalajara also experience seasonal
patterns in mortality, albeit not as pronounced as in Mexico City. Including the mortality rate in
Guadalajara as a control (Columns (1) and (2) of Appendix Table 6A) does not qualitatively
affect the results; the effect of CO, if anything, actually increases when we control for the
mortality rate in Guadalajara. Second, we can directly include season fixed effects (Columns (3)
and (4) of Appendix Table 6A). The magnitude of the results remains qualitatively unchanged.
However, note that if we include both season and year fixed effects, the standard errors increase
substantially even though the magnitude of the estimates remains unchanged (Columns (4) and
(5)). Third, we can confirm whether the effect of pollution is similar across seasons, particularly
whether it differs across the winter and summer months. Appendix Table 6B shows these
results.25 Note that we observe a significant first stage for both the summer and winter months.26
On net, the effects on infant mortality do not appear to be significantly different across the winter
and summer months.
        Next, in Table 5, we replicate the IV analysis for mortality that results from different
causes. This can be viewed as a placebo test: If we find that our pollution measure is resulting
in deaths that are unlikely to be related to pollution, we would conclude that our instrument
might be directly linked to unobserved socio-demographic determinants of mortality. We can
define pollutant-related deaths in two ways. First, we compare deaths from all types of internal
sources and those from purely external sources. We find no observable effect on either internal
or external effects for neonatal (Columns 1 and 2). The effect of pollution on infant mortality
appears to be driven by internal deaths (Column 6); there is no observable effect on external
deaths for infants. However, mortality from external sources is rare compared to that from
internal sources, meaning it would be more difficult to detect an effect on external deaths if there
indeed is one.      Moreover, it is possible that external deaths are simply accidental and/or
immediate, and thus are altogether uncorrelated with income or health care quality.


25
   For completeness, we show two possible definitions of seasons. Specifically, we can define summer from week
13 to week 42 (Columns 1 and 2) or from week 14 to 43 (Columns 3 and 4). The results are qualitatively similar
across the two definitions.
26
   The Angrist-Pischke F-statistics are above the Stock-Yogo 10 percent threshold for weak instruments.

                                                                                                           15
       Therefore, we can also classify deaths by those that are more likely to be attributed to
pollution (i.e., respiratory and cardiovascular disease) versus those from sources that are less
likely (digestive, congenital, accidents, homicides, etc.). This is not a perfect separation, as
children who are weakened by high pollution may be more likely to pass away from other
sources (such as digestive disorders) and causes of death may be imperfectly diagnosed.
However, we should still expect the effect on respiratory diseases to be relatively large if
pollution is driving much of the effect, and not other socio-demographic characteristics. Our
results suggest that most of the deaths related to pollution are linked to respiratory and
cardiovascular causes: We find no effect on non-respiratory deaths for either neonatal (Column
3) or infant (Column 7) deaths.       Importantly, if we focus on deaths from respiratory and
cardiovascular disease, we find large effects of pollution on both infant (Column 8) and neonatal
(Column 4) deaths. The fact that we find that the effect of pollution on mortality is driven
mainly by respiratory causes implies that our instrument is capturing exogenous variation in
pollution, and not just trends in socioeconomic characteristics.
       Finally, in all the regressions above, the effect for any individual pollutant may be
capturing its own effect, as well as the effect of other pollutants. This is particularly problematic
given that we have used one main instrument to identify the effect of each pollutant.
Alternatively, we can include all pollutants in the same specification, so that the estimated effect
of each pollutant is purged of potential bias from the others. This results in multiple endogenous
variables, and therefore, we need to identify multiple instruments in order to estimate the causal
effect of each pollutant, conditional on one another.
       We exploit the fact that the effect of the inversions on pollution may differ based on the
altitude of the municipality and the thickness of the inversion, and create three instruments: the
number of inversions, the number of inversions interacted with altitude, and the thickness of
inversion interacted with altitude. As Appendix Table 7 illustrates, PM10 concentrations are
lower at higher altitudes, presumably because higher areas are likely to be above the thermal
inversion layer. However, altitude does not seem to matter as much for CO concentrations,
unless the thermal inversion layer is thick. Thickness of the thermal inversion induces higher
concentrations of CO at higher altitudes. The Angrist-Pischke F-statistic for both estimated
equations is above the Stock-Yogo 10 percent critical value for single endogenous regressors,



                                                                                                  16
which suggests that our instrument combination induces at least some independent variation in
both pollutants.
         The IV estimates are presented in Table 6. We do not observe a significant effect of
either pollutant on neonatal mortality, and the two pollutant variables are jointly insignificant
Column (1)).         While each pollutant is not an individually significant predictor for infant
mortality, the two pollutants are jointly significant in predicting infant mortality at the 10 percent
level (Column (2)).27 In terms of magnitude, we find that given the overall decline in pollution
in Mexico City from 1997 to 2006 (weighted by births), our estimates would predict a change in
the infant mortality rate that is due to pollution of 277 births per 100,000 (Columns (3) and (4)).


III.D. Non-linearity in Pollution
One of the key ways in which the relationship between pollution on mortality may differ when
estimated in data from developed and developing countries is that the relationship may be non-
linear and the range of observed values may not be the same in the two settings. We thus test for
this. Using information on the mean and variance from Currie and Neidell (2005), we define a
spline at one standard deviation above their mean (39.45 µg/m3 for PM10, and 1998 ppb for
CO).28 Therefore, we are separately estimating the effect of pollution within and above the
approximate range of values that they observe within their data.
         Creating the splines results in two endogenous variables per regression. Therefore, we
use indicator variables denoting 1, 2-3, and 4-7 thermal inversions per week as our instrument
set. Results of these estimations are presented in Table 7.29

27
   The fact that each individual coefficient is not individually significant is not surprising; pollutants tend to be
highly correlated and thus in this case, this method would yield very imprecise estimates of each individual
pollutant. We conducted an alternative method of testing for the joint effect of both pollutants. This method
chooses the linear combination of the two pollutants that maximizes their joint variance, and, therefore, yields a
single variable that captures the maximum amount of information from the two pollutants. We then use thermal
inversion as an instrument for the pollution index. This method has a large benefit in that it utilizes more
information from the data, but the drawback is that the index assumes a very specific functional form for the
relationship between the pollution variables. Using this method, we find that a one standard deviation of the
pollutant index leads to a 7.3 percent increase in the infant mortality rate. Given that pollution, measured by our
index, fell by roughly two standard deviations during the period of analysis in Mexico City, we calculate that 731.5
infant lives per year were saved by the regulatory efforts responsible for PM10 and CO reductions. Importantly,
while each coefficient is not individually significant, the total deaths predicted by the estimates from the multivariate
model is approximately the same (-198.5 – 532.9= -731.4) as the value predicted from the index despite the fact that
both models exploit different variation in pollution.
28
   For PM10, 35 percent of the observations fall below this threshold. For CO, 73 percent do so.
29
   We also tried instrumenting the pollution spline with a broader set of instruments that included the interactions
between the indicator variables and thermal inversion intensifiers such as altitude and thickness. Results were

                                                                                                                      17
        We are unable to identify non-linearities in PM10 (Panel A). However, this should be
viewed with caution: the Angrist-Pischke F-statistics of the first stages for each of the two PM10
spline variables fall below the Stock-Yogo critical value for a single endogenous regressor. With
that caveat in mind, our results suggest little difference in the marginal effect of PM10 above and
below the 54.20 µg/m3 threshold on infant mortality (Column 2).30
        We find suggestive evidence of non-linearities in the CO effect (Table 7, Panel B).
Importantly, the Angrist-Pischke F-statistics suggest we can separately identify variation in CO
above and beyond the 3167 ppb threshold by breaking thermal inversions into indicator variables
denoting 1, 2-3 and 4-7 inversions per week. We then find that the marginal effect of CO is
close to zero (lower than 0.0001) when CO concentrations are below 3,167 ppb, and 0.0082
when concentrations are above this threshold (significant at the 10 percent level). However, we
cannot reject that the coefficients are the same at conventional levels (the p-value for the test of
equality of the slopes is 0.263).


IV. DISCUSSION
One of the main goals of this paper is to better understand whether pollution estimates derived
from the United States context are externally valid to the developing world. If we believe that
there is a non-linearity in the relationship between pollution and infant mortality, or that the costs
of avoidance behaviors differs between the two settings then estimates derived from U.S. settings
may not be valid in conducting cost-benefit analysis of environmental regulations in the
developing world. As we discussed earlier, the direction of the bias is ambiguous, and therefore,
it is hard to benchmark whether we would be over- or under- estimating the benefits.
        Thus, we compare our estimates to those from Currie and Neidell (2005) (CN), Currie,
Neidell, and Schmieder (2009) (CNS), Chay and Greenstone (2003) (CG), and Knittel, Miller
and Sanders (2011) (KMS) in Table 8. Panel A reports our estimates, while Panel B provides the
comparable results for the papers in the United States setting.                For ease of interpretation, we
provide the mean level of infant mortality (Column (1)), the mean value of each pollutant

comparable, and Angrist-Pischke F-Statistics for the first stage equations were comparable. In addition, we explored
modeling non-linearities with a quadratic function. This functional form assumption resulted in small and non-
significant coefficients.
30
   Our results are robust to different definitions of the spline. For example, the marginal effect of CO above 1.5
standard deviations from the Currie and Neidell (2005) mean is 0.0105 and significant at the 10 percent level. The
marginal effect below this threshold is 0.0008 and non-significant. PM10 results using the 1.5 standard deviation
threshold are very similar in magnitude and significance to results using the 1 standard deviation threshold.

                                                                                                                 18
(Columns (2) and (5)), the point estimates (Columns (3) and (6)), and the elasticity (Columns (4)
and (7)). Note several features regarding the table. First, we use the estimates from the single
pollutant models because our subset of pollutants differs from these papers. Even though the
models are not fully comparable, we replicate this table using the multiple pollutant models in
Appendix Table 8 for completeness. Second, note that CG study total suspended particulates
(TSP) and not PM10. For comparability to our estimates, we follow KMS and convert the TSP
estimates using the following formula: PM10 = 0.55 TSP. Third, CG and KMS study internal
deaths rather than all deaths, so we additionally report the estimates for internal deaths for our
sample. Finally, we put all estimates at the year level for ease of comparison.
       We find that a 1 ppm increase of CO over a year leads to 166.4 infant deaths per 100,000
births (Panel A). This implies that a 1 percent increase in CO over the year leads to a 0.23
percent increase in the infant mortality rate. We find a much larger effect on the infant mortality
rate than either CN, CNS, or KMS (Column 3). The estimated elasticity using the Mexico City
data is larger than CN, who find an elasticity of 0.084, or CNS, who find an elasticity of 0.04.
Our estimates are larger, but not qualitatively different than KMS (0.146); however, it is
important to note that the KMS cannot statistically distinguish their estimate from zero. Overall,
while we are cautious about our non-linear estimates, they do suggest that the difference in our
estimates with CN may be driven by non-linearities in CO. For values of pollution within the
range of CN, we find point estimates that are closer to their overall estimates; specifically, we
find that a 1 ppm increase in CO per year leads to 5.2 deaths per 100,000 births.
       While we again point out that we are cautious about our non-linear estimation, they
suggest that the effect of particulates is linear. Thus, we expect that our estimates for PM10
should be similar to those from the United States. Despite the fact that the overall level of
particulates is roughly half (66.94 in Mexico City versus 35.33 in the United States), both our
point estimates for internal deaths and elasticity for PM10 are fairly similar to CG (Columns (6)
and (7)). However, our estimates are much smaller than KMS, who find that a one unit increase
in PM10 in the year leads to 17.68 deaths per 100,000 births, or that a 1 percent increase in PM10
results in a 1.82 percent increase in the infant mortality rate.


V. CONCLUSION



                                                                                                19
There is a growing concern about the effects of pollution on health in the developing world.
Especially in their urban areas, high population densities and low quality health services are
colliding with high levels in harmful pollutant concentrations. This paper sheds light on the
importance of air quality improvements in the effort to curtail mortality rates.
       Using a novel instrumental variables strategy, we find statistically significant effects of
pollution on infant mortality in Mexico City. Our estimates imply that a 1 ppb increase in CO
over a week leads to a 0.0032 per 100,000 births increase in the infant mortality rate, while a 1
µg/m3 increase in PM10 leads to a 0.24 per 100,000 births increase in their mortality rate. This
implies that a 1 percent increase in PM10 over a year leads to a 0.42 percent increase in infant
mortality, while a 1 percent increase in CO results in a 0.23 percent increase. Our results on CO
are generally larger than those estimated with data from the United States, while we find
comparable results for PM10 despite the fact that pollution levels are more than double in Mexico
City. This is consistent with our suggestive evidence of a non-linear relationship between CO
and infant mortality, and a linear relationship between PM10 and mortality. Thus, our findings
suggest that using U.S. data to estimate the benefits from cleaner air in the developing world may
be biased for pollutants that exhibit a non-linear relationship between pollution and mortality.




                                                                                                   20
WORKS CITED

Bell, M.L, and D.L. Davis, “Reassessment of the Lethal London Fog of 1952: Novel Indicators
of Acute and Chronic Consequences of Acute Exposure to Air Pollution,” Environmental Health
Perspectives, 109(2001), 389–394.

Chay, Kenneth, and Michael Greenstone, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(2003), 1121-1167.

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell, “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from
California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2005), 1003-1030.

Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes Schmieder, “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
Lessons from New Jersey,” Journal of Health Economics, 28 (2009), 688 – 703.

Davis, Lucas W., “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City,” Journal of
Political Economy, 116(2008), 38–81.

Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph Shapiro, “Defending Against
Environmental Insults: Drugs, Emergencies, Mortality and the NOx Budget Program Emissions
Market,” Working Paper, 2012.

González Calderón, Martha Hilda et al., “Informe Climatológico Ambiental del Valle de
México,” Secretaría del Medio Ambiente, 2005.

Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna, “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution
and Infant Mortality in India,” NBER Working Paper No. 17210, 2011.

Hanna, Rema and Paulina Oliva, “The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment in Mexico City,” NBER Working Paper No. 17302, 2012.

Jacobson, M., Atmospheric Pollution. History, Science, and Regulation, 1st ed. (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2002).

Jayachandran, Seema, “Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality during Indonesia’s Massive
Wildfires in 1997,” Journal of Human Resources, 44(2009), 916–954.

Knittel, Christopher, Douglas L. Miller, and Nicholas J. Sanders, “Caution, Drivers! Children
Present: Traffic, Pollution, and Infant Health,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 17222, 2011.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana, “The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the Military
to Estimate the Effect of Environmental Pollutants on Children's Health,” Journal of Human
Resources, 35 (2010), 549-590.


                                                                                            21
Molina, Luisa T., and Mario J. Molina. Air Quality in the Mexico Megacity: An Integrated
Assessment. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.

Moretti, Enrico, and Matthew Neidell, “Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior: Evidence
from the Ports of Los Angeles,” Journal of Human Resources, 46(2011), 154–75.

OECD, “OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction,” Publications
de l'OCDE, 2012.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker, “Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous
Health,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working paper No. 17684, 2011.

Tanaka, Shinsuke, “Environmental Regulations on Air Pollution in China and Their Impact on
Infant Mortality,” Working Paper, 2012.

Zivin, Joshua Graff and Matthew Neidell, “Days of haze: Environmental Information Disclosure
and Intertemporal Avoidance Behavior,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 58(2009), 119-128.




                                                                                         22
                                                       Table 1: Sample Statistics
                                            Mean of deaths in a                                                               Mean of deaths in a
                                            week/municipality                                                                year/municipality per
                                             per 100,000 births Standard Deviation       Observations                           100,000 births
                                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)                                     (4)
                                       Panel A: Neonatal Mortality Rates (28 Days and Younger)
All Causes                                         295.83              520.49              24691                                     1183.34
Non-External Causes                                287.73              513.74              24691                                     1150.93
External Causes                                     3.27                49.09              24691                                      13.07
Respiratory Causes                                  7.85                96.17              24691                                      31.39
Non-Respiratory Causes                             283.15              507.73              24691                                     1132.61

                                        Panel B: Infant Mortality Rates (One Year and Younger)
All Causes                                         38.21                 56.93              24691                                    1986.82
Non-External Causes                                36.52                 55.14              24691                                    1898.85
External Causes                                     1.18                  9.61              24691                                     61.37
Respiratory Causes                                  6.91                 29.35              24691                                     359.14
Non-Respiratory Causes                             30.79                 46.65              24691                                    1601.08

                                                Panel C: Pollution and Thermal Inversions
Particulate Matter 24hour PM10                      66.94                23.85                             18017
Carbon Monoxide 8hour avg (CO)                     2707.56              797.70                             18167
Sulfur Dioxide avg (SO2)                            13.30                 5.21                             18173
Ozone avg (O3)                                      32.33                7.47                              18167

Number of Inversions in a week                         1.68                       1.88                     18538
Number of Inversions in a week,
conditional on an inversion                            2.77                       1.68                     11257
Notes: This table provides descriptive statistics for the key variables in the regression analysis. Panel A provides information on neonatal mortality,
while Panel B provides information on infant mortality. Panel C reports information on each pollutant and the thermal inversions. External cause is
defined as deaths from accidents and homicides; internal cause encompasses all causes not including accidents or homicides. Respiratory Causes (RC)
includes respiratory and cardiovascular disease, while non-respiratory includes digestive, congenital, accidents, homicides, etc. Mortality data comes
from death certificates and was provided by Secretaría de Salud Pública. Pollution data comes from the Sistema de Monitoreo Atmosferico de la
Ciudad de Mexico (www.sma.df.gob.mx). Inversion data was provided by the Meteorological Unit at the Secretaría de Medio Ambiente.
                       Table 2: Correlation Between Pollution and Mortality
                                        Bivariate Regressions            Weather Controls
                                       Neonatal         Infant      Neonatal          Infant
                                          (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
Particulate Matter avg (PM10)         0.637***        0.136***      0.901***        0.131***
                                       (0.130)         (0.019)       (0.167)         (0.020)

Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg. (CO)                  0.022***            0.005***             0.023***           0.003***
                                                (0.003)             (0.000)              (0.004)            (0.000)

Sulfur Dioxide avg (SO2)                         0.823             0.454***             1.141**               0.064
                                                (0.553)             (0.072)             (0.558)              (0.069)

Ozone avg (O3)                                 1.540***             -0.085*             1.651***           0.171***
                                                (0.350)             (0.051)              (0.408)            (0.053)
Notes: Each cell in this table provides estimates from a separate linear regression of each pollutant on the mortality
outcome listed in the column. All regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors clustered at the week level.
The weather controls that are included in the specifications in Columns (3) and (4) are a fourth degree polynomial in
average temperature during the week, a third degree polynomial in maximum and minimum temperatures during the week, a
second degree polynomial in precipitation, cloud and humidity measures. The observations for each pollutant are as follows:
PM10: 18,040; SO2: 18,173; CO: 18,167; O3: 18,167. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.
                 Table 3: The Effect of Thermal Inversions on Pollution (First Stage)
                                     PM10           CO 8hr             SO2              O3
                                      (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
Inversions                         2.007***       153.053***          -0.210           0.181
                                    (0.383)        (14.186)          (0.127)          (0.155)

Mean of Outcome Variable                   57.67                2707.56                13.30                 32.33

Year Fixed Effects                            X                     X                     X                     X
Municipality Fixed Effects                    X                     X                     X                     X
Weather Controls                              X                     X                     X                     X
Municipality-Week Trends                      X                     X                     X                     X

N                                          18,040                18,167                18,173                18,167
Notes: This table provides the coefficient estimates of the effect of the number of thermal inversions per week on
pollution concentrations, controlling for municipality fixed effects, year fixed effects, municipality-specific week trends,
a fourth degree polynomial in average temperature during the week, a third degree polynomial in maximum and
minimum temperatures during the week, a second degree polynomial in precipitation, and cloud and humidity measures.
Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level. Statistical significance is
denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                         Table 4: The Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality
                                              Fixed Effects              Instrumental Variables
                                        Neonatal          Infant        Neonatal         Infant
                                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)
Particulate Matter 24hr avg (PM10)       0.1670          0.0237           0.4486        0.2369*
           3
 in µg/m                                         (0.2706)            (0.0272)              (0.9607)            (0.1216)

Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg. (CO)                     0.0085              -0.0006               0.0068            0.0032**
 in parts per billion (ppb)                      (0.0097)            (0.0011)              (0.0133)           (0.0014)

Sulfur Dioxide avg (SO2)                          1.4325              0.1034
 in parts per billion (ppb)                      (1.2619)            (0.1273)

Ozone avg (O3)                                    1.0400              0.1379
 in parts per billion (ppb)                      (1.1511)            (0.1147)

Mean of Outcome Variables                         295.83               38.21                295.83               38.21

Instrument: Inversions                                                                         X                   X

Week Fixed Effects                                   X                   X
Year Fixed Effects                                                                             X                   X
Municipality Fixed Effects                           X                   X                     X                   X
Weather Controls                                     X                   X                     X                   X
Municipality-Week Trends                             X                   X                     X                   X
Notes: This table presents Fixed Effects and Instrumental Variable estimates of the effect of pollution on infant mortality.
Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression. The fixed effects estimation, reported in Columns (1) and (2),
includes week fixed effects, municipality fixed effects, municipality-specific week trends and weather controls. In the
Instrumental Variables estimation, presented in Columns (3) and (4), the number of thermal inversions per week is the
excluded instrument; this model includes year fixed effects, municipality fixed effects, municipality-specific week trends and
weather controls. Weather controls are a fourth degree polynomial in average temperature during the week, a third degree
polynomial in maximum and minimum temperatures during the week, a second degree polynomial in precipitation, and
cloud and humidity measures. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level.
Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                                                  Table 5: IV Effect of Pollution on Mortality, by Cause of Death
                                                                    Neonatal                                                                   Infant
                                               External      Internal      Non-RC         RC           External                       Internal        Non-RC              RC
                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)                            (6)             (7)              (8)
Particulate Matter 24hr avg (PM10)              -0.0198       0.0173        -0.3196   0.3170***         0.0164                        0.1773*          0.0747         0.1189***
                                               (0.0719)      (0.6736)      (0.6604)    (0.1202)        (0.0129)                       (0.0964)        (0.0693)         (0.0455)

Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg (CO)                    -0.0004          0.0005           -0.0047        0.0048***            0.0002         0.0024**           0.0009        0.0017***
                                               (0.0010)         (0.0096)         (0.0094)         (0.0015)           (0.0002)        (0.0011)          (0.0009)        (0.0005)

Mean of Outcome Variable                          3.27           287.73           283.15            7.85               1.18            36.52            30.79             6.91
Notes: This table presents the coefficient estimates from the IV estimation of each pollutant on mortality, by cause of death. Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression.
External cause is defined as deaths from accidents and homicides; internal cause encompasses all causes not including accidents or homicides. Respiratory Causes (RC) includes
respiratory and cardiovascular disease, while non-respiratory (Non-RC) includes digestive, congenital, accidents, homicides, etc. All regressions control for municipality and year
fixed effects, municipality-week trends, a fourth degree polynomial in average temperature during the week, a third degree polynomial in maximum and minimum temperatures during
the week, a second degree polynomial in precipitation, and cloud and humidity measures. The number of thermal inversions per week is the excluded instrument. Standard errors
(listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                                                  Table 6: Multiple Pollutant Models
                                                                                                                           Change in infant
                                                                                                     Change in            death rate per year
                                                                                                 Pollution between        between 1997 and
                                                    Neonatal                   Infant             1997 and 2006                  2006
                                                       (1)                       (2)                     (3)                      (4)
Particulate Matter 24 hr avg (PM10)                 -1.6329                    0.0696                  -21.87                    -79.2
                                                    (2.2139)                  (0.2105)
Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg (CO)                          0.0293                   0.0024                 -1581.73                    -197.4
                                                     (0.0324)                 (0.0032)
Chi2 Stat Joint Significance Test                     0.872                     5.600                                             -276.6
p-value                                               0.647                    0.0608
Notes: Each column in this table presents the results of a single specification that includes CO and PM10 simultaneously. We present the results
of an IV estimation of the multivariate pollution model, where inversions, inversions × altitude, and inversions × thickness are instruments for
CO and PM10 (the first stage is reported in Appendix Table 7). Coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of each pollutant, conditional on
the other pollutant. All regressions control for municipality and year fixed effects, municipality-week trends, a fourth degree polynomial in
average temperature during the week, a third degree polynomial in maximum and minimum temperatures during the week, a second degree
polynomial in precipitation, and cloud and humidity measures. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. For
ease of interpretation, in Columns (3) and (4), we calculate the change in infant deaths per year that can be attributed to the change in pollution
in Mexico City between 1997 and 2006 (assuming 282,000 births per year).
                                               Table 7: Non-Linearities
                                                                                           Neonatal               Infant
                                                                                             (1)                    (2)
                                           Panel A: Linear Spline in PM 10
PM10 max 24hr between 0 and 54.203 and ug/m3                                                 -0.2047             0.2171
                                                                                            (2.7675)            (0.3297)
PM10 max 24hr between 54.203 and 300 ug/m3                                                   1.5173             0.3219**
                                                                                            (1.1804)            (0.1449)

Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 1                                                   7.247                7.346
Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 2                                                   9.906                0.001
Stock-Yogo weak ID critical value for single endogenous regressor                            8.68                  8.68

Equal Slopes F (Chi-squared) Statistic                                                       0.365                0.0883
p-value                                                                                      0.546                0.766

                                 Panel B: Linear Spline in CO
CO 8hr avg. between 0 and 3167 ppb                                                           -0.0159              0.0001
                                                                                            (0.0305)             (0.0032)
CO 8hr avg. higher than 3167 ppb                                                             0.0558              0.0082*
                                                                                            (0.0422)             (0.0047)

Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 1                                                   12.17                14.34
Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 2                                                   14.09                11.58
Stock-Yogo weak ID critical value for single endogenous regressor                            8.68                  8.68

Equal Slopes F (Chi-squared) Statistic                                                       1.152                1.255
p-value                                                                                      0.283                0.263
Notes: In this table, we explore whether there is a non-linearity in the dose-response relationship between pollution and
mortality. Each column within each panel corresponds to a separate regression. We include a linear spline in both
pollutants to capture the effect of pollution at levels within the range of California's pollution levels in the period used for
Currie and Neidell's (2005) study and the effect at the higher pollution levels observed in many developing countries.
Regressions are using 2SLS and include all controls as listed in Table 4. The instrument set consists of three indicator
variables denoting one thermal inversion, two to three thermal inversions and four to seven thermal inversions during the
week. For ease of interpretation, we include a test for equal slopes to test whether the effect of pollution on mortality
differs at low versus high levels. We also report the Angrist-Piscke F-statistic to assess the strength of each of the two
first stage equations in the model. These statistics should be above the Stock-Yogo critical value for a single endogenous
regressor reported below them in order to rule out more than 10% bias due to weak instruments. Standard errors (listed
below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                          Table 8: Comparison with Literature in United States Setting (Sample for 1 year olds)
                                                                        CO                                Particulate Matter
                                          Infant                    Effect Size                              Effect Size
                                      Mortality Rate Mean Level       (Year)      Elasticity   Mean Level       (Year)       Elasticity
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                     Panel A: Mexico City Data
Infant Mortality                         1986.82          2.71       166.4**         0.227        66.94       12.3188*         0.415
Infant Mortality-Internal                1898.85          2.71       124.8**         0.178        66.94        9.2196*         0.325

                                                       Panel B: Estimates from United States Setting
Currie and Neidell (2005)                            391             2.00      16.501**        0.084                       39.45           0.013            0.001
Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2009)                688             1.58       17.6***        0.040                       29.60           -0.189           -0.008
Chay and Greenstone (2003)                           1179                                                                  35.33           9.47**           0.284
Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011)                  280             1.01        40.56         0.146                       28.94          17.68**           1.827
Notes: In this table, we compare our primary estimates with estimates derived from the United States context. We convert Chay and Greenstone from total suspended
particulars to particulate matter for ease of comparison. We also provide the elasticity of the infant mortality rate to pollution (Columns 4 and 7). Given that Currie,
Neidell, and Schmieder (2009) does not have a directly comparable group, we report their estimates for the 0-2 week age group.
                                                            Figure 1: Thermal Inversions




                                                                                                                       Thermal Inversion Layer




Panel A: Without Inversions, Pollutants Rise and Disburse                  Panel B: Pollutants Are Trapped Beneath the Inversion Layer
    Figure 2: Thermal Inversions, Temperatures and Infant Mortality, by Month of the Year
                              Panel A: Inversions and Temperature




                                   Panel B: Inversions and Infant Mortality




Notes: Panel A of this figure compares the average number of inversions per week (bars) with the monthly average
temperature in Celsius (spikes) for each month of the year. Panel B compares the average number of inversions per week
(bars) against the infant mortality rate in Mexico City (line) for each month of the year.
                          Figure 3: Mortality and Pollution Trends in MCMA
                               Panel A: Pollution and Neonatal Mortality




                                   Panel B: Pollution and Infant Mortality




Notes: This figure plots the average annual pollution concentrations over time for the maximum daily 24-hour
average of PM10, the maximum daily 8-hour average of CO, the average concentration of SO2 and the average
concentration of O3 (solid lines). It also plots average weekly neonatal (Panel A) and infant mortality rates (Panel
B) for Mexico City (dashed lines).
                Figure 4: The Relationship Between the Number of Thermal Inversion Per Week and Pollution




Notes: This figure plots average pollutant concentrations (maximum daily 24-hour average of PM10, the maximum daily 8-hour average of CO,
the average concentration of SO2 and the average concentration of O3) by the number of thermal inversions per week (thick bars) and frequency
of thermal inversions per week (thin bars). The horizontal line corresponds to the average concentration of the corresponding pollutant in the
period of study.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                  Appendix Table 1: Exploring the Assumptions on Statistical Inference (Reduced Form Analysis)
                                              Main Specification
                                           (Comparable to Table 4)                    No Weighing for Births                  Conley Standard Errors
                                           Neonatal          Infant                  Neonatal         Infant                  Neonatal        Infant
                                              (1)              (2)                      (3)             (4)                      (5)            (6)
Thermal Inversions                          0.9783         0.5084**                   0.9223        0.7828**                   0.7247       0.7502**
                                           (1.9937)        (0.2177)                  (3.2166)       (0.3952)                  (2.9374)      (0.3300)

Weighted by Number of Births                   X                   X
Clustered by week                              X                   X                     X                   X
Spatially Correlated Errors                                                                                                        X                 X

Year FE                                        X                   X                     X                   X                     X                 X
Municipality FE                                X                   X                     X                   X                     X                 X
Weather Controls                               X                   X                     X                   X                     X                 X
Municipality Week Trends                       X                   X                     X                   X                     X                 X
Notes: This table compares our results under different models for the variance-covariance matrix. We present all results as reduced form regressions here to
facilitate the use of Conley Standard Errors. Columns (1) and (2) show our reduced form results corresponding to our main specification. We use the same
control variables as reported in the IV specification in Table 4. Columns (3) and (4) show the results without weighting each observation by the number of
births. Finally, Columns (5) and (6) show the reduced form results when we use Conley standard errors to account for spatial correlations rather than clustering
at the week level.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                          Appendix Table 2: Alternative Thresholds for Distance of Furthest Pollution Station
                                                                              Infant Mortality
                                                        Fixed Effects                             Instrumental Variables
                                             10km radius             8km radius             10 km radius           8km radius
                                                  (1)                   (2)                     (3)                    (4)

Particulate Matter 24 hr Avg (PM10)                     0.0402*                      0.0232                       0.1973*                       0.1705
                                                        (0.0217)                    (0.0233)                      (0.1148)                     (0.1251)

Carbon Monoxide 8 hr Avg (CO)                          -0.000263                    -0.000184                     0.0029**                      0.0022
                                                      (0.000777)                   (0.000078)                     (0.0014)                     (0.0014)

Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)                                     -0.0848                     -0.0323
                                                        (0.0979)                    (0.0988)

Ozone (O3)                                               0.0597                      0.0308
                                                        (0.0800)                    (0.0860)

Observations                                             12,478                       9,264                        12,478                       9,264
Notes: In this table, we vary the maximum distance from stations to municipality centroids in the distance-weighted averages for municipality-level pollution.
Each coefficient and corresponding standard error corresponds to a separate regression. For conciseness, we only report results on infant mortality. Columns (1)
and (3) show results comparable to Columns (2) and (4) of Table 4, but with a maximum of 10 km distance between a station and a municipality centroid (rather
than 15km). This more restrictive method of calculating pollution results in more precise measures of pollution at the municipality level (less measurement
error). However, note that this results in a smaller number of observations, since we lose municipality-week observations for which no station is available within
a 10 km radius. Similarly, Columns (2) and (4) are comparable to Columns (2) and (4) of Table 4, but with a maximum distance of 8 km between a station and a
municipality centroid. The number of observations using this restriction drops even further.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                            Appendix Table 3A: Alternative Controls in Fixed Effects Specification
                                       No Municipality Trends          No Min/Max Temp             No Week FE (C&N)
                                        Neonatal      Infant        Neonatal        Infant        Neonatal      Infant
                                           (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)
   Particulate Matter 24hr avg (PM10)   0.4138*       0.0291          0.1497       0.0214          0.0166      -0.0102
                                        (0.2436)     (0.0252)        (0.2695)     (0.0270)        (0.2613)    (0.0296)

   Carbon Monoxide 8 hr avg (CO)                     0.0058          -0.0010              0.0082          -0.0008             0.0003            0.0001
                                                    (0.0097)         (0.0011)            (0.0097)         (0.0011)           (0.0082)          (0.0008)

   Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)                              1.8033           0.1175              1.5853           0.1195            -0.6889            -0.1149
                                                    (1.2382)         (0.1257)            (1.2658)         (0.1268)           (0.7493)          (0.0854)

   Ozone (O3)                                        1.0381           0.1307              0.9698           0.1292             0.4209            0.0150
                                                    (1.1260)         (0.1109)            (1.1562)         (0.1157)           (0.6342)          (0.0749)

   Week FE                                              X                X                   X                X
   Year FE
   Month of the year * Municipality FE                                                                                           X                 X
   Municipality FE                                      X                X                   X                X                  X                 X
   Weather Controls                                     X                X                   X                X                  X                 X
   Municipality Week Trends                                                                  X                X                  X                 X
   Notes: Here, we explore the robustness of the fixed effects estimates, reported in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, to different sets of control variables.
   Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) drop the municipality specific week trends from the set of controls. Columns
   (3) and (4) drop the controls for maximum and minimum temperature. Columns (5) and (6) seek to replicate the set of controls used in Currie and
   Neidell's (2005) study by dropping week fixed effects and controlling for seasonality by including month of the year × municipality dummies.
   Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                    Appendix Table 3B: Alternative Control Variables in the Instrumental Variables Model
                                       No Municipality Trends         No Min/Max Temp           Flexible Time Trend
                                       Neonatal       Infant       Neonatal         Infant     Neonatal       Infant
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
     Particulate Matter 24hr (PM10)     0.4133        0.1481        0.5123        0.2578**      0.5640      0.2822**
                                       (0.7853)      (0.0917)      (0.8123)       (0.1050)     (1.0651)      (0.1426)

     Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg. (CO)                   0.0081          0.0024*              0.0083         0.0039***             0.0071          0.0036**
                                                    (0.0125)         (0.0013)            (0.0123)         (0.0013)            (0.0139)         (0.0015)

     Instrument: Inversions                             X                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X

     Week FE
     Year FE                                            X                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
     Municipality FE                                    X                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
     Weather Controls                                   X                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
     Municipality Week Trends                                                                X                 X                  X                 X
     Notes: In this table we explore the robustness of the IV estimates, reported in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4, to different sets of control variables.
     Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) drop the municipality specific week trends from the set of controls.
     Columns (3) and (4) drop the controls for maximum and minimum temperature. Columns (5) and (6) introduce a quadratic overall time trend in
     addition to the municipality-level linear time trends. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Statistical
     significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                       Appendix Table 4A: First Stage at Month Level
                                                       PM10 24 hr avg                              CO 8 hr avg
                                                            (1)                                        (2)
       Number of Thermal Inversions per Month              0.337                                   31.905***
                                                          (0.221)                                   (5.665)

       Kleibergen and Paap rk statistic                                         2.138                  27.19
         Stock-Yogo Critical Value 10% maximal IV size                          16.38                  16.38
       Notes: This table presents the estimates of the effect of the number of thermal inversions per month on
       average PM10 concentration (Column 1) and CO concentration (Column 2) at the month level. These
       regressions control for year fixed effects, municipality fixed effects, municipality level month trends, a
       fourth degree polynomial in mean temperature, a third degree polynomial in minimum and maximum
       temperatures during the month, a second degree polynomial in precipitation, humidity and cloud cover
       measures. Standard errors are clustered at the month level. The bottom two rows provides the Kleibergen-
       Paap rk statistic for weak instruments and the Stock-Yogo critical value at the 10% level. The first stage
       for PM10 does not pass the weak instruments test. However, the Kleibergen-Paap rk test is above the critical
       value for the CO specification.

                      Appendix Table 4B: IV Estimation at the Month Level
                                                           Neonatal                                   Infant
                                                               (1)                                      (2)
       Particulate Matter 24hr avg (PM10)                   10.7805                                   2.6912
                                                            (8.0766)                                 (1.7277)

       Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg (CO)                                           0.1738*               0.0376***
                                                                              (0.0979)               (0.0146)

       Observations                                                             5634                   5634

       Mean Mortality Rate                                                    1187.32                 164.00

       Instrument: Inversions                                                     X                      X

       Year FE                                                                    X                      X
       Municipality FE                                                            X                      X
       Weather Controls                                                           X                      X
       Municipality Month Trends                                                  X                      X
       Notes: In this table, we explore whether there is harvesting by estimating our main results at the month
       level instead of at the week level. Each coefficient and corresponding standard error is the result of a
       separate regression. Here, the dependent variable is infant morality rates at the month level calculated as
       the number of deaths in the month divided by the total number of births in the same month. Controls are the
       same as in the First Stage specification and the excluded instrument is number of inversions in the
       corresponding month. Because we collapse our data at the month level, the number of observations drops to
       5634. We also provide the mean mortality rate at the month level, which corresponds to the number of
       deaths in each age category (younger than 28 days or younger than 1 year) divided by the number of births
       corresponding to that cohort. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the
       week level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                                                    Appendix Table 5: Specification Checks
                                                                    Logs                                  Not Dropping Outliers
                                                          Neonatal         Infant                        Neonatal        Infant
                                                              (1)            (2)                            (3)            (4)
                Particulate Matter (PM10)                  0.00026       0.00384*                         0.4504       0.2408**
                                                          (0.00246)      (0.00232)                       (0.9466)       (0.1197)

                Carbon Monoxide (CO)                           0.00000            0.00005*                 0.0060            0.0031**
                                                              (0.00003)           (0.00003)               (0.0121)           (0.0013)

                Mean of Outcome Variable                         0.98                0.73                  295.83              38.21

                Instrument: Inversions                             X                   X                      X                   X

                Week Fixed Effects
                Year Fixed Effects                                 X                   X                      X                   X
                Municipality Fixed Effects                         X                   X                      X                   X
                Weather Controls                                   X                   X                      X                   X
                Municipality Week Trends                           X                   X                      X                   X
                Notes: In this table, we investigate the robustness of our results to alternative model specifications. We estimate the
                model in logs rather than levels, and explore whether the results change if we do not drop outliers. Each coefficient is the
                result of a separate regression. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level.
                Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                          Appendix Table 6A: Are the Results Driven By Seasonality? (IV Estimation)
                                     Mortality in Guadalajara as Control       Seasons FE                                             Seasons + Year FE
                                         Neonatal            Infant       Neonatal      Infant                                      Neonatal      Infant
                                            (1)                (2)           (3)          (4)                                          (5)          (6)
Particulate Matter 24 hr avg (PM10)       0.3429           0.2156*         0.7157     0.2247**                                       0.3489       0.2351
                                         (0.9236)          (0.1167)       (0.7549)    (0.0988)                                      (1.4495)     (0.1839)

Carbon Monoxide 8hr avg (CO)                         0.0056               0.0030**                0.0151         0.0047**            0.0044           0.0027
                                                    (0.0129)              (0.0014)               (0.0163)        (0.0019)           (0.0165)         (0.0017)

Mean of Outcome Variable                             295.83                  38.21                295.83           38.21             295.83           38.21

Week Fixed Effect
Year Fixed Effect                                       X                      X                     X                X                 X                X
Municipality Fixed Effect                               X                      X                     X                X                 X                X
Weather Controls                                        X                      X                     X                X                 X                X
Municipality Specific Week Trends                       X                      X                     X                X                 X                X
Notes: In this table, we investigate whether our results are driven by seasonality in mortality that is independent of thermal inversions and pollution. We are
already controlling for a wide array of temperature and weather variables in our main regressions, and so this table tests the sensitivity of the results to
seasonality above and beyond weather patterns. If seasonality in mortality is driving our results, we would expect these to be sensitive to adding seasonality
controls in addition to the weather and temperature variables. Each coefficient is the result of a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show our IV results
when the infant mortality rate in Guadalajara as added as a control. Columns (3) and (4) show our IV results when we include season indicators (summer, fall
and spring) as controls instead of year fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) show our results when we control seasons and year fixed effects in the same
specification. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the week level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                                 Appendix Table 6B: Effect of Pollution, By Season
                                                          Neonatal             Infant                          Neonatal          Infant
                                                             (1)                 (2)                             (3)               (4)
                             Panel A: Heterogeneity of PM 10 effect by winter/summer weeks
    PM10 24hr avg                                          0.5100             0.2667*                           0.2272         0.2151*
                                                          (1.1621)            (0.1473)                         (1.0657)        (0.1293)
    Summer Definition 1 * PM10                             0.0556              0.0287
                                                          (0.2732)            (0.0370)
    Summer Definition 2 * PM10                                                                                  -0.2628         -0.0234
                                                                                                               (0.2809)        (0.0310)

    Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 1                          13.63                13.1                14.61           14.16
    Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 2                          66.72               65.02                95.7            94.87
    Stock-Yogo Critical Values for Single Endog. Regress                16.38               16.38                16.38           16.38

                                     Panel B: Heterogeneity of CO effect by winter/summer weeks
    CO 8hr avg                                                     0.0062           0.0030**                    0.0057         0.0030**
                                                                 (0.0130)           (0.0014)                   (0.0132)        (0.0014)
    Summer Definition 1 * CO                                      -0.0018            -0.0005
                                                                 (0.0040)           (0.0005)
    Summer Definition 2 * CO                                                                                    -0.0074       -0.0012**
                                                                                                               (0.0049)        (0.0005)

    Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 1                          114.9               113.21              123.32          122.04
    Angrist-Pischke F-statistic, First Stage 2                         208.28                207.6              146.14          148.65
    Stock-Yogo Critical Values for Single Endog. Regress                16.38                16.38               16.38           16.38


    Instrument: Inversions, Inversions * Summer Definitio                 X                   X
    Instrument: Inversions, Inversions * Summer Definition 2                                                       X               X

    Year FE                                                               X                   X                    X               X
    Municipality FE                                                       X                   X                    X               X
    Weather Controls                                                      X                   X                    X               X
    Municipality Specific Week Trends                                     X                   X                    X               X
    Notes: In this table, we investigate whether the estimates differ by seasons. Although most thermal inversions occur in the winter
    months scattered thermal inversions the rest of the year allow us to test for whether our results hold outside of the winter season. We
    define "summer weeks" in two different ways: from the 14th to the 43rd week of the year (Summer Definition 1) and from the 13th to
    the 42nd week of the year (Summer Definition 2). These weeks correspond roughly to the weeks of the year where temperature
    increases substantially compared to the winter weeks. To test for whether our results differ between cold and warm months, we
    include the interaction between pollution with the summer weeks indicator as a right hand side variable. Our set of instruments
    consists of the uninteracted number of thermal inversions per week and the interaction between the summer weeks indicator and the
    number of thermal inversions. Each column within each panel corresponds to a separate regression. We report the Angrist-Piscke F-
    statistic to assess the strength of each of the two first stage equations in the model. To rule out more than 10% bias due to weak
    instruments, these statistics should be above the Stock-Yogo critical value for a single endogenous regressor reported below them.
    Controls are the same as in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at
    the week level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                   Appendix Table 7: First Stage For Multivariate Model
                                             PM10 24hr avg         CO 8hr avg
                                                   (1)                 (2)
        Inversions                            13.7335***          116.1699***
                                                (1.8382)            (39.7789)

        Inversions * Altitude                             -0.0056***                   0.00167
                                                           (0.0009)                    (0.0199)

        Thickness * Altitude                                0.000013                   0.0004*
                                                           (0.000008)                  (0.0002)

        Angrist-Pischke F-statistic                           24.36                      50.24
        Stock Yogo weak ID critical value
                                                               8.68                       8.68
        for single endogenous regressor

        Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic                                      33.15
        Stock-Yogo weak ID test for 2
        instruments and 2 endogenous                                        5.44
        regressors
        Notes: This table presents the results of first stage equations for Table 6, Panel A (see notes on
        Table 6). We report the Angrist-Piscke F-statistic to assess the strength of each of the two first
        stage equations in the model. To rule out more than 10% bias due to weak instruments, these
        statistics should be above the Stock-Yogo critical value for a single endogenous regressor
        reported below them. In addition, we report the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic which offers a
        way to test for weak instruments in all first stage equations simultaneously when compared to the
        Stock-Yogo critical value for 2 endogenous regressors.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                 Appendix Table 8: Comparison with Literature in United States Setting (Multiple Regression Results)
                                                                   CO                                Particulate Matter
                                     Infant                    Effect Size                               Effect Size
                                                 Mean Level                  Elasticity    Mean Level                   Elasticity
                                  Mortality Rate                 (Year)                                    (Year)
                                       (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                   Panel A: Mexico City Data
  Infant Mortality                  1986.82        2.70756        124.8        0.170          66.94        3.6192         0.120

                                                      Panel B: Estimates from United States Setting
  Currie and Neidell (2005)                       391           1.998       18.125**       0.093                           39.448             -0.226   -0.024
  Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011              280           1.01          80.6         0.291                           28.94             18.2***   1.881
  Notes: This table replicates Table 8 but uses the estimates from the multiple regression model rather than the single regression models.
ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                 Appendix Figure 1: Comparing Mexico City and Guadalajara




  Notes: This figure compares the average number of inversions per week (bars) against the infant mortality rate
  in Mexico City (bold line) and the infant mortality rate in Guadalajara (dashed line) for each month of the year.
  Guadalajara's infant mortality rate appears to be lower and nearly constant across the different months of the
  year, while Mexico's City infant mortality appears to have strong seasonal patterns that coincide with thermal
  inversion patterns. Thermal inversions are absent in Guadalajara.
