NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEMPERATURE, HUMAN HEALTH, AND ADAPTATION:
A REVIEW OF THE EMPIRICAL LITERATURE
Olivier Deschenes
Working Paper 18345
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18345

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012

This paper was prepared for the Integrated Assessment Modeling Conference, May 17-18, 2012, in
Cambridge MA. I thank the conference participants for helpful suggestions. Ashwin Rode and Karin
Donhowe provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Olivier Deschenes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Temperature, Human Health, and Adaptation: A Review of the Empirical Literature
Olivier Deschenes
NBER Working Paper No. 18345
August 2012
JEL No. I1,Q5,Q54
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a survey of the empirical literature studying the relationship between health outcomes,
temperature, and adaptation to temperature extremes. The objective of the paper is to highlight the
many remaining gaps in the empirical literature and to provide guidelines for improving the current
Integrated Assessment Model (IAM) literature that seeks to incorporate human health and adaptation
in its framework. I begin by presenting the conceptual and methodological issues associated with the
measurement of the effect of temperature extremes on health, and the role of adaptation in possibly
muting these effects. The main conclusion that emerges from the literature is that despite the wide
variety of data sets and settings most studies find that temperature extremes lead to significant reductions
in health, generally measured with excess mortality. Regarding the role of adaptation in mitigating
the effects of extreme temperature on health, the available knowledge is limited, in part due to the
lack of real-world data on measures of adaptation behaviors. Finally, the paper discusses the implications
of the currently available evidence for assessments of potential human health impacts of global climate
change.

Olivier Deschenes
Department of Economics
2127 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu

INTRODUCTION:
The changes in the earth’s climate that are predicted to result from greenhouse gas emissions are both
varied and complex. As a result, the impact margins of climate change are wide and far‐reaching. In
particular, climate change is likely to affect human health in a number of ways: through its effect on the
disease environment, through changes in the prevalence of extreme and destructive weather events,
through changes in the average and the variability of temperature, through droughts, etc. Human health
is now recognized as one of the most important impact margins of climate change, and thus is a global
research priority. A vast literature – almost exclusively in public health and epidemiology – has emerged
to document the excess morbidity and mortality associated with exposure to extreme temperatures, as
well as the associated risk factors. (See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2007 and
National Institute for Environmental Health Science (NIEHS) 2010 for reviews.)
A critical aspect in assessing the human health threats posed by climate change is the degree to
which ‘adaptation’ is possible. Adaptation, according to the IPCC, is defined as "adjustment in natural or
human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates
harm or exploits beneficial opportunities" (IPCC 2007). For the rest of this paper, the practical definition
of adaptation will refer to the set of actions that are taken in order to reduce the health impacts of
exposure to extreme weather events or changes in climate. 2 As such, adaptation measures can include
individual or household‐level actions as well as community‐level actions. Further, some aspects of
adaptation will be possible in the short‐run and longer‐run (e.g., air‐conditioning usage, migration) while
others will only be possible in the longer‐run (e.g., urban space redesign). 3
The purpose of this paper is to review the existing empirical literature that specifically examines
the determinants and effects of adaptation on human health in response to extreme weather and
climate events. In order to narrow the scope of the analysis, I focus exclusively on health impacts and
adaptation driven by exposure to extreme temperatures. It is important to note that the set of changes
to the global climate system unquestionably goes far beyond rising temperatures (i.e. rising sea‐levels,
droughts, storms). As such, this review only offers a partial survey of the implications of global climate
change on human health and adaptation.4 However, the increased incidence of extreme temperature
2

Acclimatization could also be considered as a form of adaptation. However, since acclimatization occurs through
long‐term changes in human physiology (i.e. increased tolerance to extreme heat), it does not constitute
adaptation according to the set definition for this paper.
3
Short‐run forms of adaptation are also called defensive or avoidance behavior in environmental economics
literature.
4
See IPCC (2007) and NIEHS (2010) for broad surveys of the full spectrum of potential health impacts of climate
change.

2

events and the prospects of increased heat‐related morbidity and mortality are by far the most studied
outcomes in empirical research.
I begin by presenting the conceptual and methodological issues associated with the
measurement of the effect of temperature extremes on health, and the role of adaptation in possibly
muting these effects. To proceed, I derive the implications of a simple version of the Becker‐Grossman
economic model of health production in the presence of ‘adaptation’. The model highlights the tradeoff
between health production and costly adaptation. A key implication is that in the extreme, it is possible
that individuals can fully adapt such that extreme temperatures would have no detectable effects on
measured health outcomes. In this case, an analysis that would only focus on the dose‐response
relationship between health outcomes and temperature would incorrectly conclude that the human
health burden of climate change is negligible. An important finding in the review below is that virtually
all studies outside of economics do not explicitly model adaptation and so are subject to such incorrect
inference.
In terms of methodological issues, the most salient are the measurement of health, temperature
exposure, and adaptation, the research design underlying the study, and its external validity. At the
conceptual level, the main limitations of the existing literature is that mortality and hospitalizations are
the only health outcomes that have been exclusively studied, and so little is known about the potentially
large “lower‐level” effects of temperature extremes on chronic conditions and quality of life. A second
key drawback is that only a handful of possible adaptations have been analyzed in context by the
literature, namely energy consumption (or air‐conditioning), geographical mobility, and indoor/outdoor
time allocation. Finally, the empirical literature is based on research designs that exploit day‐to‐day or
year‐to‐year fluctuations in daily temperature distributions. Since daily temperatures are determined
independently of health conditional on time and location, these studies have generally reasonable
degrees of interval validity. Whether or not these studies are externally valid to make projections of
impacts due to permanent climate change is clearly more questionable. At the very least, economic
theory suggests that these impacts derived from short‐run fluctuations in temperatures are likely to
overstate the impacts that would result under permanent climate change.
I then present a review of the literature published in economics journals and working papers, as
well as in public health and epidemiology. Unfortunately, the lack of uniformity of the modeling of
temperature effects across the wide range studies makes it virtually impossible to convert the estimates
into elasticities or other statistics that can be systematically compared across studies. In particular, the
public health studies mostly report the estimates through figures, and do not consistently report point

3

estimates and confidence intervals for the temperature gradients. My review of these studies is thus
based on visual inspection of the relevant figures, and the conclusions stated by the authors.
The main points that emerge from this literature review are that despite the wide variety of
data sets and settings most studies find that temperature extremes lead to significant reductions in
health, generally measured with excess mortality. There is also some evidence of heterogeneity in the
response across subpopulations and geographical areas, although that evidence is not as definitive.
There is broad evidence of a dynamic relationship between temperature exposure and health, where
heat impacts on mortality are more immediate, and to some extent reflect the influence of harvesting or
forward displacement. On the other hand, cold temperature exposure leads to mortality impacts that
tend to accumulate over time, indicative of delayed effects.
Regarding the role of adaptation in mitigating the effects of extreme temperature on health, the
available knowledge is limited, in part due to the lack of availability of credible and large scale real‐world
data on measures of adaptation.

The best evidence available looks at the relationship between

residential energy consumption and extreme temperatures and find a nonlinear relationship where
energy consumption increase significantly at the extremes of the temperature distribution. The
response of residential energy consumption to extreme heat is 4 times as large proportionally as the
mortality response. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the more muted mortality‐temperature
relationship is at least partially due to the self‐protection provided by the cooling from increased energy
consumption.
I conclude with a discussion of the remaining gaps in the empirical literature, the implications of
the currently available evidence for assessments of the potential human health impacts of global climate
change, and by providing guidelines for improving the current IAM literature that seeks to incorporate
human health and adaptation in its framework.

II. ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
This section presents a simple 1‐period Becker‐Grossman health production model that highlights the
role of adaptation in the context of the health impact of climate change. The presentation follows from
Harrington and Portney (1987) and Deschenes and Greenstone (2011). In particular the model shows
the important point that the health‐related welfare impact of climate change goes beyond what is
suggested by the statistical relationship between climate or weather extremes and health when
individuals invest resources in adaptation or self‐protection. Indeed, the model shows that the correct
measurement of the willingness‐to‐pay to avoid climate change requires knowledge of how

4

temperature affects health outcomes like mortality and how it affects self‐protection investments that
maintain health. More generally, the correct WTP should consider all the monetized health impacts and
the value of all self‐protection investments caused by the climatic factors likely to change under global
climate change.
To proceed, assume that the representative individual derives utility from consuming a single
consumption good, XC (whose price is normalized to 1), and from health, or more precisely from the
survival rate S.5 This can be represented by the following utility function:
(1) U = U[XC , S]
The survival rate depends on ambient temperature T and on the consumption of a health‐maintaining
market good XH (with price = pH) that increases the probability of survival. Expenditures in XH have also
been labeled ‘defensive’ or ‘averting’ expenditures. Specifically, the production function for survival is
expressed as follows:
(2) S = S(XH, T)
The consumption of XH does not directly generate utility, it is only purchased to increase the survival
probability and is defined such that ∂S/∂XH > 0. For the purpose of this review, ‘adaptation’ is defined as
the process by which individuals change their investments in XH in response to climate change that
operates through a change in T. As such, this variable allows for adaptation to alter the relationship
between temperature and health. Temperature is treated as an exogenous variable in this model. In
order to keep the exposition simple we assume that climate change leads to an increase in
temperatures in the summer only when higher temperatures are harmful for health so that ∂S/∂T < 0. In
reality, warmer winters can in principle lead to lower mortality rates.
The individual faces the standard budget constraint of the form:
(3) XC + pHXH = I,
where I is exogenous income. The individual’s problem is to choose XC, and XH to maximize (1) subject to
(2) and (3). The first‐order conditions associated with an interior optimum are:
(4)

U

X C

(5)

pH
U / S

S / X H


Condition (4) shows that the Lagrange multiplier  equals the marginal utility of income. Condition (5)
shows that purchases of the health‐producing good XH are made until their marginal cost pH equals the
5

A more complete model would also include leisure. See Harrington and Portney (1987).

5

monetized value of the health time it provides. Solving for the first‐order conditions yields input demand
equations for XC and XH that are functions of exogenous variables prices, income, and temperature.
Further, it reveals the indirect utility function, V, which is the maximum utility obtainable given p, I, and
T.
The indirect utility function V(p, I, T) can be used to derive an expression for the welfare impact
of climate change, holding constant utility (and prices). In particular, consider an increase in T as climate
change is predicted to increase temperatures. In this case, it is evident that the consumer must be
compensated for changes in T with changes in I when utility is held constant. Denote this function as
I*(T). The term dI*(T)/dT is the change in income necessary to hold utility constant for a change in T. In
other words, it measures willingness to pay (accept) for a decrease (increase) in temperatures. In this
stylized model that focuses on mortality and temperature alone, dI*(T)/dT is the theoretically correct
measure of the health‐related welfare impact of climate change.
The challenge to derive this measure is that the indirect utility function is not observable and so
we must derive an expression for dI*(T)/dT in terms that can be measured with available data sets.
Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) derive a practical expression for dI*(T)/dT when utility depends only
on S and XC:

dI * (T ) 
X H*   U / S dS 

  
  pH
(6)

dT
T
dT 


  
Equation (6) shows that the willingness to pay/accept for a change in temperature can be
inferred from measured changes in S, and XH. The total derivative of the survival function with respect to
temperature (dS/dT), or the dose‐response function, is obtained through the estimation of
epidemiological‐style equations that do not control for XH. The vast majority of the public health and
economics literature reviewed here has used such an approach. The term (∂U/∂S)/ is the dollar value
of the disutility of a change in the survival rate. This is known as the value of a statistical life (VSL) and
empirical estimates are available (see e.g., Ashenfelter and Greenstone 2004). The first term is the
partial derivative of XH with respect to temperature multiplied by the price of XH.
Since temperature increases in this model raise the effective price of survival, the theory would
predict that dS/dT ≤ 0 and ∂XH/∂T ≥ 0. Further, it is possible that there will be a large change in the
consumption of XH (at the expense of consumption of XC) and little change in S. The key point is that in
this model the full welfare effect of the exogenous change in temperature is reflected in changes in the
survival rate and in the consumption of the health‐preserving good XH. More generally, this simple
model highlights the importance of adaptation in modifying the temperature‐health relationship.

6

Studies based on the epidemiological dose‐response model alone (i.e. those that do not analyze
adaptation as a separate endogenous variable) are likely to understate the health‐related social cost of
climate change.
It is important to highlight that this simple framework has some limitations. First, by focusing on
mortality, it only offers a partial measure of the health‐related welfare loss, because climate change may
affect other health outcomes (e.g., morbidity rates, chronic disease, quality of life, etc). Further, climate
change may induce many forms of adaptation through investments in XH (e.g., energy expenditures for
temperature regulation (i.e. AC), substituting outdoor time for indoor time, geographic mobility, etc).6
As such, the data requirements to analyze the full set of adaptations are tremendous.
Finally, the simple static model presented here obscures an issue that may be especially relevant
given that all empirical studies of the temperature‐mortality relationship are based on short‐term (i.e.
day‐to‐day) or intermediate‐term (i.e. year‐to‐year) fluctuations in temperature. An important issue that
is discussed below is the extent to which studies identified by such fluctuations are externally valid to
make meaningful statements about the health effects of permanent climate change. Short‐ to medium‐
term adaptations such as purchasing an air conditioner or increasing energy demand to use air
conditioning are possible in response to temporary increases in temperature. In the longer‐run, many
other forms of adaptations – slower in nature – will be possible. For example, permanent climate change
may lead individuals improve the heat protection and energy efficiency of their homes or perhaps even
to migrate out of regions where the new climate is detrimental to health.

III. METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES
There are several important methodological issues that require attention in assessing studies of the
prospective effect of climate change on human health including: (A) What are the health outcomes
analyzed? (B) How is exposure to temperature modeled? (C) What is the research design and how does
it address the main statistical challenges? (D) What measures of adaptation are considered in the
analysis? And (E) What is the external validity of the study regarding the possible impacts of climate
change on health?
An important methodological issue that I leave aside for this review for reason of brevity is the
dimension of climate or weather that is under study (e.g., change in temperature, precipitation, sea
6

Energy consumption may affect utility through other channels in addition to its role in self‐protection. For
example, high temperatures are uncomfortable. It would be straightforward to add comfort to the utility function
and make comfort a function of temperature and energy consumption. In this case the observed change in energy
consumption would reflect its role in self‐protection and comfort.

7

level, storms, etc). As mentioned in the introduction, I will focus exclusively on health impacts and
adaptation driven by extreme temperatures, noting that these studies represent the majority of the
accumulated knowledge in this research area.

A. Health outcomes:
The overwhelming majority of studies focus on mortality or hospitalization rates as the health outcome
analyzed. All‐cause and cause‐specific mortality for causes that are thought to be modulated by
temperature (cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease) are generally the main outcomes, as
opposed to mortality directly coded as “heat‐related”. This is because only a few deaths are directly
coded as being caused by heat on death certificates. Premature mortality is clearly a key societal health
outcome. Nevertheless, the strong focus on these outcomes as opposed to others (e.g., incidence of
chronic conditions) also reflects the fact that vital statistics data on age and cause‐specific mortality and
administrative records from hospital admissions are available from a wide range of countries over
relatively long periods of time.
A notable methodological difference exists between the studies in economics and the studies in
public health. Economic studies generally estimate models for annual or monthly mortality rates using
panel data methods, in particular fixed effects models. These fixed effects are used to control for
permanent time‐invariant differences in health across geographic areas (and possibly for differences by
SES group and location) while also controlling for seasonality and trends in health over time. On the
other hand, studies in public health typically are based on models for city‐level daily mortality counts.
These are analyzed in a Poisson regression framework and also allow for geographical and temporal
heterogeneity.
Other health outcomes considered include measures of infant neonatal health (see e.g.,
Deschenes, Greenstone, and Guryan 2009). These are especially important given that exposure to
extreme weather events during the perinatal and postnatal periods may lead to significant long‐term
reductions in health and quality of life. Therefore, the key implication of this is that the available
empirical estimates can only characterize a partial measure of the health‐related welfare loss, because
climate change may affect other health outcomes (e.g., morbidity rates, chronic respiratory conditions,
quality of life, etc) and those have not been extensively studied. An important direction for future
research is to expand upon these health outcomes.
A key challenge for studies of the impact of extreme temperatures on health that seeks to
inform about substantive changes in life expectancy is to develop estimates that are based on the long‐

8

term impact of such shocks on life expectancy. This information cannot be obtained from studies that
correlate day‐to‐day changes in temperature with day‐to‐day changes in mortality in presence of
delayed effects and/or ‘harvesting’. “Harvesting” or short‐term mortality displacement refers to the
temporal advancement of death among persons who are already ill or at high risk of dying. On the other
hand, delayed effects refer to the case when the effect of temperature shocks on health takes several
days or weeks to manifest themselves. The solution to this problem is to design studies that examine
intermediate‐ and long‐term effects, rather than only short‐term effects, either through appropriate
time aggregation of the data (as in Deschenes and Greenstone 2011) or through the use of distributed
lag models (as in Braga et al. 2001 and Deschenes and Moretti 2009).7

B. Temperature exposure:
Heat (and cold) –related mortality is the result of excessive temperature‐related stress experienced by
the human body. The body’s heat regulatory function enables us to cope with exposure to high and low
temperatures, but this coping increases the stress on many functions, primarily the cardiovascular
circulation. Most studies therefore focus on ambient temperature, measuring a single or group of
weather stations near cities or county centers, as an indicator of heat stress. This invariably leads to
some measurement error since the actual heat stress experienced by the population is not
systematically recorded. Further, adaptations such as air conditioning also modify the relationship
between ambient temperatures and heat stress.
The majority of studies focus on daily average temperature, and some also use daily minimum
and maximum temperatures to capture differences in daytime and nighttime exposure. Additionally,
some studies control for measures of relative humidity or dew temperature, or calculate measures of
apparent temperature such as the heat index. Generally, these additional considerations do not lead to
meaningful changes in the model estimates (compared to models that only control for temperatures).
The key modeling issue with temperature is the fact that nonlinearities and threshold effects
need to be accounted for. Credible studies of the effect of temperature on mortality generally detect
significant effects only at the upper and lower extremes of the temperature distribution. Empirically,
this is accomplished by modeling temperature through splines, threshold indicators, or temperature‐day
bins. This latter approach discretizes the daily temperature distribution in a set of ranges or ‘bins’ and
then allow each temperature range (up to a reference category) to have a potentially differential impact
7

Studies that focus on isolated heat waves are particularly sensitive to the problem of short‐term mortality
displacement.

9

on the health outcome. The temperature‐day bins approach is used in most economics paper in this
literature, whereas in public health the spline approach is most common.

C. Research design
For obvious reasons the effect of temperature on human health has not been studied under the
protocol of randomized control trials. All studies, both in the economics and public health /
epidemiological literatures are based on observational data, generally from vital statistics registries.
Nevertheless, due to the unpredictability of weather conditional on time and location, these studies are
identified through presumably exogenous shocks to local weather distributions across days or years. As
such these are quasi‐experimental studies with a reasonable degree of internal validity.
In the public health literature, the standard approach, known as the ‘time‐series approach,’ is to
relate daily mortality rates or counts measured in multiple geographic areas (typically at the city level) to
the temperature exposure variables. 8 This is done through a Poisson regression model, so the resulting
estimates are interpreted in relative risk. The effect of seasonality and other secular time trends are
controlled for by including smooth splines in season and time, as well as day of the week indicators.
When applicable, models also include covariates to control for other predictors of health, such as
ambient pollution. These models are estimated separately by city, and the set of parameters of interest
– i.e. the city‐specific temperature‐mortality gradients – can be averaged across cities using various
statistical techniques, for example a hierarchical model.
The approach used in economics is similar, although there are a few differences. The key
difference is that a single set of temperature‐mortality gradients is estimated, or at the very least, it is
not estimated for each observed geographical area. This allows the inclusion of county or city fixed
effects, which can also be included in the ‘time‐series approach’ used in epidemiology since the constant
term from each city‐specific regression is equivalent to a city fixed effect. These variables play a key role
in the analysis as they absorb all unobserved county‐ or city‐specific‐ time invariant determinants of the
mortality rate. So, for example, differences in the overall healthiness of the local population will not
confound the analysis. A second difference is that the influence of seasonality and other time trends is
controlled for by year, or year‐by‐geographic area, and season fixed effects. The inclusion of time fixed

8

The public health / epidemiological literature also report ‘descriptive studies’ or ‘heat wave studies’ which are
not reviewed in this paper. These studies focus on mortality (or other measures of health) in isolated heat wave
events and compare mortality during the heat wave to baseline mortality for the same city in the years prior to the
heat wave.

10

effects that vary geographically is also important since they control for time‐varying differences that are
common within a geographic area and that affect health (e.g., changes in state Medicare policies).

D. Measures of adaptation.
The broad policy literature (e.g, IPCC 2007, NIEHS 2010) strongly emphasizes adaptation and its role in
reducing the health impacts of climate change. The words “adaptation” and “adaptive” appear 56 and
96 times in IPCC 2007 and NIEHS 2010, respectively. The reviews list several possible adaptation
strategies in response to global warming and increased incidence of extreme temperature events. These
can be categorized as household (or individual) level actions, or community (possibly national) level
actions as follows:

Household level adaptations:
Air conditioning
Change in outdoor/indoor time allocation
Wearing sun‐protective clothing
House design
Geographical mobility

Community level adaptations:
Early warning systems and other health
communications (media, internet, etc)
Outreach systems
Establishment of local cooling centers
Fan distribution

This strong focus on adaptation is explained by the fact that it is likely to be one of the most
important components of the global strategy to address climate change in light of the difficulties in
reaching a global agreement to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, especially in the short run.
Despite this strong focus little is directly known about the effectiveness of particular adaptation
strategies in reducing the health impairments caused by exposure to temperature extremes. Empirical
evidence on the ability to adapt to large‐scale climate or environmental change remains limited due to
the few credible opportunities to combine large scale real‐world data on adaptive behaviors with data
on health outcomes for long periods of time.
Studies in public health and epidemiology generally do not directly measure and analyze any of
the adaptation strategies listed above. Some studies residually associate reductions over time in heat‐
related mortality during successive heat waves to better preparation and adaptation (e.g., Fouillet et al.
2008). A few other studies relate city‐specific estimates of mortality‐temperature gradients to city‐level
penetration rates of air‐conditioning (e.g., Curriero et al. 2002). This literature does not appear to have
directly analyzed the relationship between measures of adaptation (say, AC usage) and temperature.

11

Further, it has not examined whether AC usage dampens the relationship between mortality and
temperature.
In economics, four of the five papers considered in this review do explicitly analyze the
relationship between some form of adaptation (AC/energy consumption, outdoor time use,
geographical mobility) and measures of temperature extremes. So it is clear the economics literature is
more advanced in this arena. Nevertheless, these measures of adaptation have been analyzed as
dependent variables only in models that complement similar models where measures of health are
outcomes. As a result, an important research gap remains in quantifying the extent to which these
adaptations modify the relationship between health and temperature. Acquiring the data files and
performing this sort of analysis is an important goal for future research.

E. External validity and projected health impacts of climate change
Are studies based on historical variation in temperature and mortality externally valid to assess the
health impacts of global climate change? This is an extremely important question that has received little
attention outside of economics. The key problem, as explained in Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), is
that all empirical studies are identified by historical variation in temperature, rather than a permanent
change in climate. It is an open and debatable question if the estimates of the temperature‐mortality
relationship estimated from the observed historical variation are externally valid to the new
‘environment’ after permanent climate change.9
Absent random assignment of climates across population, there is no research design that can
fully address this point. At the very least, economic theory suggests that this approach leads to an
overstatement of the projected human health costs of climate change. This is because the available set
of health‐preserving adaptations that are available to respond to a temperature shock that occurs in the
short‐run are constrained relative to the set of health‐preserving adaptations that are likely to be
available in the longer‐run. One implication of this, it appears, is that studies in economics that leverage
year‐to‐year shocks to temperature distributions are more likely to have a higher degree of external
validity than studies in public health that rely primarily on day‐to‐day shocks to ambient temperature.

9

On the other hand, studies directly analyzing the relationship between climate (e.g., the long‐run average of
temperature and health are subject to the standard cross‐sectional bias. Since climate is time‐invariant (at least in
periods where health status is comparable), it will be impossible to separately identify the effect of climate on
health from the effect of unobserved determinants of health that are correlated with climate. Perhaps for this
reason no such study appears in the reviews by IPCC (2007) and NIEHS (2010).

12

A second and related question is what are the predicted impacts of climate change on health,
notwithstanding the issue of external validity? Again, few studies outside of economics have tackled this
question. This task requires the preparation of data files with predicted changes in the temperature
exposure variables (and in any other weather/climate variables included in the statistical models) over
various time horizons, at the local level.
To this end, Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) use future climate predictions from the Hadley
Centre’s 3rd Coupled Ocean‐Atmosphere General Circulation Model and from National Center for
Atmospheric Research’s Community Climate System Model (CCSM) 3. These daily data are available in
model‐gridded format for the entire United States, and thereby allow the derivation of future climate
predictions that vary geographically across areas of the country. Calculating the actual magnitude and
the geographical difference in the predicted impacts of climate change on health should be an
important component of future research as well.

IV. Review of the Evidence
Tables 2 and 3 summarize the recent empirical studies of the impact of ambient temperature on health.
For studies in economics, I derived the set of studies by searching Econlit, the NBER Working Papers
Series, and by examining citations in published papers. Book chapters, review articles, and dissertation
chapters were excluded. A first key point for this review is that the set of empirical studies in economics
that analyze health, temperature, and possibly adaptation is small.10 Only 5 articles: Deschenes and
Moretti (2009), Deschenes, Greenstone and Guryan (2009), Graff‐Zivin and Neidell (2010), Deschenes
and Greenstone (2011), and Barreca (2012) fit these requirements.11 Of those, 4 articles analyze
adaptation measures that include air‐conditioning (energy consumption), outdoor time use, and
geographical mobility.
The literature outside of economics (e.g., public health, epidemiology, etc) is much wider. In
order to limit the set of studies included, I derived the set of empirical studies by examining the citation
in two prominent and broad policy surveys: A Human Health Perspective on Climate Change (NIEHS
2010), and the chapter ‘Human Health’ in Climate Change 2007 (IPCC 2007). 12 Further, I also examine
the citations in the papers listed in IPCC (2007) and NIEHS (2010). Based on this, there are 14 studies to
10

Studies derived from IAM, CGE or calibrated models are excluded.
The Barreca study is very similar to Deschenes and Greenstone (2011). The only difference is that the former
includes controls for humidity in the regression models and analyzed monthly mortality as opposed to annual
mortality.
12
Studies that do not include an empirical analysis such as review articles and studies that only include data
tabulations are excluded.
11

13

be reviewed. These selected studies are amongst the most cited in this area. Nevertheless, it is possible
that important studies are ignored by this selection approach. For the rest of this review I will refer to
these studies as the “public health” studies.

A. Cold and heat‐related mortality
Although the studies use a variety of data sets, time periods, populations, temperature exposure
variables, and statistical models, most do find that temperature extremes lead to significant reductions
in health, generally measured with excess mortality. This point is illustrated in Figure 1 below that is
taken from Deschenes and Greenstone (2011). It shows the temperature‐mortality response function
estimated from daily temperature and annual county‐level mortality data for the U.S. between 1968 and
2002. The key finding is that temperature‐days above 90 F and below 40 F are associated with
statistically significant increases in the annual mortality rate in the U.S. The estimates indicate that each
day where the average temperature exceeds 90 F leads to an increase the annual mortality rate by
0.1%, while days where the average temperature lies between 80 F and 90 F do not lead to significant
changes in the mortality rate. It is also evident that cold‐related mortality is important, at least in the
United States. Days where the average temperature is below 40 F are associated with excess mortality,
although the magnitude is smaller than the heat‐related excess mortality of the >90 F days. This
suggests that the overall impact of climate change that leads to a right shift in the daily temperature
distribution is a priori ambiguous, as it might lead to a reduction in cold‐related mortality and an
increase in heat‐related mortality.
The differences in the estimated effect of temperature on mortality across the temperature
distribution suggest that the relationship is indeed nonlinear. Importantly, most of the reviewed studies
use a statistical model that allows for nonlinear relationships or threshold effects. Unfortunately, the
lack of uniformity of the modeling of temperature effects across the wide range studies makes it
virtually impossible to convert the estimates into elasticities or other statistics that can be compared
across studies. In addition, the public health studies mostly report the estimates through figures, and do
not consistently report point estimates and confidence intervals for the temperature gradients. As such
it is difficult to interpret the estimates beyond the textual summaries provided in these papers.
Some other results on the effect of temperature on health are worth emphasizing. Not all
causes of death are equally impacted by temperature fluctuations. Cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases are two causes whose risk is elevated by cold and heat exposure, while neoplasms are not. Not
surprisingly, the impact of temperature on health and mortality varies across the age distribution, with

14

the older population (e.g., 65+ or 75+) being the groups with the greatest risk. Many studies have also
examined if the relationship between temperatures and mortality varies geographically. Such variation
could reflect differences in acclimatization, as the population that is least exposed to high temperatures
may be more likely to be impacted by heat waves and extreme events. Similarly, differences in housing
stocks’ abilities to face extreme temperatures by having central AC, as well as differences in SES and
state‐level public health preparation, may also explain why the effect of temperature on mortality could
vary across geography or climatic baselines.
The evidence is generally suggestive of geographical differences in the effect of high
temperatures on mortality. However, the areas where the mortality impacts are more pronounced tend
to differ. For example, Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) and Barreca (2012) find that the responses are
the highest in the South Atlantic and East South Central divisions, whereas Curriero et al. (2002)
conclude that colder temperatures have larger effects on mortality risk in southern cities and warmer
temperatures have larger effects on mortality risk in northern cities. The paper fails to report standard
errors so it is impossible to assess the significance of such a finding.13 Deschenes and Greenstone (2011)
try to test whether the difference in response functions across divisions is due to better heat‐(cold)
related adaptation in warmer (colder) places. These tests, based on US census division specific estimates
of the temperature‐mortality relationship (so just 9 data points per temperature bin), fail to produce
empirical support for the hypothesis that differential adaptation to hot and cold temperatures explains
the differences across divisions in the effects of hot and cold temperatures. This sort of hypothesis
should be investigated more thoroughly in future research.
Other possible sources of heterogeneity in the temperature‐mortality response include
difference across age groups and sex. Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) reports estimates of heat‐
related mortality that grow in magnitude with age along with the overall mortality rate. As a result,
impacts in proportion to overall mortality are similar across age groups. Nevertheless, it is generally
believed that the elderly and infants are the most vulnerable age groups due to their reduced capacity
for physiological heat regulation function. Similarly, individuals from lower socioeconomic groups and
those with prior histories of cardiovascular disease are also thought to be more at risk for heat‐related
mortality. Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) also report estimated temperature‐mortality effects that
are similar for males and females. Ebi et al. (2004) also examine male‐female difference in the effect of

13

Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) do find that the effect of 90 F+ temperature‐days is the largest in the New
England division, however, the estimate is statistically insignificant (p‐value = 0.24).

15

temperature on hospital admissions in California. It is impossible to assess the male‐female differential
effect with the information reported in the paper.
Another important concern is the possibility of bias in the estimates of the temperature‐
mortality relationship due to the exclusion of confounders such as ambient pollution or humidity.
Adding controls for humidity or dew temperature in order to approximate better apparent temperature
generally does not lead to meaningful changes in the effect of heat on mortality, but does reduce the
measured effect of cold temperature (Barreca 2012). Studies in public health have also investigated
whether ambient pollution modifies the temperature‐mortality relationship. This is important because
the concentrations of some pollutants are strongly associated with temperature (e.g., ground‐level
ozone). The literature has not reached a definitive conclusion on whether failure to control for ambient
pollution confounds the temperature‐mortality relationship.
Finally, it is important to consider whether the received evidence is robust to the harvesting and
other dynamic effects that were discussed in Section III(A). Indeed, most of the reviewed studies allow
for a dynamic relationship between temperature and mortality. Studies based on daily data tend to
address the issue by including distributed lags in temperature and computing cumulative effects. Studies
based on monthly or annual data instead focus on time‐aggregating the daily temperature data in a
manner that allows for sufficient post temperature shock mean‐reversion thereby reducing concerns
about near term displacement.
The key finding that is found throughout the literature is that extreme heat is associated with
some mortality displacement in that contemporaneous (or “day 0”) impacts are larger than cumulative
impacts that account for exposure over periods of days or weeks prior to the mortality event. In other
words, heat effects on mortality are more immediate, and to some extent reflect the influence of
harvesting or forward displacement. In the case of cold temperature exposure, the mortality impacts
tend to accumulate over time, at least for certain causes of death, indicative of delayed effects (see e.g.,
Braga et al. 2001 and Deschenes and Moretti 2009). The implication of both results is that the
substantive long‐term impact of a given day’s temperature on longevity may take several days before it
impacts observable health.
Hajat et al. (2005) also report differences in the estimated displacement effect of high
temperature on mortality across countries (India, Hungary, England). Impacts of high temperature
shocks in Delhi, India on mortality last for up to 4 weeks, whereas in London, England, the impact
disappears after 2 days. Interestingly, the contemporaneous effect (i.e. the lag 0 effect) for all 3
countries falls within the same confidence interval. An important component of future research is to

16

better ascertain the differences in the temperature‐mortality response across countries, especially the
difference between developed and less developed countries.

B. Adaptation
Most studies in public health do not directly measure and analyze adaptive behaviors in response to
temperature extremes, although some do consider adaptation as a residual explanation for changes
observed in mortality effects over time (see Table 2). In contrast, 4 out of the 5 recent studies published
in economics journals include adaptation measures as part of their empirical analysis (see Table 1). Air‐
conditioning is the form of adaptation to climate change that is by far the most cited in both the broad
policy and academic literatures. The reasons behind this are obvious since air‐conditioning can regulate
ambient indoor temperatures and lower the heat stress imposed on the body. One issue with studying
air‐conditioning, however, is that data on air‐conditioning usage is not available in any large‐scale
survey. Moreover, information on air‐conditioning ownership is limited to decadal information in the
U.S. Census of Population and in the smaller scale American Housing Survey, which is conducted every 6
years and difficult to link to county‐level measures of health in a systematic way.
Instead of focusing directly on air‐conditioning and its potential effect on reducing heat‐related
mortality, Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) and Barreca (2012) rely on residential energy consumption.
Data on annual residential energy consumption is available from the EIA since at least the late 1960s and
so it can be used in a rich panel data analysis.14 In addition, residential energy consumption has the
advantage of embodying the adaptive actions taken in response to extreme cold and extreme heat. As a
result it is straightforward to use a temperature‐residential energy consumption response function to
assess the impact of climate change on this form of adaptation.
Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) find a nonlinear relationship between annual energy
consumption and daily temperature, where energy consumption is elevated in response to
temperature‐ days at the two extremes of the distribution. This is illustrated in Figure 2 below which
shows the temperature‐residential energy consumption response function estimated from daily
temperature and annual state‐level energy consumption data for the U.S. between 1968 and 2002.
Another important finding is the residential energy consumption response curve is more pronounced

14

An excellent study of the effect of temperature extremes on residential energy consumption is Auffhammer and
Aroonruengsawat (2011). They relate rich household‐level electricity billing data to temperature‐day bins by
climatic region for the entire state of California and find important heterogeneity in the response function across
climate zones.

17

than the mortality response curve: for example, each additional temperature‐day exceeding 90° F
increase annual energy consumption by 0.4%, relative to the baseline temperature‐day. The
corresponding impact in Figure 1 for annual mortality is 0.1%, so the residential energy response to this
given temperature shock is 4 times as large as the mortality response.
Even though the data sets available in Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) do not allow us to
directly test the hypothesis that access to ambient temperature regulation contributed to reduce heat
and cold‐related mortality, it seems plausible to conclude that the weaker mortality‐temperature
relationship is at least partially due to the self‐protection provided by the cooling from increased energy
consumption.
Graff‐Zivin and Neidell (2010) present the best study of time allocation responses to extreme
temperatures. They use data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) for 2003‐2008 and examine
the response of time spent indoors/outdoors to exposure to extreme temperatures. The models are
based on individual‐level data and include year‐month and county fixed effects so the identification is
driven by variation in temperature over time within counties and within seasons.
The main finding that is relevant for this review is that time spent indoors significantly increase
when maximum daily temperatures exceeds 100 F or are below 65 F. The magnitude of the increase in
indoor time in response to extreme heat is non‐negligible: it corresponds to about 2% of the average
time spent indoors in their sample. While the Graff‐Zivin and Neidell analysis does inform the human
health impact of climate change directly, it makes two key points. First individuals do change their
behavior in response to exposure to temperature extremes, for comfort or health reasons. The Becker‐
Grossman model in Section II predicts that any cost in terms of lost utility from shifting time spent
outdoors to indoors must be compensated by an equal or larger utility from increased health or
comfort. Second, the magnitude of the adjustment documented is large enough to expect it might lead
to significant improvements in health in a future that includes the extensive warming predicted by most
GCMs.
Finally, Deschenes and Moretti (2009) consider geographical mobility as an adaptive response to
exposure to temperature extremes. Using daily U.S. vital statistics for 1972‐1988, they find that cold
temperature spells lead to significant and large increases in mortality, especially for the 65+ population.
The predicted extent of cold‐related mortality is larger than heat‐related mortality. They also test
whether mobility decisions of individuals are correlated with the health benefits associated with
avoiding extreme cold. The main finding of this analysis is that the probability of moving to a state with a
warmer climate is higher for the age groups that are predicted to benefit more in terms of lower

18

mortality compared to the age groups that are predicted to benefit less.15 While this analysis suggests
that health considerations are taken into account for mobility decisions, it based only on the response to
the lower segment of the temperature distribution. As global average temperatures continue to rise, it
remains to be seen if the reverse migration pattern from the Southwest to the Northeast will emerge.

C. Climate change impact predictions
Once an estimate of the temperature‐mortality (or health) relationship is obtained the question
becomes what to make of that information? There is a marked difference between the public health and
economics literature in that regard. The literature in public health–epidemiology primarily uses this
information for broad public health recommendations such as the creation or evaluation of early
warning systems and outreach systems. However, these papers generally provide little detail about the
implications of their results for predicting the health impacts of climate change.
In contrast, several papers in economics (Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), Deschenes,
Greenstone, and Guryan (2009), Barreca (2012)) combine the estimated temperature‐mortality
relationships with end‐of‐century (i.e., 2070–2099) daily climate change predictions from state of the art
climate models and “business‐as‐usual” scenarios. Under a series of assumptions, this allows the
calculation of partial estimates of the health‐related social costs of climate change. These are partial
estimates because mortality rates are the only health outcome analyzed in these studies. As mentioned
in the introduction, the health impacts of climate change are likely to be significantly broader. To date,
these calculations have been produced only for the United States, although work in progress by Burgess
et al. (2011) is implementing a similar approach for India. Clearly more work is needed to empirically
assess the likely impacts of climate change on health in other countries.
The predictions in Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), based on the error‐corrected Hadley 3
A1FI climate model and scenario, suggest that climate change will lead to approximately 63,000
additional deaths annually in the United States at the end of the century, or a net 3 percent increase in
the annual mortality rate. This estimates accounts for the increase in heat‐related mortality and the
decrease in cold‐related mortality associated with climate. Barecca (2012) reports similar estimates. To
put the 3% increase estimate in some context, it is useful to compare it to the observed improvements
in longevity in the United States over the last 30 years. During this period, the age‐adjusted mortality
rate declined by approximately 1 percent per year. Thus, even if the end of century mortality predictions
15

Deschenes and Moretti also note that there are many unobserved factors that determine mobility decisions and
so the reported correlations do not necessarily have a causal interpretation.

19

are taken literally, the increase in mortality predicted to occur under climate change is roughly
equivalent to losing just three years of typical improvement in longevity over the rest of the 21st
century.
Another approach to characterize the predicted impacts of climate change on mortality is to
report the present discounted value (PDV) of the stream expected monetized losses associated with the
predicted increase in mortality. This approach requires daily climate model predictions for all years of
the 21st century and all climate model grid points (as opposed a single average prediction for the 2070‐
2099 period). In addition, the mortality estimates need to be transformed in years of life loss using life
tables and age‐specific estimates of the temperature‐mortality relationship. Years of life loss estimates
can then be monetized using an estimate for the value of statistical life (VSL). Therefore, these
monetized calculations entail strong data requirements. To date, only Deschenes and Greenstone (2011)
have produced such calculations.
Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) use two different sets of assumptions regarding the VSL. One
specification assumes a fixed VSL of $100,000 per life‐year while the other allows for real per capita
income grows of 2 percent per year and an elasticity of the value of a life‐year with respect to income of
1.6, which is leads to increases in the VSL (or value of life‐years) over time (Costa and Kahn 2004). Using
a discount rate of 3 percent yields a PDV of the U.S. mortality cost of climate change of $1.0 to $5.5
trillion. By comparison, the corresponding PDV of the adaptive residential energy costs of climate
change varies from $0.5 to $3.0 trillion, depending on the assumed rate of growth for energy price (0 or
5 percent annually). This simple decomposition of social cost of climate change associated with
mortality as the single health outcome and residential energy consumption as the single adaptation
highlights that adaptation is economically important: it accounts for about one third of this partial social
cost.
Finally, it is important to recognize that these projections of health impacts at the end of the
century requires a number of strong assumptions, including that the climate change predictions are
correct, that relative prices will remain constant or evolve deterministically according to a projection,
the same technologies will prevail, and the demographics of the US population (e.g., age structure) and
their geographic distribution will remain unchanged. These assumptions are strong, but their benefit is
that they allow for a transparent analysis based on the available historical data.
In particular, the assumption of stability of medical and other technologies and the fact that all
studies based on historical data are necessarily identified by data about the past and by short‐run
variation in temperature (as opposed to long‐run variation in temperature) generally leads to an

20

overstatement of human health costs of climate change since the set of possible health‐preserving
adaptations will necessarily be more limited in the short‐run than in the long‐run. Absent random
assignment of climates across populations, no research design based on real‐world data can fully
address this point. Therefore all empirical studies of the prospective effect of climate change on health
suffer from this limitation, and should be interpreted accordingly.

V. Implications and Conclusions
My reading of the empirical literature on the impact of extreme temperature exposure on health
highlights three sets of implications for the practice of IAMs, and for future empirical research. First, the
empirical identification of the response function linking extreme temperatures to health is difficult. The
main challenges are that the response functions are likely to be nonlinear, reflect complicated dynamic
relationships, and possibly confounded by omitted variables bias and/or by secular and seasonality
trends. As such, the response functions and parameter estimates that are taken from the empirical
literature and integrated in IAMs must be critically chosen and evaluated.
Second, it is likely that there is significant heterogeneity in the response functions, reflecting
both secular changes over time (as a result of economic growth and technological improvements), and
across countries (reflecting differences in economic environments, adaptation possibilities, and
population vulnerabilities). Few empirical studies have investigated these issues and so little is known
about either types of variation. The question is how to calibrate a regional IAM to reflect actual
variation across regions in the response functions when the variation has not been properly
documented?
Third, very little is known empirically about the health‐preserving effects of adaptation in
response to extreme temperatures. The limited set of existing studies of health, adaptation and climate
change all focus on the United States, and on very few adaptations. In addition, no study to date has
estimated the interaction effect between extreme temperature and access to adaptation measures.
Therefore the exact magnitude by which adaptation can mitigate the detrimental effect of extreme
temperatures on health is largely unknown. Finally, it would be incorrect to extrapolate the little
credible evidence available for the U.S. to developing countries in a regional IAM.
The research summarized in this review also offers broader implications for policy and motivates
future research. The first point is that most of the research has focused on the United States where the
required data sets are readily available. It is especially important to develop estimates for countries
where economies are more weather‐dependent or where current temperatures are higher than in the

21

United States. These countries are also generally poorer and equipped with less infrastructure, and so
identifying feasible and life‐preserving adaptations is especially important. This will contribute to
reducing the human health burden of climate change and also inform the development of rational
climate policy which requires knowledge of the health and other costs of climate change from around
the world.
The second point is that there is a pressing need for developing databases and research designs
to study additional forms of adaptation, in the United States and elsewhere. The available evidence is
taken from a handful of studies, and more information is needed before concrete policy
recommendations can be proposed. These studies clearly show that in the context analyzed adaptation
is incomplete. Nevertheless the results indicate that adaptation is both economically important and
contributes to reducing mortality attributable to temperature extremes.

22

References:
Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone. 2004. “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the Value
of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Political Economy. 112 (February): S226‐S267.
Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat. 2011. “Impacts of Climate Change on Residential
Electricity Consumption: Evidence From Billing Data,” in The Economics Of Climate Change: Adaptations
Past and Present, Gary Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, editors. University of Chicago Press.
Barnett, Adrian Gerard. 2007. “Temperature and Cardiovascular Deaths in the US Elderly.” Epidemiology
18 (3) (May): 369–372.
Barreca, Alan 2012. “Climate Change, Humidity, and Mortality in the United States,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management
Burgess, Robin, Olivier Deschenes, David Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone 2011. "Weather and
Death in India: Mechanisms and Implications for Climate Change," Mimeograph, MIT Department of
Economics
Basu, Rupa and Jonathan M. Samet. 2002. “Relation Between Elevated Ambient Temperature and
Mortality: A Review of the Epidemiologic Evidence.” Epidemiologic Review. 24 (December): 190‐202.
Chestnut, Lauraine G., William S. Breffle, Joel B. Smith, and Laurence S. Kalkstein. 1998. “Analysis of
Differences in Hot‐weather‐related Mortality Across 44 U.S. Metropolitan Areas.” Environmental Science
& Policy 1 (1) (March): 59–70.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940‐1980.” The Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty. 29(2): 159‐180.
Curriero, F. C., K. S. Heiner, J. M. Samet, S. L. Zeger, L. Strug, and J. A. Patz, “Temperature and Mortality
in 11 Cities of the Eastern United States.” American Journal of Epidemiology 155 (2002), 80–87.
Deschênes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. “Climate Change and Birth
Weight.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 99(2): 211‐217.
Deschênes, Olivier, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Extreme Weather Events, Mortality and Migration.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 659‐681.
Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the U.S.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3(4): 152‐185.
Ebi, K. L., K. A. Exuzides, E. Lau, M. Kelsh, and A. Barnston. 2004. “Weather Changes Associated with
Hospitalizations for Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke in California, 1983–1998.” International Journal
of Biometeorology 49 (1): 48–58.
Fouillet, A., G. Rey, V. Wagner, K. Laaidi, P. Empereur‐Bissonnet, A. Le Tertre, P. Frayssinet, et al. 2008.
“Has the Impact of Heat Waves on Mortality Changed in France Since the European Heat Wave of

23

Summer 2003? A Study of the 2006 Heat Wave.” International Journal of Epidemiology 37 (2) (April 1):
309–317.
Gouveia, Nelson, Shakoor Hajat, and Ben Armstrong. 2003. “Socioeconomic Differentials in the
Temperature–mortality Relationship in São Paulo, Brazil.” International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (3)
(June 1): 390–397.
Graff‐Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew J. Neidell. 2010. Temperature and the Allocation of Time: Implications
for Climate Change. Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15717.
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model.” In Handbook of Health Economics: Volume 1A,
edited by Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: North‐Holland.
Hajat, Shakoor, Ben G. Armstrong, Nelson Gouveia, and Paul Wilkinson. 2005. “Mortality Displacement
of Heat‐Related Deaths.” Epidemiology 16 (5) (September): 613–620.
Hajat, Shakoor, Ben Armstrong, Michela Baccini, Annibale Biggeri, Luigi Bisanti, Antonio Russo, Anna
Paldy, Bettina Menne, and Tom Kosatsky. 2006. “Impact of High Temperatures on Mortality.”
Epidemiology 17 (6) (November): 632–638.
Harrington, Winston and Paul R. Portney. 1987. “Valuing the Benefits of Health and Safety Regulation,”
Journal of Urban Economics 22 (July): 101‐112.
International Panel on Climate Change Working Group II. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Published for the International Panel on Climate Change.
Kalkstein, L S, and J S Greene. 1997. “An Evaluation of Climate/Mortality Relationships in Large U.S.
Cities and the Possible Impacts of a Climate Change.” Environmental Health Perspectives 105 (1)
(January): 84–93.
Morabito, Marco, Pietro Amedeo Modesti, Lorenzo Cecchi, Alfonso Crisci, Simone Orlandini, Giampiero
Maracchi, and Gian Franco Gensini. 2005. “Relationships Between Weather and Myocardial Infarction: A
Biometeorological Approach.” International Journal of Cardiology 105 (3) (December 7): 288–293.
National Institutes of Environmental Health Science 2010: “A Human Health Perspective On Climate
Change,” Accessed September 2010. http://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/docs/climatereport2010.pdf
Piver, W T, M Ando, F Ye, and C J Portier. 1999. “Temperature and Air Pollution as Risk Factors for Heat
Stroke in Tokyo, July and August 1980‐1995.” Environmental Health Perspectives 107 (11) (November 1):
911–916.
Schwartz, Joel, Jonathan M. Samet, and Jonathan A. Patz. 2004. “Hospital Admissions for Heart Disease.”
Epidemiology 15 (6) (November): 755–761.
Ye, F, W T Piver, M Ando, and C J Portier. 2001. “Effects of Temperature and Air Pollutants on
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Diseases for Males and Females Older Than 65 Years of Age in Tokyo,
July and August 1980‐1995.” Environmental Health Perspectives 109 (4) (April): 355–359

24

Figure 1: Estimated Relationship Between Annual Age‐Adjusted Mortality Rate Per 100,000 and
Average Daily Temperature in the United States, 1968‐2002
1.5

0.94

1.0
0.69
0.59

0.64

0.5

0.33

0.36
0.23

0.27

0.12
0.00

0.0

-0.5
<10

10-20

20-30

30-40

40-50

50-60

60-70

70-80

80-90

>90

Estimated Impact of a Day in 9 Daily Mean Temperature (F) Bins on Annual Mortality Rate,
Relative to a Day in the 50°-60° F Bin
-2 Std Error

Annual Deaths Per 100,000

+2 Std Error

Notes: Taken from Deschenes and Greenstone (2011). Figure 1 plots the aggregate response function between
annual mortality rate (per 100,000) and average daily temperatures, based on a sample of 107,590 county‐year
observations. The response function is normalized with the 50°‐60° F category set equal to zero so each of the 9
estimated coefficients corresponds to the estimated impact of an additional day in bin j on the annual age‐
adjusted mortality rate (i.e., deaths per 100,000) relative to the mortality rate associated with a day where the
temperature is between 50°‐60° F. The figure also shows the 95% confidence interval.

25

Figure 2: Estimated Relationship Between Log Residential Energy Consumption and Average Daily
Temperature, 1968‐2002
0.0060

0.0037

0.0040
0.0032

0.0019

0.0022
0.0017

0.0020
0.0012
0.0008

0.0000

0.0001

0.0003

0.0000

-0.0020
<10

10-20

20-30

30-40

40-50

50-60

60-70

70-80

80-90

>90

Estimated Impact of a Day in 9 Daily Mean Temperature (F) Bins on Log Annual Residential
Energy Consumption, Relative to a Day in the 50°-60° F Bin
-2 Std Error

Impact

+2 Std Error

Notes: Taken from Deschenes and Greenstone (2011). Figure 2 plots the estimated response function between log
annual residential energy consumption and daily mean temperatures, based on a sample of 1,715 state‐year
observations. The response function is normalized with the 50°‐60° F category so each of the 9 estimated
coefficients corresponds to the estimated impact of an additional day in bin j on residential QBTU relative to the
log residential energy QBTU associated with a day where the temperature is between 50°‐60° F. The figure also
shows the 95% confidence interval.

26

Table 1: Recent Studies of Health, Temperature Extremes, and Adaptation in Economics Literature
Study

Data Source and Sample

Measure of Temperature

Measure of
Adaptation
Geographical
mobility, Air‐
conditioning
(interaction of
temperature and
county‐level average
AC coverage)

Methodology and Comments

Main Findings

Estimates based on panel
fixed effect regression for
daily mortality rates. Models
include county  year 
month fixed effects and up to
30 days in lags.

Heat‐related mortality (80 F)
mostly associated with short‐term
displacement. Cold‐related (30 F)
excess mortality larger in
magnitude and persistent up to 30
days after temperature event.
Geographical mobility from
Northeast to Southwest has
contributed to increased longevity
in the U.S.

1.

Deschenes and
Moretti (2009)

1972‐1988 daily mortality
rate data at U.S. county
level, from Multiple
Cause of Death Files
(NCHS). DV = daily
mortality rate.

Indicator variables for
days with mean
temperature below 30 F
and above 80 F

2.

Deschenes,
Greenstone, and
Guryan (2009)

1972‐1988 daily natality
data at U.S. county level,
from Natality Detail Files
(NCHS). DV = infant
birthweight, indicators
for low birthweight.

Temperature‐day bins,
(daily mean temperature),
by gestational trimester

None

Estimates based on
individual‐level regression
and include controls for
maternal characteristics,
smooth profile in day of the
year, and county  year 
race fixed effects.

Exposure to temperature extremes
(<25F and >85F) in utero
associated with lower birth weight,
nd
rd
especially in 2 and 3 gestational
trimesters. Climate change (under
predictions from CCSM 3 A2)
predicted to increase incidence of
low birth weight.

3.

Graff‐Zivin and
Neidell (2010)

2003‐2006 American
Time Use Surveys (ATUS).
DV = time spent inside
and outside

Temperature‐day bins
(daily maximum
temperature)

Indoor time use

Estimates based on
individual‐level regression
and include controls for other
weather variables, individual
characteristics, day of the
week fixed effects,
year*month fixed effects and
county fixed effects.

Time spent indoors significantly
increase when maximum
temperature exceeds 100F or is
below 65F

4.

Deschenes and
Greenstone
(2011)

1968‐2002 annual
mortality rate data at
U.S. county level, from
Compressed Mortality
Files (NCHS). DV = annual
mortality rate

Temperature‐day bins
(daily mean temperature)

Residential energy
consumption
(cooling and heating)

Estimates based on panel
fixed effect regression for
annual mortality rates.
Models include county and
state  year fixed effects.
Model for residential energy
consumption estimated on
state*year panel.

Temperature‐days above 90F and
below 40 F associated with
increased mortality. Temperature‐
days above 80F and below 40 F
associated with increased
residential energy consumption.
Residential energy consumption
effect proportionally larger than
mortality effect. Climate change
(under predictions from Hadley 3
A1FI corrected) predicted to
increase mortality rate by 3% by
end of century.

27

Table 1: (continued)
Study
5.

Barreca (2012)

Data Source and Sample
1973‐2002 monthly
mortality rate data at
U.S. county level, from
Multiple Cause of Death
Files (NCHS). DV =
monthly mortality rate

Measure of Temperature
Temperature‐day bins
(daily mean temperature)

Measure of
Adaptation
Residential energy
consumption
(cooling and heating)

28

Methodology and
Comments
Same specification as
Deschenes and
Greenstone (2011), except
mortality data is at county‐
month level. Only largest
373 counties are included.
Models include also
measures of humidity.

Main Findings
Temperature‐days above 90F
associated with increased mortality.
High‐temperature result unchanged
by inclusion of humidity control.
Interactions between high
temperatures and humidity
insignificant. No systematic
relationship between residential
energy consumption and humidity.

Table 2: Recent Studies of Health, Temperature Extremes, and Adaptation in Public Health / Epidemiology Literature
Study

Data Source and Sample

Measure of
Temperature

1.

Kalkstein and
Greene (1997)

Daily mortality counts
from 44 U.S. MSAs,
1964‐1990 (NCHS). Age‐
adjusted mortality count
deviated from baseline
level

Days with either ‘hot
and dry’ or ‘moist
tropical’ as per Spatial
Synoptic Classification

2.

Chestnut et al.
(1998)

Same as Kalkstein and
Greene (1997)

Variability in daily
minimum summer
temperature, days with
“moist tropical 1” (MT1)
air mass.

3.

Piver et al.
(1999)

Daily records from
Tokyo, Japan, for
months of July and
August, 1980‐1995,
population aged 65+. DV
= Hospital emergency
transports for heat
stroke

4.

Ye et al. (2001)

5.

Braga et al.
(2001)

Mention of
Adaptation
in Text?
Yes

Measure of
Adaptation

Methodology and Comments

Main Findings

None

Estimates based on stepwise
regression.

Oppressive air masses associated
with increased excess mortality.
Relationship is stronger in the
Eastern U.S. than in the Southern
U.S.

Yes

Fraction of
houses with AC
in MSA (from
1980 Census)

Estimation sample is set of 44
MSA‐specific excess heat‐
related mortality estimates
from Kalkstein and Greene
(1997).

Variability in daily minimum
summer temperature and number
of days with MT1 air mass
associated with higher heat‐
related mortality even after
controlling for across MSA
differences in average AC rates.

Daily maximum
temperature, modeled
linearly

No

None

Models include up to 4 lags
and also control for ambient
pollution. Final estimates
based on stepwise regression
procedure.

Daily maximum temperature and
NO2 are associated with increased
hospital emergency transport for
heat stroke.

Same as Piver et al.
(1999). DV = Hospital
emergency transports
for CVD and RD

Daily maximum
temperature, modeled
linearly

No

None

Models include up to 4 lags
and also control for ambient
pollution. Final estimates
based on stepwise regression
procedure.

Daily maximum temperature not
associated with increased hospital
emergency transport for CVD and
RD.

Daily mortality counts
from 12 U.S. cities, 1986‐
1993 (NCHS). DV =
mortality count

Daily mean
temperature, modeled
with splines

Yes

City‐level
fraction of
houses with AC

Estimation based on city‐
specific Poisson model.
Model includes up to 21 days
in lags, and controls for
season, day of the week,
humidity, and barometric
pressure

Hot and cold temperature
exposure associated with excess
mortality. Effect of cold and heat
on mortality varies across cities.
Cold‐related mortality effect
persistent. Most of the heat‐
related mortality caused by
harvesting. Variability of summer
temperature explains larger share
of across‐city difference in heat‐
related mortality than AC.

29

Table 2: (continued)
Study

Data Source and Sample

Measure of
Temperature

6.

Curriero et al.
(2002)

Daily mortality counts
for 11 Eastern U.S. cities,
1973‐1994 (NCHS). DV =
mortality count

Daily mean
temperature,
modeled with splines

7.

Gouveia et al.
(2003)

Daily mortality counts
from Sao Paulo, Brazil,
1991‐1994. DV =
mortality count

Daily mean
temperature,
modeled with splines

8.

Ebi et al.
(2004)

Hospital admission
records from three
California ‘regions’ (Los
Angeles, San Francisco,
Sacramento), for age
55+ persons, 1983‐1998.
DV = hospitalizations for
various heart diseases
(AMI, stroke, etc)

9.

Schwartz et al.
(2004)

Daily hospital admission
records from 12 U.S.
cities, 1986‐1994
(Medicare patients, from
HCFA). DV =
Hospitalizations for CVD
for age 65+ population

Mention of
Adaptation
in Text?
Yes

Measure of
Adaptation

Methodology and Comments

Main Findings

City‐level
fraction of
houses with AC
and heating

Estimation based on city‐
specific Poisson model.
Model includes up to 7 days
in lags, and controls for dew
point temperature, and
smooth polynomial time
trend.

Hot and cold temperature
exposure associated with excess
mortality. Effect of cold and heat
on mortality varies across cities.
Effect of temperature on mortality
strongest in same‐day or lags 1‐3.
High temperature mortality
gradient reduced by city‐level
average AC coverage.

Yes

None

Data available at city district
level. Estimates based on
SES‐specific Poisson model.
Model includes up to 21 days
in lags, and controls for
ambient pollution, humidity,
day of the week, and smooth
polynomial time trend.

Hot and cold temperature
exposure associated with excess
mortality. No differences in
mortality effects by socioeconomic
status.

Relative daily
temperature,
precipitation,
extreme heat days, El
Nino events

Yes

None

Estimation based on Poisson
model. Model includes up to
7 days in lags, and linear time
trend.

3°C increase in maximum
temperature or 3°C decrease in
minimum temperature increased
hospitalizations for age 70+
population in San Francisco and
Sacramento. No significant effect
for Los Angeles.

Daily mean
temperature,
modeled with
polynomials

Yes

None

Estimation based on city‐
specific Poisson model.
Model includes up to 21 days
in lags, and controls for
season, day of the week,
humidity, and barometric
pressure

Hospital admissions increased
monotonically with temperature.
Effects similar across cities. Effect
of high temperature on hospital
admissions driven primarily by
short‐term displacement
(‘harvesting’). No effect of
humidity.

30

Table 2: (continued)
Study

Data Source and Sample

Measure of
Temperature

Mention of
Adaptation
in Text?
No

10.

Hajat et al.
(2005)

Daily counts of all‐cause
mortality from Delhi, Sao
Paulo, and London, for
1991‐1994, by age
group. DV= mortality
count

Daily mean
temperature,
modeled with splines

11.

Hajat et al.
(2006)

Daily counts of all‐age
mortality in London
(1976‐2003), Budapest
(1970‐2000) and Milan
(1985‐2002). DV =
mortality count

Daily mean
temperature with
threshold
(temperature above
threshold modeled
linearly or with
splines). Also include
“heat wave”
indicators for
sequences of
temperature‐days at
th
th
or above 98 or 99
percentile

12.

Morabito et al.
(2005)

Hospital discharge data
from large hospital in
Florence, Italy, 1998‐
2002. DV = Hospital
admissions for AMI

13.

Barnett et al.
(2007)

Daily CVD mortality
counts for 107 U.S.
cities, 1987‐2000
(National Morbidity and
Mortality Air Pollution
Study). DV = CVD
mortality count

Measure of
Adaptation

Methodology and Comments

Main Findings

None

Estimation based on city‐
specific Poisson model.
Model includes up to 34 days
in lags, and controls for
season, relative humidity,
rainfall, ambient air pollution,
day of the week, public
holidays, and smooth
polynomial time trend.

Temperatures greater than 20 C
associated with excess mortality in
each city. Largest effect in Delhi,
smallest in London. In Delhi, excess
mortality detected 3 weeks after
exposure. In London excess
mortality offset after 2 days.

No

None

Models fitted only to
observations from June‐
September. Estimation based
on city‐specific Poisson
model. Model includes up to
2 days in lags, and controls
for season, day of the year,
humidity, and ambient
pollution.

Controlling for daily temperature,
“heat wave” indicators raise daily
mortality by additional 5.5‐12.5%.
Effects smaller in distributed lag
and nonlinear models. Heat wave
effect small relative to excess
summer mortality.

Daily mean
temperature. Various
biometeorological
indices for apparent
temperature

No

None

Models estimated by linear
regression.

Strong association between cold
ambient temperature and hospital
admissions. No association with
high ambient temperature. At least
9 hours per day of severely hot
weather (based on apparent
temperature) leads to increase in
admissions.

Daily mean
temperature

Yes

None

Models estimated by city‐
specific random effect
regression and then averaged
to single estimate using
Bayesian hierarchical model.
Models also control for dew
temperature and day of the
week indicators.

Excess summer CVD mortality due
to high temperature disappears
between 1987 and 2000.

31

Table 2: (continued)
Study

14.

Fouillet et al.
(2008)

Data Source and Sample

Mortality records from
France, 1975‐2006, (only
for June 1 – Sept. 30).
DV = mortality count

Measure of
Temperature
Daily minimum and
maximum
temperatures,
modeled with
interactions and
cumulative
maximum
temperature

Mention of
Adaptation
in Text?
Yes

Measure of
Adaptation
None

32

Methodology and Comments

Estimates based on Poisson
model that includes seasonal
controls.

Main Findings

Observed mortality during the
2006 heat wave 32% smaller than
predicted mortality based on
model fitted to 1975‐2003 data.
This is attributed to better
preparation and adaptation after
the 2003 heat wave.

