                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PROMOTIONAL REVIEWS:
        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION OF ONLINE REVIEW MANIPULATION

                                            Dina Mayzlin
                                            Yaniv Dover
                                         Judith A. Chevalier

                                        Working Paper 18340
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18340


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2012




The authors contributed equally, and their names are listed in reverse alphabetical order. We thank
the Wharton Interactive Media Initiative, the Yale Whitebox Center, and the National Science Foundation
(Chevalier) for providing financial support for this project. We thank Steve Hood, Sr. Vice President
of Research at STR for helping us with data collection. We also thank David Godes and Avi Goldfarb
for detailed comments on the paper. We also thank numerous seminar participants for helpful comments.
All errors remain our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Dina Mayzlin, Yaniv Dover, and Judith A. Chevalier. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Promotional Reviews: An Empirical Investigation of Online Review Manipulation
Dina Mayzlin, Yaniv Dover, and Judith A. Chevalier
NBER Working Paper No. 18340
August 2012, Revised May 2013
JEL No. L1,L15,L83

                                              ABSTRACT

Online reviews could, in principle, greatly improve consumers' ability to evaluate products. However,
the authenticity of online user reviews remains a concern; firms have an incentive to manufacture positive
reviews for their own products and negative reviews for their rivals. In this paper, we marry the diverse
literature on economic subterfuge with the literature on organizational form. We undertake an empirical
analysis of promotional reviews, examining both the extent to which fakery occurs and the market
conditions that encourage or discourage promotional reviewing activity. Specifically, we examine
hotel reviews, exploiting the organizational differences between two travel websites: Expedia.com
and TripAdvisor.com. While anyone can post a review on TripAdvisor, a consumer can only post
a review of a hotel on Expedia if she actually booked at least one night at the hotel through the website.
We examine differences in the distribution of reviews for a given hotel between TripAdvisor and Expedia.
We exploit the characteristics of a hotel's neighbor. We show that hotels with a nearby neighbor have
more one- and two-star (negative) reviews on TripAdvisor relative to Expedia. We argue that the net
gains from promotional reviewing are likely to be highest for independent hotels that are owned by
single-unit owners and lowest for branded chain hotels that are owned by multi-unit owners. Our methodology
thus isolates hotels with a disproportionate incentive to engage in promotional reviewing activity.
We show that the hotel neighbors of hotels with a high incentive to fake have more one- and two-star
(negative) reviews on TripAdvisor relative to Expedia than do hotels whose neighbors have a low
incentive to fake. Furthermore, we show that hotels with a high incentive to fake have a greater share
of five-star (positive) reviews on TripAdvisor relative to Expedia.


Dina Mayzlin                                         Judith A. Chevalier
USC Marshall School of Business                      Yale School of Management
701 Exposition Boulevard                             135 Prospect Street
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0808                           New Haven, CT 06520
mayzlin@marshall.usc.edu                             and NBER
                                                     judith.chevalier@yale.edu
Yaniv Dover
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
yaniv.dover@tuck.dartmouth.edu
1        Introduction

User-generated online reviews have become an important resource for consumers making purchase

decisions; an extensive and growing literature documents the inuence of online user reviews on the

quantity and price of transactions.
                                            1 In theory, online reviews should create producer and consumer

surplus by improving the ability of consumers to evaluate unobservable product quality. However,

one important impediment to the usefulness of reviews in revealing product quality is the possible

existence of fake or promotional online reviews. Specically, reviewers with a material interest in

consumers' purchase decisions may post reviews that are designed to inuence consumers and to

resemble the reviews of disinterested consumers. While there is a substantial economic literature

on persuasion and advertising (reviewed below), the specic context of advertising disguised as user

reviews has not been extensively studied.

        The presence of undetectable (or dicult to detect) fake reviews may have at least two deleterious

eects on consumer and producer surplus.                 First, consumers who are fooled by the promotional

reviews may make suboptimal choices. Second, the potential presence of biased reviews may lead

consumers to mistrust reviews. This in turn forces consumers to disregard or underweight helpful

information posted by disinterested reviewers.               For these reasons, the Federal Trade Commission

in the United States recently updated its guidelines governing endorsements and testimonials to

also include online reviews. According to the guidelines, a user must disclose the existence of any

material connection between himself and the manufacturer.
                                                                           2 Relatedly, in February 2012, the UK

Advertising Standards Authority ruled that travel review website TripAdvisor must cease claiming

that it oers honest, real, or trusted reviews from real travelers.                  The Advertising Standards

Authority, in its decision, held that TripAdvisor's claims implied that consumers could be assured

that all review content on the TripAdvisor site was genuine, and when we understood that might

not be the case, we concluded that the claims were misleading.
                                                                                3

    1
        Much of the earliest work focused on the eect of eBay reputation feedback scores on prices and quantity sold; for
example, Resnick and Zeckhauser (2002), Melnik and Alm (2002), and Resnick et al. (2006). Later work examined
the role of consumer reviews on product purchases online; for example, Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006), Anderson and
Magruder (2012), Berger et al. (2010), and Chintagunta et al. (2010).
    2
        The guidelines provide the following example, An online message board designated for discussions of new music
download technology is frequented by MP3 player enthusiasts...Unbeknownst to the message board community, an
employee of a leading playback device manufacturer has been posting messages on the discussion board promoting the
manufacturer's product. Knowledge of this poster's employment likely would aect the weight or credibility of her
endorsement. Therefore, the poster should clearly and conspicuously disclose her relationship to the manufacturer to
members and readers of the message board (http://www.ftc.gov/os/2009/10/091005endorsementguidesfnnotice.pdf )
    3
        www.asa.org/ASA-action/Adjudications.
       In order to examine the potential importance of these issues, we undertake an empirical analysis

of the extent to which promotional reviewing activity occurs, and the rm characteristics and market

conditions that result in an increase or decrease in promotional reviewing activity. The rst challenge

to any such exercise is that detecting promotional reviews is dicult. After all, promotional reviews

are designed to mimic unbiased reviews.             For example, inferring that a review is fake because it

conveys an extreme opinion is awed; as shown in previous literature (see Li and Hitt (2008) and

Dellarocas and Wood (2007)), individuals who had an extremely positive or negative experience

with a product may be particularly inclined to post reviews. In this paper, we do not attempt to

classify whether any particular review is fake, and instead we empirically exploit a key dierence in

website business models. In particular, some websites accept reviews from anyone who chooses to

post a review while other websites only allow reviews to be posted by consumers who have actually

purchased a product through the website (or treat unveried reviews dierently from those posted

by veried buyers).        If posting a review requires making an actual purchase, the cost of posting

disingenuous reviews is greatly increased. We examine dierences in the distribution of reviews for

a given product between a website where faking is dicult and a website where faking is relatively

easy.

       Specically, in this paper we examine hotel reviews, exploiting the organizational dierences

between Expedia.com and TripAdvisor.com.                 TripAdvisor is a popular website that collects and

publishes consumer reviews of hotels, restaurants, attractions and other travel-related services.

Anyone can post a review on TripAdvisor. Expedia.com is a website through which travel is booked;

consumers are also encouraged to post reviews on the site, but a consumer can only post a review

if she actually booked at least one night at the hotel through the website in the six months prior

to the review post. Thus, the cost of posting a fake review on Expedia.com is quite high relative

to the cost of posting a fake review on TripAdvisor.               Purchasing a hotel night through Expedia

requires the reviewer to undertake a credit card transaction on Expedia.com. Thus, the reviewer is

not anonymous to the website host, potentially raising the probability of detection of any fakery.
                                                                                                                     4

We also explore the robustness of our results using data from Orbitz.com, where reviews can be

either veried or unveried.

       We present a simple analytical model in the Appendix that examines the equilibrium levels of

   4
       As discussed above, TripAdvisor has been criticized for not managing the fraudulent reviewing problem. TripAd-
visor recently announced the appointment of a new Director of Content Integrity. Even in the presence of substantial
content verication activity on TripAdvisor's part, our study design takes as a starting point the higher potential for
fraud in TripAdvisor's business model relative to Expedia.



                                                           2
manipulation of two horizontally-dierentiated competitors who are trying to convince a consumer

to purchase their product. The model demonstrates that the cost of review manipulation (which

we relate to reputational risk) determines the amount of manipulation in equilibrium. We marry

the insights from this model to the literature on organizational form and organizational incentive

structures.   Based on the model as well as on the previous literature we examine the following

hypotheses: 1) hotels with a neighbor are more likely to receive negative fake reviews than more

isolated hotels, 2) small owners are more likely to engage in review manipulation than hotels owned

by companies that own many hotel units, 3) independent hotels are more likely to engage in review

manipulation (post more fake positive reviews for themselves and more fake negative reviews for

their competitors) than branded chain hotels, and 4) hotels with a small management company are

more likely to engage in review manipulation than hotels that use a large management company.

   Our main empirical analysis is akin to a dierences in dierences approach (although, unconven-

tionally, neither of the dierences is in the time dimension). Specically, we examine dierences in

the reviews posted at TripAdvisor and Expedia for dierent types of hotels. For example, consider

calculating for each hotel at each website the ratio of one- and two-star (the lowest) reviews to total

reviews. We ask whether the dierence in this ratio for TripAdvisor vs. Expedia is higher for hotels

with a neighbor within a half kilometer vs. hotels without a neighbor. Either dierence alone would

be problematic. TripAdvisor and Expedia reviews could dier due to diering populations at the

site. Possibly, hotels with and without neighbors could have dierent distributions of true quality.

However, our approach isolates whether the two hotel types' reviewing patterns are signicantly

dierent across the two sites. Similarly, we examine the ratio of one- and two-star reviews to total

reviews for TripAdvisor vs. Expedia for hotels that are close geographic neighbors of hotels with

small owners vs. large owners, close neighbors of independent hotels vs. chain-aliated hotels, and

neighbors of hotels with large management companies versus small management companies. That

is, we measure whether the neighbor of hotels with small owners fare worse on TripAdvisor than

on Expedia, for example, than the neighbors of hotels owned by large multi-unit entities. We also

measure the ratio of ve-star (the highest) reviews to total reviews for TripAdvisor vs.      Expedia

for independent vs. chain hotels, hotels with small owners vs. large owners, and hotels with large

management companies versus small management companies.            Thus, our empirical exercise is a

joint test of the hypotheses that promotional reviewing take place on TripAdvisor and that the

incentive to post false reviews is a function of organizational form.    Our identifying assumption




                                                  3
is that TripAdvisor and Expedia users do not dierentially value hotel ownership and aliation

characteristics and the ownership and aliation characteristics of neighbors. In our specications,

we control for a large number of hotel observable characteristics that could be perceived dierently

by TripAdvisor and Expedia consumers. We discuss robustness to selection on unobservables that

may be correlated with ownership and aliation characteristics.

    The results are largely consistent with our hypotheses. That is, we nd that the presence of a

neighbor, neighbor characteristics (such as ownership, aliation and management structure), and

own hotel characteristics aect the measures of review manipulation. The mean hotel in our sample

has a total of 120 reviews on TripAdvisor, of which 37 are 5-star. We estimate that an independent

hotel owned by a small owner will generate an incremental 7 more fake positive Tripadvisor reviews

than a chain hotel with a large owner. The mean hotel in our sample has thirty 1- and 2-star reviews

on TripAdvisor. Our estimates suggest that a hotel that is located next to an independent hotel

owned by a small owner will have 6 more fake negative Tripadvisor reviews compared to an isolated

hotel.

    The paper proceeds as follows.   In Section 2 we discuss the prior literature.   In Section 3 we

describe the data and present summary statistics. In Section 4 we discuss the theoretical relationship

between ownership structure and the incentive to manipulate reviews. In Section 5 we present our

methodology and results, which includes main results as well as robustness checks. In Section 6 we

conclude and also discuss limitations of the paper.




2    Prior Literature

Broadly speaking, our paper is informed by the literature on the rm's strategic communication,

which includes research on advertising and persuasion. In advertising models, the sender is the rm,

and the receiver is the consumer who tries to learn about the product's quality before making a

purchase decision. In these models the rm signals the quality of its product through the amount of

resources invested into advertising (see Nelson (1974), Milgrom and Roberts (1986), Kihlstrom and

Riordan (1984), Bagwell and Ramey (1994), Horstmann and Moorthy (2003)) or the advertising

content (Anand and Shachar (2009), Anderson and Renault (2006), Mayzlin and Shin (2011)).

In models of persuasion, an information sender can inuence the receiver's decision by optimally

choosing the information structure (Crawford and Sobel (1982), Chakraborty and Harbaugh (2010),

and Dziuda (2011) show this in the case where the sender has private information, while Kamenica



                                                  4
and Gentzkow (2011) show this result in the case of symmetric information). One common thread

between all these papers is that the sender's identity and incentives are common-knowledge. That

is, the receiver knows that the message is coming from a biased party, and hence is able to to

take that into account when making her decision.               In contrast, in our paper there is uncertainty

surrounding the sender's true identity and incentives. That is, the consumer who reads a user review

on TripAdvisor does not know if the review was written by an unbiased customer or by a biased

source.

       The models that are most closely related to the current research are Mayzlin (2006) and Dellaro-

cas (2006). Mayzlin (2006) presents a model of promotional chat where competing rms, as well as

unbiased informed consumers, post messages about product quality online. Consumers are not able

to distinguish between unbiased and biased word of mouth, and try to infer product quality based

on online word of mouth. Mayzlin (2006) derives conditions under which online reviews are persua-

sive in equilibrium: online word of mouth inuences consumer choice. She also demonstrates that

producers of lower quality products will expend more resources on promotional reviews. Compared

to a system with no rm manipulation, promotional chat results in welfare loss due to distortions in

consumer choices that arise due to manipulation. The welfare loss from promotional chat is lower

the higher the participation by unbiased consumers in online fora. Dellarocas (2006) also examines

the same issue. He nds that there exists an equilibrium where the high quality product invests

more resources into review manipulation, which implies that promotional chat results in welfare

increase for the consumer. Dellarocas (2006) additionally notes that the social cost of online ma-

nipulation can be reduced by developing technologies that increase the unit cost of manipulation

and that encourage higher participation by honest consumers.

       The potential for biased reviews to aect consumer responses to user reviews has been recognized

in the popular press. Perhaps the most intuitive form of biased review is the situation in which a

producer posts positive reviews for its own product. In a well-documented incident, in February

2004, an error at Amazon.com's Canadian site caused Amazon to mistakenly reveal book reviewer

identities. It was apparent that a number of these reviews were written by the books' own publishers

and authors (see Harmon (2004).
                                         5 Other forms of biased reviews are also possible. For example,

rival rms may benet from posting negative reviews of each other's products.                      In assessing the

   5
       Similarly, in 2009 in New York, the cosmetic surgery company Lifestyle Lift agreed to pay $300,000 to settle
claims regarding fake online reviews about itself. In addition, a web site called verr.com which hosts posts by users
advertising services for $5 (e.g.:  I will drop o your dry-cleaning for $5 ) hosts a number of ads by people oering
to write positive or negative hotel reviews for $5.



                                                          5
potential reward for such activity, it is important to assess whether products are indeed sucient

substitutes to benet from negative reviewing activity. For example, Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006)

argue that two books on the same subject may well be complements, rather than substitutes, and

thus, it is not at all clear that disingenuous negative reviews for other rm's products would be

helpful in the book market. Consistent with this argument, Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) nd that

consumer purchasing behavior responds less intensively to positive reviews (which consumers may

estimate are more frequently fake) than to negative reviews (which consumers may assess to be

more frequently unbiased). However, there are certainly other situations in which two products are

strong substitutes; for example, in this paper, we hypothesize that two hotels in the same location

are generally substitutes.
                                6

       A burgeoning computer science literature has attempted to empirically examine the issue of

fakery by creating textual analysis algorithms to detect fakery. For example, Ott et al. (2011) create

an algorithm to identify fake reviews. The researchers hired individuals on the Amazon Mechanical

Turk site to write persuasive fake hotel reviews. They then analyzed the dierences between the

fake 5-star reviews and truthful 5-star reviews on TripAdvisor to calibrate their psycholinguistic

analysis. They found a number of reliable dierences in the language patterns of the fake reviews.

One concern with this approach is that it is possible that the markers of fakery that the researchers

identify are not representative of dierently-authored fake reviews. For example, the authors nd

that truthful reviews are more specic about spatial congurations than are the fake reviews.

However, the authors specically hired fakers who had not visited the hotel. We can not, of course,

infer from this nding that fake reviews on TripAdvisor authored by a hotel employee would in fact

be less specic about spatial congurations than true reviews. Since we are concerned with fake

reviewers with an economic incentive to mimic truthful reviewers, it is an ongoing challenge for

textual analysis methodologies to provide durable mechanisms for detecting fake reviews.
                                                                                                            7 Some

other examples of papers that use textual analysis to determine review fakery are Jindal and Liu

(2007), Hu et al. (2012), and Mukherjee and Glance (2012).

       Kornish (2009) uses a dierent approach to detect review manipulation. She looks for evidence

of double voting in user reviews. That is, one strategy for review manipulation is to post a fake

positive review for one's product and to vote this review as helpful. That is, Kornish (2009) uses

   6
       In theory, a similar logic applies to the potential for biased reviews of complementary products (although this
possibility has not, to our knowledge, been discussed in the literature).     For example, the owner of a breakfast
restaurant located next door to a hotel might gain from posting a disingenuous positive review of the hotel.
   7
       One can think of the issue here as being similar to the familiar arms race between spammers and spam lters.



                                                           6
a correlation between review sentiment and usefulness votes as an indicator of manipulation. This

approach isolates one possible type of review manipulation and is vulnerable to the critique that

there may be other (innocent) reasons for a correlation between review sentiment and usefulness

votes: if most people who visit a product's page are positively inclined towards the product, the

positive reviews may be on average considered to be more useful.

    Previous literature has not examined the extent to which the design of websites that publish

consumer reviews can discourage or encourage manipulation. In this paper, we exploit those dier-

ences in design by examining Expedia versus TripAdvisor. The literature also has not empirically

tested whether manipulation is more pronounced in empirical settings where it will be more bene-

cial to the producer. Using data on organizational form, quality, and competition, we examine the

relationship between online manipulation and market factors which may increase or decrease the

incentive to engage in online manipulation. We will detail our methodology below; however, it is

important to understand that our methodology does not rely on identifying any particular review

as unbiased (real) or promotional (fake).

    Of course, for review manipulation to make economic sense, online reviews must play a role

in consumer decision-making. Substantial previous research establishes that online reviews aect

consumer purchase behavior (see, for example, Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) and Luca (2012)).

There is less evidence specic to the travel context.   Vermeulen and Seegers (2009) measure the

impact of online hotel reviews on consumer decision-making in an experimental setting with 168

subjects. They show that online reviews increase consumer awareness of lesser-known hotels and

positive reviews improve attitudes towards hotels. Similarly, Ye et al. (2010) use data from a major

online travel agency in China to demonstrate a correlation between traveler reviews and online sales.




3    Data

User generated Internet content has been particularly important in the travel sector. In particular,

TripAdvisor-branded websites have more than 50 million unique monthly visitors and contain over

60 million reviews.   While our study uses the US site, TripAdvisor branded sites operate in 30

countries. As Scott and Orlikowski (2012) point out, by comparison, the travel publisher Frommer's

sells about 2.5 million travel guidebooks each year. While TripAdvisor is primarily a review site,

transactions-based sites such as Expedia and Orbitz also contain reviews.

    Our data derive from multiple sources. First, we identied the 25th to 75th largest US cities



                                                 7
(by population) to include in our sample.             Our goal was to use cities that were large enough to

t many hotels, but not so large and dense that competition patterns among the hotels would

be dicult to determine.
                                8   In October of 2011, we scraped data on all hotels in these cities

from TripAdvisor and Expedia. TripAdvisor and Expedia were co-owned at the time of our data

collection activities but maintained separate databases of customer reviews at the two sites.                     As

of December 2011, TripAdvisor derived 35 percent of its revenues from click-through advertising

sold to Expedia.
                      9 Thus, 35 percent of TripAdvisor's revenue derived from customers who visited

Expedia's site immediately following their visit to the TripAdvisor site.

       Some hotels are not listed on both sites, and some hotels do not have reviews on one of the

sites (typically, Expedia). At each site, we obtained the text and star values of all user reviews, the

identity of the reviewer (as displayed by the site), and the date of the review. We also obtained

data from Smith Travel Research, a market research rm that provides data to the hotel industry

(www.str.com). To match the data from STR to our Expedia and TripAdvisor data, we use name

and address matching.          Our data consist of 2931 hotels matched between TripAdvisor, Expedia,

and STR with reviews on both sites. Our biggest hotel city is Atlanta with 160 properties, and our

smallest is Toledo, with 10 properties.

       Table 1 provides summary statistics for review characteristics, using hotels as the unit of ob-

servation, for the set of hotels that have reviews on both sites. Unsurprisingly, given the lack of

posting restrictions, there are more reviews on TripAdvisor than on Expedia. On average, our hotels

have nearly three times the number of reviews on TripAdvisor as on Expedia. Also, the summary

statistics reveal that on average, TripAdvisor reviewers are more critical than Expedia reviews. The

average TripAdvisor star rating is 3.52 versus 3.95 for Expedia. Based on these summary statis-

tics, it appears that hotel reviewers are more critical than reviewers in other previously studied

contexts. For example, numerous studies document that eBay feedback is overwhelmingly positive.

Similarly, Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) report average reviews of 4.14 out of 5 at Amazon and 4.45

at barnesandnoble.com for a sample of 2387 books.


       Review characteristics are similar if we use reviews, rather than hotels as the unit of observation.

   8
       We dropped Las Vegas, as these hotels tend to have an extremely large number of reviews at both sites relative
to hotels in other cities; these reviews are often focused on the characteristics of the casino rather than the hotel.
Many reviewers may legitimately, then, have views about a characteristic of the hotel without ever having stayed at
the hotel.
   9
       Based on information in S-4 form led by Tripadvisor and Expedia with SEC on July 27,               2011 (see
http://ir.tripadvisor.com/secling.cfm?lingID=1193125-11-199029&CIK=1526520)




                                                           8
                       Table 1: User Reviews at TripAdvisor and Expedia




                           Mean     Standard        Minimum   Maximum
                                    deviation

Number of TripAdvisor      119.58   172.37          1         1675
reviews

Number of Expedia          42.16    63.24           1         906
reviews

Average TripAdvisor        3.52     0.75            1         5
star rating

Average Expedia star       3.95     0.74            1         5
rating

Share of TripAdvisor       0.14
1-star reviews

Share of TripAdvisor       0.11
2-star reviews

Share of Expedia 1-star    0.07
reviews

Share of Expedia 2-star    0.08
reviews

Share of TripAdvisor       0.31
5-star reviews

Share of Expedia 5-star    0.44
reviews

Total number of hotels     2931

Notes: The table reports summary statistics for user reviews for 2931 hotels with reviews at both

TripAdvisor and Expedia collected in October of 2011.




                                                9
Our data set consists of 350,485 TripAdvisor reviews and 123,569 Expedia reviews. Of all reviews,

8.0% of TripAdvisor reviews are 1s, 8.4% are 2s, and 38.1% are 5s. For Expedia, 4.7% of all review

are 1s, 6.4% are 2s, and 48.5% of all reviews are 5s.     Note that these numbers dier from the

numbers in Table 1 because hotels with more reviews tend to have better reviews. Thus, the share

of all reviews that are 1s or 2s is lower than the mean share of 1-star reviews or 2-star reviews

for hotels. Since the modal review on TripAdvisor is a 4-star review, in most of our analyses we

consider negative reviews to be 1- or 2-star reviews.

   We use STR to obtain the hotel location; we assign each hotel a latitude and longitude designator

and use these to calculate distances between hotels of various types. These locations are used to

determine whether or not a hotel has a neighbor.

   Importantly, we use STR data to construct the various measures of organizational form that

we use for each hotel in the data set. We consider the ownership, aliation, and management of a

hotel. A hotel's aliation is the most observable attribute of a hotel to a consumer. Specically,

a hotel can have no aliation (an independent) or it can be a unit of a branded chain. In our

data, 17% of hotels do not have an aliation. The top 5 parent companies of branded chain hotels

in our sample are: Marriott, Hilton, Choice Hotels, Intercontinental, and Best Western. However,

an important feature of hotels is that aliation is very distinct from ownership.     A chain hotel

unit can be a franchised unit or a company-owned unit.        In general, franchising is the primary

organizational form for the largest hotel chains in the US. For example, International Hotel Group

(Holiday Inn) and Choice Hotels are made up of more than 99% franchised units.          Within the

broad category of franchised units, there is a wide variety of organizational forms. STR provides

us with information about each hotel's owner. The hotel owner (franchisee) can be an individual

owner-operator or a large company. For example, Archon Hospitality owns 41 hotels in our focus

cities. In Memphis, Archon owns two Hampton Inns (an economy brand of Hilton), a Hyatt, and a

Faireld Inn (an economy brand of Marriott). Typically, the individual hotel owner (franchisee) is

the residual claimant for the hotel's prots, although the franchise contract generally requires the

owner to pay a share of revenues to the parent brand. Furthermore, while independent hotels do

not have a parent brand, they are in some cases operated by large multi-unit owners. In our sample,

16% of independent hotels and 34% of branded chain hotels are owned by a multi-unit owners. Thus

aliation and ownership are distinct attributes of a hotel.

   Owners often, though not always, subcontract day to day management of the hotel to a man-




                                                 10
agement company. Typically, the management company charges 3 to 5 percent of revenue for this

service, although agreements which involve some sharing of gross operating prots have become

more common in recent years.
                                   10 In some cases, the parent brand operates a management company.

For example, Marriott provides management services for approximately half of the hotels not owned

by Marriott but operated under the Marriott nameplate. Like owners, management companies can

manage multiple hotels under dierent nameplates. For example, Crossroads Hospitality manages

29 properties in our data set. In Atlanta, they manage a Hyatt, a Residence Inn (Marriott's longer

term stay brand), a Doubletree, and a Hampton Inn (both Hilton brands). While a consumer can

clearly observe a hotel's aliation, the ownership and management structure of the hotel are more

dicult to infer for the consumer.

      In constructing variables, we focus both on the characteristics of a hotel and characteristics of

the hotel's neighbors. Table 2 provides summary measures of the hotel's own characteristics. We

construct dummies for whether a hotel's aliation is independent (vs. part of a branded chain). We

also construct a dummy for whether the hotel has a multi-unit owner. For example, chain-aliated

hotels that are not owned by a franchisee but owned by the parent chain will be characterized as

owned by a multi-unit ownership entity, but so will hotels that are owned by a large multi-unit

franchisee. In our data, the modal hotel is a chain member, but operated by a small owner. For

some specications, we will also include a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the hotel

is operated by a large multi-unit management company. This is the case for 35% of independent

hotels and for 55% of branded chain hotels in our data.

      We then characterize the neighbors of the hotels in our data. The summary statistics for these

measures are in Table 3. That is, for each hotel in our data, we rst construct a dummy variable that

takes the value of one if that hotel has a neighbor hotel within 0.5km. As the summary statistics

show, 76% of the hotels in our data have a neighbor. We next construct a dummy that takes the

value of one if a hotel has a neighbor hotel that is an independent. Obviously, this set of ones is a

subset of the previous measure; 31% of all of the hotels in our data have an independent neighbor.

We also construct a dummy for whether the hotel has a neighbor that is owned by a multi-unit

owner. In our data 49% of the hotels have a neighbor owned by a multi-unit owner company. For

some specications, we also examine the management structure of neighbor hotels. We construct

a variable that takes the value of one if a hotel has a neighbor hotel operated by a multi-unit

 10
      See O'Fallon and Rutherford (2010).




                                                    11
                Table 2: Hotel Aliation, Ownership and Management and Structure



                                       Share of All     Share of          Share of Chain
                                       Hotels With      Independent       Aliated
 Hotel Status                          Reviews          Hotels            Hotels
 Independent                           0.17             1.00              0.00

 Marriott Corporation Aliate          0.14             0.00              0.17

 Hilton Worldwide Aliate              0.12             0.00              0.15

 Choice Hotels Int'l Aliate           0.11             0.00              0.13

 Intercontinental Hotels Grp           0.08             0.00              0.10
 Aliate

 Best Western Company Aliate          0.04             0.00              0.04

 Multi-unit owner                      0.31             0.16              0.34

 Multi-unit management company         0.52             0.35              0.55

 Multi-unit owner AND multi-unit       0.26             0.12              0.29
 management company

 Total Hotels in Sample = 2931

 Notes: Table shows summary information about brand aliation, ownership, and management

 characteristics for 2931 hotels sampled with reviews at TripAdvisor and Expedia.



management entity, which is the case for 59% of hotels in our sample.

   In our specications, we will be measuring the dierence between a hotel's reviews on Tri-

pAdvisor and Expedia. The explanatory variables of interest are the neighbor characteristics, the

ownership and aliation status, and the ownership and aliation status of the neighbors. However,

it is important that our specications also include a rich set of observable hotel characteristics to

control for the possibility that TripAdvisor and Expedia users value hotels with dierent character-

istics dierently. We obtain a number of characteristics. First, we include the ocial hotel rating

for the hotel. At the time of our study, these ocial ratings were reported in common by TripAdvi-

sor and Expedia and are based on the amenities of the hotel. From STR, we obtain a dierent hotel

classication system; hotels are categorized as Economy Class, Luxury Class, Midscale Class,

Upper Midscale Class, Upper Upscale Class and Upscale Class.      We use dummy variables to

represent these categories in our specications. We also obtain the year built from STR and use

it to construct a hotel age variable (censored at 100 years old). Using STR categorizations, we also

construct dummy variables for all suites hotels, convention hotels, and a dummy that takes the

value of one if the hotel contains at least one restaurant. Even within the same city, hotels have




                                                 12
             Table 3: Hotel Characteristics of Neighbor Hotels Within 0.5 km Radius



 Hotel Status                Share of All      Share of          Share of Chain
                             Hotels With       Independent       Aliated
                             Reviews           Hotels            Hotels

 Hotel has a neighbor        0.76              0.72              0.77

 Hotel has an                0.31              0.50              0.27
 independent neighbor

 Hotel has a multi-unit      0.49              0.52              0.49
 owner neighbor

 Hotel has a multi-unit      0.59              0.58              0.59
 management entity
 neighbor

 Notes: Table shows summary characteristics of neighbors within 0.5km of the 2931 hotels in the sample.



dierent location types. In all of our specications, we include dummies for airport locations, resort

locations, and interstate/suburban locations, leaving urban locations as the excluded type.




4    Theoretical Relationship between Ownership Structure and Re-

     view Manipulation

Previous literature on promotional reviewing (see Mayzlin (2006), Dellarocas (2006)) models review

generation as a mixture of unbiased reviews and reviews surreptitiously generated by competing

rms. The consumer, upon seeing a review, must discount the information taking into account the

equilibrium level of review manipulation.

    In the Appendix we present a simple model that is closely related to the previous models of

promotional reviews but also allows the cost of review manipulation to dier across rms, a new key

element in the current context. In the model rms engage in an optimal level of review manipulation

(which includes both fake positive reviews for self and fake negative reviews for competitors). The

cost of review manipulation is related to the probability of getting caught, which in turn increases

in each fake review that is posted. This model yields the following intuitive result: an increase in

the rm's cost of review manipulation decreases the amount of manipulation in equilibrium. Note

that this also implies that if the rm's competitor has lower cost of review manipulation, the rm

will have more negative manufactured reviews.




                                                 13
   The model reects the fact that in practice the primary cost of promotional reviews from the

rm's perspective is the risk that the activity will be publicly exposed.       The penalties that an

exposed rm faces range from government nes, possibility of lawsuits, and penalties imposed by

the review-hosting platform.    We use the literature on reputational incentives and organizational

form to argue that this cost is also aected by the size of the entity. In this regard, our analysis is

related to Blair and Lafontaine (2005) and Jin and Leslie (2009) who examine the incentive eects of

reputational spillovers among co-branded entities. Our analysis is also related to Pierce and Snyder

(2008), Bennett et al. (forthcoming), and Ji and Weil (2009). Bennett et al. (forthcoming) show

that competition leads vehicle inspectors to cheat and pass vehicles that ought to fail emissions

testing. Pierce and Snyder (2008) show that larger chains appear to curb cheating behavior from

their inspectors; inspectors at a large chain are less likely to pass a given vehicle than are inspectors

who work for independent shops. Similarly, Ji and Weil (2009) show that company-owned units of

chains are more likely to adhere to labor standards laws than are franchisee-owned units. While

our analysis is related to this prior literature, we exploit the rich dierences in organizational form

(chain vs. independent, large owner vs. small owner, and large management company vs. small

management company) particular to the hotel industry.

   Before we formulate our hypotheses on the eect of entity size on review manipulation, we note

a few important details on the design of travel review sites. In particular, note that reviews on these

sites are hotel-specic, rather than chain or owner specic. That is, a Hampton Inn in Cambridge,

MA has unique reviews, distinct from the reviews of a Hampton Inn in Atlanta, GA. If one wants

to enhance the reputation of both hotels positively, one must post positive reviews of both hotels

separately on the site. If one wants to improve the attractiveness of these hotels relative to their

neighbors, one must post negative reviews for the individual neighbors of each hotel separately on

the site. These design features make it unlikely that reviews would generate positive reputational

spillovers across hotels - that a fake review by one unit of a multi-unit entity is more productive

because it creates positive reputational spillovers for other units in the entity. Note also that while

the presence of positive spillovers is conceivable in the case of chain-aliated hotel posting positive

fake reviews about itself (an improved customer review at one Hampton Inn, for example, could

possibly benet another Hampton Inn), it seems very unlikely in the case of the ownership variable

since co-ownership is not visible to the customers. Thus, it seems inconceivable that a positive review

for, say, Archon Hospitality's Memphis Faireld Inn would improve the reputation of its Memphis




                                                   14
Hampton Inn.         Positive spillovers are also less likely to arise in the case of negative competitor

reviews. Posting a negative review of one hotel will likely only benet that hotel's neighbors, not

other hotels throughout the chain.

       In contrast to the discussion above, there are sizable negative spillovers associated with pro-

motional reviews. Each incremental promotional review posted increases the probability of getting

caught. A larger entity suers a greater penalty from being caught undertaking fraudulent activities

due to negative spillovers across various units of the organization. Specically, if an employee of

a multi-unit entity gets caught posting or soliciting fake reviews, any resulting government action,

lawsuit, or retribution by the review site will implicate the entire organization.                 Because of this

spillover, many larger entities have social media policies, constraining the social media practices

of employees or franchisees.
                                  11

       To make this concrete: suppose that the owner of Archon Hospitality, which owns 41 hotels in

our sample under various nameplates, were contemplating posting a fake positive review about an

Archon Hotel. As discussed above, the benet of the fake review would likely only accrue to the one

hotel about which the fake review was posted. To benet another hotel, another fake review would

have to be posted. However, the probability of getting caught increases in each fake review that is

posted. If the owner of Archon were caught posting a fake review about one hotel, the publicity

and potential TripAdvisor sanctions would spill over to all Archon hotels. Hence the cost of posting

a fake review increases in the number of hotels in the ownership entity, but the benet of doing so

does not.

       This mechanism is also demonstrated in a recent case. The Irish hotel Clare Inn Hotel and Suites,

part of the Lynch Hotel Group, was given the  red badge by TripAdvisor warning customers that

the hotel manipulated reviews after it was uncovered that a hotel executive solicited positive reviews.

TripAdvisor also removed reviews from other Lynch Hotel Group hotels, and the treatment of Lynch

Hotel Group was covered by news media in Ireland. Although the Lynch Hotel Group hotels are

not co-branded under a common nameplate, TripAdvisor took action against the whole hotel group

given the common ownership and management of the hotels.
                                                                        12 Thus, the key assumption underlying

our ownership/aliation specications is that the reputational benet of posting a fake review only

accrues to one hotel, while the cost of posting the fake review (getting caught) multiplies in the

  11
       For example, Hyatt's social media policy instructs Hyatt employees to Avoid commenting on Hyatt...only certain
authorized individuals may use social media for Hyatt as business purposes...your conduct may reect upon the Hyatt
brand. (http://www.constangy.net/nr_images/hyatt-hotels-corporation.pdf, accessed April 10 2013).
  12
       http://www.independent.ie/national-news/hotel-told-sta-to-fake-reviews-on-TripAdvisor-2400564.html



                                                           15
number of hotels in the ownership or aliation entity. Hence smaller entities have a bigger incentive

to post fake reviews. In terms of our model, the larger entity bears a higher   δ   and   γ,   and hence will

fake fewer reviews in equilibrium based on Proposition 1.

   There is an additional incentive issue that applies specically to ownership and works in the

same direction as the mechanism that we highlight. Drawing on the literature on the separation of

ownership and control, we hypothesize that owner-operated hotels have a greater incentive to engage

in review manipulation (either positively for themselves or negatively for their neighbors). Owner-

operators are residual claimants of hotel protability and employee-operators are not. Thus, owner-

operators would have more incentive to post fake reviews because owner-operators have sharper

incentives to generate hotel protability.   An employee of a large ownership entity would have

little to gain in terms of direct prot realization from posting fake reviews but would risk possible

sanctions from the entity for undertaking fake reviewing activity.

   In our paper, we consider the dierential incentives of multi-unit entities using three measures

of entity type. First, we consider ownership entities that are large multi-unit owners versus small

owners. For example, this measure captures the distinction between an owner-operator Hampton Inn

versus a Hampton Inn owned by a large entity such as Archon Hospitality. Our ownership hypotheses

suggest that an owner-operator will have more incentive to post promotional reviews than will an

employee of a large entity. Second, we consider independent hotels versus hotels operating under

a common nameplate.     As discussed above, aliation is a distinct characteristic from ownership;

independent hotels can be owner-operated but can also be owned by a large ownership entity. We

hypothesize that units of branded hotels will have less incentive to post promotional reviews than will

independents. As discussed above, brand organizations actively discourage promotional reviewing

by aliates (with the threat of sanctions) because of the chain-wide reputational implications of

being caught. Third, we consider management by a large management company versus management

by a smaller entity. Again in this case, a review posted by the entity will benet only one unit in

the entity while the cost of being caught can conceivably spill over to the entire entity.            Unlike

owners, hotel management companies are not residual claimants and unlike franchise operations,

do not always engage in prot-sharing. Thus, while we examine hotel management companies in

our analysis, it is less clear that they have a strong enough stake in the hotel to inuence reviewing

behavior.

   In summary, we argue that the ownership and aliation structure of the hotel aects the costs




                                                  16
of the promotional reviewing activity, which in turn aects the equilibrium level of manufactured

reviews. Specically, based on our simple model and the discussion above, we make the following

three theoretical claims:



     1. A rm that is located close to a competitor will have more fake negative reviews than a rm

           with no close neighbors.



     2. A rm that is part of a smaller entity will have more positive fake reviews.



     3. A rm that is located close to a smaller entity competitor will have more fake negative reviews.




5         Methodology and Results

As Section 3 describes, we collect reviews from two sites, TripAdvisor and Expedia.                       There is a

key dierence between these two sites which we utilize in order to help us identify the presence

of review manipulation: while anybody can post a review on TripAdvisor, only those users who

purchased the hotel stay on Expedia in the past six months can post a review for the hotel.
                                                                                                              13 This

implies that it is far less costly for a hotel to post fake reviews on TripAdvisor versus posting fake

reviews on Expedia; we expect that there would be far more review manipulation on TripAdvisor

than on Expedia. In other words, a comparison of the dierence in the distribution of reviews for

the same hotel could potentially help us identify the presence of review manipulation. However, we

can not infer promotional activity from a straightforward comparison of reviews for hotels overall

on TripAdvisor and Expedia since the population of reviewers using TripAdvisor and Expedia may

dier; the websites dier in characteristics other than reviewer identity verication.

         Here we take a dierences in dierences approach (although, unconventionally, neither of our dif-

ferences are in the time dimension): for each hotel, we examine the dierence in review distribution

across Expedia and TripAdvisor and across dierent neighbor and ownership/aliation conditions.

We use the claims of Section 4 to argue that the incentives to post fake reviews will dier across

dierent neighbor and ownership/aliation conditions. That is, we hypothesize that hotels with

greater incentive to manipulate reviews will post more fake positive reviews for themselves and more

    13
         Before a user posts a review on TripAdvisor, she has to click on a box that certies that she has no personal
or business aliation with this establishment, and have not been oered any incentive or payment originating the
establishment to write this review. In contrast, before a user posts a review on Expedia, she must log in to the site,
and Expedia veries that the user actually purchased the hotel within the required time period.




                                                            17
fake negative reviews for their hotel neighbors on TripAdvisor, and we expect to see these eects in

the dierence in the distributions of reviews on TripAdvisor and Expedia.

      Consider the estimating equation:




  N StarReviewsTijA         N StarReviewsExp
                                         ij
                        −                         = Xij B1 + OwnAf ij B2 + Nei ij B3 +
  T otal ReviewsTijA        T otal ReviewsExp
                                          ij
                                                                                                X
                                                                       NeiOwnAf ij B4 +                   γj + εij   (1)




      This specication estimates correlates of the dierence between the share of reviews on TA that

are   N   star and the share of reviews on Expedia that are      N    star for hotel   i   in city   j.   Our primary

interest will be in the most extreme reviews, 1-star/2-star and 5-star.            Xij       contains controls for

hotel characteristics; these hotel characteristics should only matter to the extent that TripAdvisor

and Expedia customers value them dierentially. Specically, as discussed above, we include the

hotel's ocial star categorization common to TripAdvisor and Expedia, dummies for the six

categorizations of hotel type provided by STR (economy, midscale, luxury, etc.), hotel age, location

type dummies (airport, suburban, etc), and dummies for convention hotels, the presence of a hotel

restaurant, and all suites hotels.   N eiij   is an indicator variable indicating the presence of a neighbor

within 0.5km.     OwnAfij    contains the own-hotel ownership and aliation characteristics.                    In our

primary specications, these include the indicator variable for independent and the indicator variable

for membership in a large ownership entity.           N eiOwnAf ij    contains the variables measuring the

ownership and aliation characteristics of other hotels within 0.5km. Specically, we include an

indicator variable for the presence of an independent neighbor hotel, and an indicator variable for

the presence of a neighbor hotel owned by a large ownership entity. The variables                    γj   are indicator

variables for city xed eects.

      Our cleanest specications examine the eect of        N eiij   and   N eiOwnAf ij      variables on review

manipulation. Following Claim 1 in Section 4, we hypothesize that a hotel with at least one neighbor

will have more fake negative reviews (have a higher share of 1-star/2-star reviews on TripAdvisor

than on Expedia) than a hotel with no neighbor. In addition, using Claim 3 from Section 4, we

hypothesize that the neighbor eect will be exacerbated when the rm has an independent neighbor,

and that the neighbor eect will be mitigated when the rm has a multi-unit owner or multi-unit

management company neighbor.



                                                       18
   We then turn to the eects of own-hotel organizational and ownership characteristics (OwnAfij )

on the incentive to manipulate reviews. Following the discussion in Section 4, we hypothesize that

an entity that is associated with more properties has more to lose from being caught manipulating

reviews: the negative reputational spillovers are higher. Hence, we claim that 1) independent hotels

have a higher incentive to post fake positive reviews (have a higher share of 5-star reviews on

TripAdvisor versus Expedia) than branded chain hotels, 2) small owners have a higher incentive to

post fake positive reviews than multi-unit owner hotels, 3) hotels with a small management company

have a higher incentive to post fake positive reviews than hotels that use multi-unit management

company.

   Our interpretation of these results relies on our maintained assumption that TripAdvisor and

Expedia users value hotels with dierent ownership and aliation characteristics similarly.      An

important alternative explanation for our results is that there are important dierences in tastes of

TripAdvisor and Expedia users for unobserved characteristics that are correlated with our ownership

and neighbor variables. For example, one explanation for a nding that independent hotels have a

higher share of positive reviews on TripAdvisor is that the TripAdvisor population likes independent

hotels more than the Expedia population. We discuss this alternative hypothesis at length in the

robustness section below. Here we note that this alternative explanation is much more plausible a

priori for some of our results than for others. In particular, we nd the alternative hypothesis less

plausible for the specications for which the neighbor variables are the variables of interest. For

the neighbor specications, the alternative hypothesis suggests that, for example, some consumers

will systematically dislike a Faireld Inn whose neighbor is an owner-operated Days Inn relative to

a Faireld Inn whose neighbor is a Days Inn owned by a large entity like Archon, and that this

dierence in preferences is measurably dierent for TripAdvisor and Expedia users.

   Note that our empirical methodology is similar to the approach undertaken in the economics

literature on cheating. The most closely related papers in that stream are Duggan and Levitt (2002),

Jacob and Levitt (2003), and Dellavigna and Ferrara (2010). In all three papers the authors do not

observe rule-breaking or cheating (throwing sumo wrestling matches, teachers cheating on student

achievement tests, or companies trading arms in embargoed countries) directly. Instead, the authors

infer that rule-breaking occurs indirectly. That is, Duggan and Levitt (2002) document a consistent

pattern of outcomes in matches that are important for one of the players, Jacob and Levitt (2003)

infer cheating from consistent patterns test answers, and Dellavigna and Ferrara (2010) infer arms




                                                 19
embargo violations if weapon-making companies' stocks react to changes in conict intensity. In all

of these papers we see that cheaters respond to incentives. Importantly for our paper, Dellavigna

and Ferrara (2010) show that a decrease in reputation costs of illegal trades results in more illegal

trading. Our empirical methodology is similar to this previous work. First, we also do not observe

review manipulation directly and must infer it from patterns in the data. Second, we hypothesize

and show that the rate of manipulation is aected by dierences in reputation costs for players

in dierent conditions. The innovation in our work is that by using two dierent platforms with

dramatically dierent costs of cheating we are able to have a benchmark.




5.1   Main Results


In this Section we present the estimation results of the basic dierences in dierences approach

to identify review manipulation.   Table 4 presents the results of the estimation of Equation (1).

Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are used throughout.

   We rst consider to the specication where the dependent variable is the dierence in the share
                                                           1+2StarReviewsT  ij
                                                                              A   1+2StarReviewsExpij
of 1- and 2-star reviews. Our dependent variable is thus
                                                            T otal ReviewsT A   −                     . This is
                                                                          ij       T otal ReviewsExp
                                                                                                 ij
our measure of negative review manipulation. We begin with the simplest specication: we examine

the dierence between negative reviews on TripAdvisor and Expedia for hotels that do and do not

have neighbors within 0.5km. This specication includes all of the controls for hotel characteristics

(X ij in Equation 1), but does not include the   OwnAf ij      and   N eiOwnAf ij     characteristics.    The

results are in Column 1 of Table 4. The results show a strong and statistically signicant eect of

the presence of a neighbor on the dierence in negative reviews on TripAdvisor vs. Expedia. The

coecient estimate suggests that hotels with a neighbor have an increase of 1.9 percentage points

in the share of 1-star and 2-star reviews across the two sites. This is a large eect given that the

average share of 1- and 2-star reviews is 25% for a hotel on TripAdvisor.

   We continue with our analysis of negative reviews by examining ownership and aliation char-

acteristics. We include in the specication all of the own hotel ownership characteristics and the

neighbor owner characteristics (OwnAfij and     N eiOwnAf ij ).      For these negative review manipu-

lation results, we do not expect to see any eects of the hotel's own organizational structure on

its share of 1- and 2-star reviews since a hotel is not expected to negatively manipulate its own

ratings. Instead, our hypotheses concern the eects of the presence of neighbor hotels on negative

review manipulation. The results are in Column 2 of Table 4. As before, our coecient estimates




                                                 20
                             Table 4: Estimation Results of Equation 1



                                        Dierence in share   Dierence in share        Dierence in share
                                        of 1- and 2-star     of 1- and 2-star          of 5- star reviews
                                        reviews              reviews

Xij            Site rating              -0.0067              -0.0052                   -0.0205**
                                        (0.0099)             (0.0099)                  (0.0089)

               Hotel age                0.0004***             0.0003*                   0.0002
                                        (0.0002)             (0.0002)                  (0.0002)

               All Suites               0.0146                0.0162*                   0.0111
                                        (0.0092)             (0.0092)                  (0.0111)

               Convention Center        0.0125                0.0159*                  -0.0385***
                                        (0.0086)             (0.0091)                  (0.0113)

               Restaurant               0.0126                0.0114                    0.0318***
                                        (0.0093)             (0.0092)                  (0.0099)

               Hotel tier controls?     Yes                  Yes                       Yes

               Hotel location           Yes                  Yes                       Yes
               controls?

OwnAfij        Hotel is Independent                           0.0139                    0.0240**
                                                             (0.0110)                  (0.0103)

               Multi-unit owner                              -0.0011                   -0.0312***
                                                             (0.0063)                  (0.0083)



N eiij         Has a neighbor           0.0192**              0.0296**                 -0.0124
                                        (0.0096)             (0.0118)                  (0.0119)

N eiOwnAf ij   Has independent                                0.0173*                  -0.0051
               neighbor                                      (0.0094)                  (0.0100)

               Has multi-unit owner                          -0.0252***                -0.0040
               neighbor                                      (0.0087)                  (0.0097)



γj             City-level xed          YES                  YES                       YES
               eects?



               Num. of observations     2931                 2931                      2931

               R-squared                0.05                 0.06                      0.12

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Regression estimates of Equation (1).
The dependent variable in all specications is the share of reviews that are   N   star for a given hotel
at TripAdvisor minus the share of reviews for that hotel that are   N   star at Expedia.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. All neighbor eects calculated for neighbors
within a 0.5km radius.




                                                   21
suggest that the presence of any neighbor within 0.5km signicantly increases the dierence in the

1- and 2-star share across the two sites. We hypothesize that multi-unit owners bear a higher cost

of review manipulation and thus will engage in less review manipulation.             Our results show that

the presence of a multi-unit owner hotel within 0.5km results in 2.5 percentage point decrease in

the dierence in the share of 1- and 2-star reviews across the two sites, relative to having only

single-unit owner neighbors. This negative eect is statistically dierent from zero at the 1 percent

condence level. As expected, the hotel's own ownership and aliation characteristics do not have

a statistically signicant relationship to the presence of 1-star and 2-star reviews. The presence of

an independent hotel within 0.5km results in an additional increase of 1.7 percentage point in the

dierence in the share of 1-star and 2-star reviews across the two sites. Our point estimates imply

that having an independent neighbor versus having no neighbor results in a 4.7 percentage point

increase in and 1- and 2 star reviews (3.0 percentage points for having any neighbor plus 1.7 for the

neighbor being independent). These estimated eects are large given that the average share of 1-

and 2-star reviews is 25% for a hotel on TripAdvisor.

   Of course, the neighbor characteristics are the characteristics of interest in the 1- and 2-star

review specications. However, our specications include the hotel's own ownership characteristics

as control variables. The estimated coecients for the hotel's own ownership characteristics are small

in magnitude and statistically insignicant. This is consistent with our manipulation hypotheses

but seem inconsistent with the alternative hypothesis of dierences in preferences for ownership

characteristics across TripAdvisor and Expedia users.

   We next turn to the specication where the dependent variable is the dierence in the share
                                                        5StarReviewsT ij
                                                                        A       5StarReviewsExp
                                                                                            ij
of 5-star reviews. That is, the dependent variable is
                                                        T otal ReviewsT A   −                       .   This is our
                                                                      ij        T otal ReviewsExp
                                                                                              ij
measure of possible positive review manipulation. Consistent with our hypothesis that independent

hotels optimally post more positive fake reviews, we see that independent hotels have 2.4 percentage

points higher dierence in the share of 5-star reviews across the two sites than branded chain hotels.

This eect is statistically dierent from zero at the ve percent condence level. Since hotels on

TripAdvisor have on average a 31% share of 5-star reviews, the magnitude of the eect is reasonably

large. However, as we mentioned before, while this result is consistent with manipulation, we can

not rule out the possibility that reviewers on TripAdvisor tend to prefer independent hotels over

branded chain hotels to a bigger extent than Expedia customers.

   We also measure the disparity across sites in preferences for hotels with multi-unit owners.




                                                 22
Consistent with our hypothesis that multi-unit owners will nd review manipulation more costly,

and therefore engage in less review manipulation, we nd that hotels that are owned by a multi-unit

owner have a 3.1 percentage point smaller dierence in the share of 5-star reviews across the two

sites. This translates to about four fewer 5-star reviews on TripAdvisor if we assume that the share

of Expedia reviews stays the same across these two conditions and that the hotel has a total of 120

reviews on TripAdvisor, the site average. While we include neighbor eects in this specication, we

do not have strong hypotheses on the eect of neighbor characteristics on the dierence in the share

of 5-star reviews across the two sites, since there is no apparent incentive for a neighboring hotel

to practice positive manipulation on the focal hotel. Indeed, in the 5-star specication, none of the

estimated neighbor eects are large or statistically signicant.   In interpreting these results, it is

important to remember that the ownership characteristic is virtually unobservable to the consumer;

it measures the dierence between, for example, an Archon Hospitality Faireld Inn and an owner-

operator Faireld Inn. Nonetheless, it is plausible that TripAdvisor and Expedia users dierentially

value hotel characteristics that are somehow correlated with the presence of an owner-operator (and

not included in our regression specications). We return to this issue below.

   For the 5-star specications, the hotel's own ownership characteristics are the variables of in-

terest, rather than the neighbor variables. Here, we nd the estimated coecients of the neighbor

characteristics to be small and statistically insignicant. This nding is consistent with our ma-

nipulation hypothesis but seems inconsistent with the alternative hypothesis that TripAdvisor and

Expedia users have systematically dierent preferences for hotels with dierent kinds of neighbors.

   What do our results suggest about the extent of review manipulation on an open platform such as

TripAdvisor overall? Note that we cannot identify the baseline level of manipulation on TripAdvisor

that is uncorrelated with our characteristics. Thus, we can only provide estimates for the dierence

between hotels of dierent characteristics.   However, as an example, let's consider the dierence

in positive manipulation under two extreme cases: a) a branded chain hotel that is owned by a

multi-unit owner (the case with the lowest predicted and estimated amount of manipulation) and

b) an independent hotel that is owned by a small owner (the case with the greatest predicted and

estimated amount of manipulation). Recall that the average hotel in our sample has 120 reviews, of

which 37 on average are 5-star. Our estimates suggest that we would expect about 7 more positive

TripAdvisor reviews in case b versus case a. Similarly, we can perform a comparison for the case

of negative manipulation by neighbors. Consider case c) being a completely isolated hotel and case




                                                 23
d) being located near an independent hotel that is owned by a small owner. For the average hotel

with 120 reviews, thirty 1-star and 2-star reviews would be expected as a baseline. Our estimates

suggest that there would be a total of 6 more fake negative reviews on TripAdvisor in case d versus

case c.

   Our main results focus on the presence of neighbors and the ownership and aliations of hotels

and their neighbors.   However, hotels dier structurally not only in their ownership but also in

their management. As explained above, some hotel units have single unit owners, but these owners

outsource day to day management of the hotels to a management company. In our sample of 2931

hotels, of the 2029 that do not have multi-unit owners, 767 do outsource management to multi-unit

managers. As we explain in Section 4, the management company is not residual claimant to hotel

protability the way that the owner is, but nonetheless, obviously has a stake in hotel success. As

in the case of multi-unit owners, posting of fake reviews by an employee of a management company

could, if detected, have negative implications for the management company as a whole. Thus, we

expect that a multi-unit management company would have a lower incentive to post fake reviews

than a single-unit manager (which in many cases is the owner). This implies that hotel neighbors

of hotels with multi-unit managers should have fewer 1- and 2-star reviews on TripAdvisor while

hotels with multi-unit managers should have fewer 5-star reviews on TripAdvisor, once again if we

assume that the share of Expedia reviews stays the same.

   In the rst column in Table 5, we use the share dierence in 1- and 2-star reviews as the

dependent variable. Here, as before, we have no predictions for the own hotel characteristics (and

none are statistically dierent from zero). We do have predictions for neighbor characteristics. As

before, we nd that having any neighbor is associated with having more 1- and 2-star reviews, a 3.8

percentage point increase. As before, an independent hotel neighbor is associated with more negative

reviews on TripAdvisor relative to Expedia and having a large owner chain neighbor is associated

with fewer negative reviews on TripAdvisor. The presence of a large management company neighbor

is associated with fewer negative reviews on TripAdvisor, although the eect is not statistically

signicant at standard condence level. The presence of a large owner neighbor and the presence of

a large management company neighbor are quite positively correlated. A test of the joint signicance

shows that the two variables are jointly signicant in our specication at the 1 percent level.

   In the second column of Table 5, we examine 5-star reviews.        Here, as before, the neighbor

characteristics are uninformative. As before, independent hotels have more 5-star reviews on Tri-




                                                 24
                            Table 5:   Management Company Specications



                                                        Dierence in      Dierence in
                                                        share of 1- and   share of 5-star
                                                        2- star reviews   reviews

Xij          Site rating                                -0.0047           -0.0183**
                                                        (0.0100)          (0.0090)

             Hotel age                                  0.0003**          0.0002
                                                        (0.0002)          (0.0002)

             All Suites                                 0.0169*           0.0144
                                                        (0.0091)          (0.0112)

             Convention Center                          0.0163*           -0.0363***
                                                        (0.0090)          (0.0113)

             Restaurant                                 0.0110            0.0323***
                                                        (0.0092)          (0.0099)

             Hotel tier controls?                       YES               YES

             Hotel location controls?                   YES               YES

OwnAfij      Hotel is Independent                       0.0141            0.213**
                                                        (0.0111)          (0.0104)

             Multi-unit owner                           -0.0014           -0.0252***
                                                        (0.0064)          (.0086)

             Multi-unit management company              0.0022            -0.0211 **
                                                        (0.0077)          (0.0092)



N eiij       Has a neighbor                             0.0379***         -0.0098
                                                        (0.0142)          (0.0140)

N eiOwnAf ij Has     independent neighbor               0.0173*           -0.006
                                                        (0.0094)          (0.0100)

             Has multi-unit owner neighbor              -0.0169*          0.0004
                                                        (0.0097)          (0.0114)

             Has multi-unit management                  -0.0183           -0.0059
             company neighbor                           (0.0125)          (0.0136)



γj           City-level xed eects?                    YES               YES



             Num. of observations                       2931              2931

             R-squared                                  0.06              0.12

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Regression estimates of Equation (1). The dependent variable in all specications is the share
of reviews that are    N   star for a given hotel at TripAdvisor minus the share of reviews for that
hotel that are   N   star at Expedia. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.
All neighbor eects calculated for 0.5km radius.

                                                   25
pAdvisor relative to Expedia and that hotels with a large owner company have fewer 5-star reviews.

In addition, the results show that a hotel that is managed by a multi-unit management company

has a statistically signicant 2.1 percentage point decrease in the dierence of the share of 5-star

reviews between the two sites which we interpret as a decrease in positive manipulation. Notably,

the inclusion of this variable does not alter our previous results; independent hotels continue to have

signicantly more 5-star reviews on TripAdvisor relative to Expedia and hotels with multi-unit own-

ers have fewer 5-star reviews. This result is important because, like a multi-unit owner company,

management by a multi-unit management company is invisible to the consumer. Thus, altogether,

there is suggestive evidence that, like larger owner companies, larger management companies are

associated with less review manipulation.

   Unfortunately, it is impossible for us, given these data, to measure the eect that these ratings'

changes will have on sales.   While Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) show that 1-star reviews hurt

book sales more than 5-star reviews help book sales, those ndings do not necessarily apply to

this context.   Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) note that two competing books on the same subject

may indeed be net complements, rather than net substitutes. Authors and publishers, then, may

gain from posting fake positive reviews of their own books, but will not necessarily benet from

posting negative reviews of rivals' books. Thus, in the context of books, 1-star reviews may be more

credible than 5 star reviews. We have seen that, in the case of hotels, where two hotels proximate

to each other are clearly substitutes, one cannot infer that a 1 or 2 star review should be treated

by customers as more credible than a 5-star review.




5.2   Results for One-Time Reviewers


Our preceding analysis is predicated on the hypothesis that promotional reviewers have an incentive

to imitate real reviewers as completely as possible.    This is in contrast to the computer science

literature, described above, that attempts to nd textual markers of fake reviews.        Nonetheless,

for robustness, we do separately examine one category of suspicious reviews. These are reviews

that are posted by one-time contributors to TripAdvisor. The least expensive way for a hotel to

generate a user review is to create a ctitious prole on TripAdvisor (which only requires an email

address), and following the creation of this prole, to post a review. This is, of course, not the only

way that the hotel can create reviews. Another option is for a hotel to pay a user with an existing

review history to post a fake review; yet another possibility is to create a review history in order




                                                  26
to camouage a fake review. Here, we examine  suspicious reviews: the review for a hotel is the

rst and only review that the user ever posted. In our sample, 23.0% of all TripAdvisor reviews are

posted by one-time reviewers. These reviews are more likely to be extreme compared to the entire

TripAdvisor sample: 47.6% of one-time reviewers are 5-star versus 38.1% in the entire TripAdvisor

sample. There are more negative outliers as well: 24.3% of one-time reviews are 1-star and 2-star

versus 16.4% in the entire TripAdvisor sample. Of course, the extremeness of one-time reviews does

not in and of itself suggest that one-time reviews are more likely to be fake; users who otherwise do

not make a habit of reviewing may be moved to do so by an unusual experience with a hotel.

   In Table 6 we present the results of the following three specications.                   In the rst column,

we present the results of a specication where the dependent variable is the share of one-time
                                                                                         one−time ReviewsT  ij
                                                                                                              A
contributor user reviews on TripAdvisor. Thus, our dependent variable is                                        . This
                                                                                           T otal ReviewsT
                                                                                                         ij
                                                                                                           A


captures the incidence of these suspicious reviews and includes potential positive as well as negative

manipulation.   The most striking result is that one-time reviews are 8.8 percentage points more

common for independent hotels.        This is consistent with our earlier results, but also could be

attributable to legitimate customer reviewing preferences. Also consistent with our earlier results,

we nd a negative impact of multi-unit owner on one-time reviewing activity, and a negative impact

of multi-unit owner neighbors.     There is one variable in our specication that does not have the

anticipated sign. The presence of any neighbor is negatively associated with suspicious reviews

(although this eect is insignicant); our model would predict that this association would be positive.

   The other two specications in Table 6 address the valence of these reviews. For these specica-
                                   one−time N StarReviewsTij
                                                            A       N StarReviewsExp
                                                                                 ij
tions, the dependent variable is
                                      one−time ReviewsT A       −                       . That is, we look at the
                                                      ij            T otal ReviewsExp
                                                                                  ij
dierence between the share of     N -star   reviews among suspicious reviews on TripAdvisor and the

overall share of N-Star reviews on Expedia. Ideally, we might want to compare one-time reviews

on TripAdvisor to one-time reviews on Expedia. Unfortunately, Expedia's reviewer identication

features render identifying one-time reviewers impossible. Column 2 shows the case where                     N =1
or 2, our specication that focuses on the characteristics of neighbor hotels.                 The presence of a

neighbor is associated with a 2.9 percentage point increase in the share of one-time reviews that are

1 or 2 stars. This eect is statistically signicant at the ten percent level. The eect of indepen-

dent neighbors and multi-unit neighbors are positive and negative, respectively, in accordance with

our model and previous results. However, these eects are not signicant at standard condence

levels. It is possible that these results are weak in part because one-time reviews are suspicious.




                                                     27
                Table 6: Results for TripAdvisor one-time contributor reviewers



                                       Share of one-time           Dierence in share    Dierence in
                                       contributor user            of 1 and 2 star       share of 5 star
                                       reviews                     reviews               reviews

Xij            Site rating             -0.0176***                  -0.0175               -0.0083
                                       (0.0061)                    (0.0113)              (0.0102)

               Hotel age                0.0003**                   0.00005               0.0002
                                       (0.0001)                    (0.0002)              (0.0002)

               All Suites               0.0086                     -0.0147               0.0035
                                       (0.0065)                    (0.0137)              (0.0150)

               Convention Center       -0.0177**                   0.0532***             -0.0716***
                                       (0.0082)                    (0.0147)              (0.0170)

               Restaurant               0.0376***                  0.0079                0.0329***
                                       (0.0068)                    (0.0126)              (0.0128)

               Hotel tier controls?    YES                         YES                   YES

               Hotel location          YES                         YES                   YES
               controls?

Ownij          Hotel is Independent     0.0881***                  -0.0035               0.0082
                                       (0.0079)                    (0.0135)              (0.0123)

               Multi-unit owner        -.0135**                    0.0109                -0.0239**
                                       (0.0052)                    (0.0102)              (0.0117)

N eiij         Has a neighbor          -0.0091                     0.0285*               -0.0093
                                       (0.0080)                    (0.0156)              (0.0159)

N eiOwnAf ij   Has independent          0.0002                     0.0203                0.0027
               neighbor                (0.0066)                    (0.0133)              (0.0130)

               Has multi-unit owner    -0.0144**                   -0.0150               -0.0038
               neighbor                (0.0062)                    (0.0125)              (0.0132)

γj             City-level xed         YES                         YES                   YES
               eects?



               Num. of observations    2874                        2874                  2874

               R-squared               0.35                        0.05                  0.07

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Estimation of Equation 1 with the sample restricted to hotels that have at least one review by
a one-time contributor (the reviewer has only submitted one review on TripAdvisor).
The dependent variable in the rst column is the share of reviews by one-time contributors among
all TripAdvisor reviews for a given hotel. The dependent variable in the other two columns is the
share of reviews by one-time contributors that are      N   star for a given hotel at TripAdvisor minus
the share of reviews for that hotel that are   N   star at Expedia.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. All neighbor eects calculated for 0.5km radius.




                                                   28
TripAdvisor has a policy whereby hotels can contest suspicious reviews and TripAdvisor may, at

its discretion, remove contested suspicious reviews from the site. Negative reviews by one-time

reviewers may be more likely to be expunged from the site. In Column 3, we examine 5-star reviews,

the specications in which we focus on own-hotel characteristics. The eect of hotel independence is

positive, as predicted, but not signicantly dierent from zero. Multi-unit owner has a statistically

signicant 2.4 percentage point lower dierence in the share of 5-star reviews across the two sites,

which is consistent with our hypotheses and earlier results.

   Overall, these results conrm our prior results that manipulation of reviews takes place in a way

that is consistent with predicted hotel incentives. However, our results for suspicious reviews are

not as compelling as our results for all reviews.   Of course, with this analysis we are forced to

construct the left hand side variable using a smaller subset of reviews, which may be noisy. Further,

if fakers are sophisticated in their attempt to avoid detection, they may be avoiding these suspicious

reviewing activities.




5.3   Robustness Checks


Perhaps the main concern with our results is the potential for selection on unobservables. That is,

TripAdvisor and Expedia users may dier in their taste for hotel characteristics. We have included

many such possible characteristics in our specications (hotel age, hotel tier, hotel location type,

etc.). Thus, dierences in tastes for these included characteristics are not a problem for our analy-

sis; we have controlled for these in our specication. However, it is possible that consumer tastes

dier across the two websites for unobservable characteristics. This is a concern if the unobservable

characteristics are correlated with the ownership, aliation, and neighbor variables of interest. This

could in principle lead to signicant measured impacts of our ownership, aliation, and neighbor

variables even if ownership, aliation, and neighbor characteristics are not associated with review

manipulation. A priori, we nd this alternative hypothesis less plausible for any specications in

which the variables of interest are neighbor variables.    It seems unlikely, for example, that Tri-

pAdvisor users systematically dislike (relative to Expedia users) hotels whose hotel neighbors are

franchisees that operate a single hotel. A priori, we nd selection on unobservables to be a more

plausible concern for specications in which the variables of interest are own-hotel ownership and

aliation.

   To investigate selection on unobservables, we undertake the following exercise. Recall that our




                                                 29
base specications include a rich set of control variables. We re-estimate the base specications in

Table 4, maintaining the neighbor, ownership, and aliation variables but removing all of the control

variables. We compare the result of this no-controls specication to our basic results including all of

the control variables. We examine how much (if at all) inclusion of the control variables attenuates

the coecients for the variables of interest. If unobservable characteristics are positively correlated

with observable characteristics, one might expect that the inclusion of additional controls, if they

were available, would further attenuate the coecients on the variables of interest.
                                                                                                       14   The no-

control specications are shown in Columns 1 through 3 of Table 7. Comparing Table 4 to Table

7, for the neighbor specication shown in Column 1, reestimation excluding all control variables

actually produces a smaller point estimate of the neighbor eect. Thus, inclusion of a set of control

variables does not attenuate the results at all. This nding has been interpreted in the literature

as assuaging concerns about selection on unobservables.                      Similarly, the full neighbor ownership-

aliation specication in Column 2 of Table 4 can be compared with the specications with no

control variables in Table 7. The independent neighbor variable has a stronger measured impact

on review dierences in the regression with the controls versus the regression without controls.

Again, inclusion of controls does not attenuate the independence eect. The owner-neighbor eect

does attenuate from -0.031 to -0.025 with the inclusion of the control variables.                     However, our

specications contain a very rich set of control variables.                   If we could hypothetically perform a

regression that contained all of the unobservables, and if these unobservables were as powerful as

the observable control variables in attenuating the ownership eect, the ownership eect would still

remain substantial in magnitude. Thus, for the neighbor specications in Columns 1 and 2 of Table

4, we conclude that selection on unobservables is unlikely to be a major explanation for our results.

      A priori, selection on unobservables is more plausible for the ve star specications examining

a hotel's own characteristics.          Own hotel ownership and aliation are plausibly correlated with

characteristics that TripAdvisor and Expedia customers could value dierently. Again, we examine

this issue by comparing the no controls specications in Column 3 of Table 7 to the full controls

specications in Column 3 of Table 4. Here, the alternative hypothesis of selection on unobservables

is more dicult to reject. Both the multi-unit owner dummy and the independent hotel dummy

are attenuated by approximately 50% when controls are added to the regression.                        Thus, our in-

terpretation of these coecients as evidence for review manipulation relies on the included hotel

 14
      See Altonji et al. (2005) for a more formal discussion of this test.




                                                            30
               Table 7: Robustness specications: Specications with no controls


                                       Dierence in         Dierence in      Dierence in
                                       Share of             Share of          Share of

                                       1- and 2 -star       1- and 2- star    5- star reviews
                                       reviews              reviews
Xij             Site rating                                                 
                Hotel age                                                   

                All Suites                                                  

                Convention Center                                           

                Restaurant                                                  

                Hotel tier controls    NO                   NO                NO

                Hotel location         NO                   NO                NO
                controls

Ownij           Hotel is                                   0.0093            0.0429***
                Independent                                 (0.0092)          (0.0103)

                Multi-unit owner                           -0.0181**         -0.0642***
                                                            (0.0075)          (0.0084)



N ei            Has a neighbor         0.0118               0.0324***         -0.0177
                                       (0.0079)             (0.0098)          (0.0109)

N eiOwnAf ij    Has independent                            0.0022            -0.0069
                neighbor                                    (0.0082)          (0.0091)

                Has multi-unit         -                    -0.0310***        -0.0211**
                owner neighbor                              (0.0083)          (0.0093)

γj              City level xed        NO                   NO                NO
                eects?



                Num of                 2931                 2931              2931
                observations

                R-squared              0.001                0.01              0.04

Notes: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10
Estimation of Equation 1 excluding control variables.
The dependent variable in all specications is the share of reviews that are      N   star for a given hotel
at TripAdvisor minus the share of reviews that are     N   star at Expedia.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.
All neighbor eects calculated for 0.5 km radius.
Results in this Table can be compared to the base specications in Table 4 to measure
whether and if the inclusion of control variables in Table 4 leads to substantial
attenuation of the coecients of interest.




                                                  31
characteristics being more powerful than omitted hotel characteristics in explaining the dierence

in reviewer behavior on TripAdvisor and Expedia.

       Our analysis of Table 7 is one strategy to examine the importance of omitted hotel characteristics.

In Appendix Table 11, we take another approach to examining omitted hotel characteristics. Here,

we reexamine the base specications of Table 4, including hotel chain xed eects for the ten largest

hotel brands. Inclusion of these chain xed eects allows TripAdvisor and Expedia patrons to have

a very general form of dierent preferences. They can have not only dierent preferences for hotel

quality tiers and hotel age (all included in the controls in our base specications), but also can

have dierent preferences for dierent individual hotel brands. These specications produce results

very similar to the base specications discussed in 4. Here, the neighbor variables of interest are

all of roughly the same magnitude and signicance as in our base specications. The only change

that inclusion of this variable causes compared to the earlier results is that the independent own

hotel dummy in the 5-star specication is no longer statistically signicant; the ownership variable

remains of the expected sign and statistically signicantly dierent from zero.

       Given the importance of our negative review specications, we next turn to a few robustness

checks that examine the robustness of our neighbor ownership and aliation results. Throughout,

we have used 1 and 2 star reviews as our marker of negative reviews. We chose this specication

in part due to the summary statistics outlined in Table 1. While 31% of reviews on TripAdvisor

are 5s, 1s and 2s together only account for 25% of reviews. Hence, a rm attempting to denigrate

its competitor will often be able to do so eectively with either 1- or 2-star promotional reviews.

Furthermore, a scan of web blogs, etc. suggests that hoteliers complain to TripAdvisor about fake

2-star negative reviews from competitors and that TripAdvisor has sometimes deemed such reviews

as fake and removed them.
                               15 Nonetheless, we provide robustness results where we examine the basic

specication in Equation 1 above, but consider only determinants of 1-star reviews. This is shown

in the rst column of Table 8. The results are similar to the base 1- and 2-star results in Column

2 of Table 4; the own-hotel ownership and aliation characteristics have little explanatory power

and are insignicant. The independent neighbor and large company owner neighbor coecients are

similar in magnitude and signicance to the main specication. The having any neighbor within

0.5km indicator variable has a smaller coecient (although still of the hypothesized sign) but is

not statistically signicant at standard condence levels.

  15
       See, for example, Fake Review Number Two in http://TripAdvisorwatch.wordpress.com/trip-advisor-fake-
reviews/.




                                                      32
                 Table 8: Specications with negative reviews as dependent variable




                                    Dierence     Dierence      Dierence     Dierence
                                    in share of   in share of    in share of   in share of
                                    1-star        1- and         1- and        1- and
                                    reviews       2-star         2-star        2-star
                                                  reviews        reviews       reviews

Xij             Site rating         -0.0177**     -0.0055        -0.0050       -0.0048
                                    (0.0076)      (0.0099)       (0.0099)      (0.0099)

                Hotel age           0.0005***      0.0003 **     0.0003**       0.0003**
                                    (0.0001)      (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0002)

                All Suites          0.0091         0.0159*       0.0156*        0.0158*
                                    (0.0076)      (0.0092)       (0.0091)      (0.0091)

                Convention          0.0104         0.0166*       0.0170*        0.0163*
                Center              (0.0073)      (0.0091)       (0.0091)      (0.0091)

                Restaurant          0.0039         0.0110        0.0091         0.0091
                                    (0.0076)      (0.0092)       (0.0092)      (0.0092)

                Hotel tier          YES           YES            YES           YES
                controls?

                Hotel location      YES           YES            YES           YES
                controls?

Ownij           Hotel is            0.0117         0.0126        0.0113         0.0114
                Independent         (0.0100)      (0.0110)       (0.0109)      (0.0109)

                Multi-unit          -0.0025       -0.0012        -0.0015       -0.0020
                owner               (0.0047)      (0.0063)       (0.0063)      (0.0063)

N eiij          Has a neighbor      0.0095        0.0258**       0.0125         0.0137
                                    (0.0106)      (0.0102)       (0.0132)      (0.0147)

N eiOwnAf ij Has     independent    0.0192**       0.0109        0.0176*        0.0207**
                neighbor            (0.0081)      (0.0099)       (0.0095)      (0.0093)

                Has multi-unit      -0.0204***    -0.0262***     -0.0252***    -0.0262***
                owner neighbor      (0.0075)      (0.0084)       (0.0093)      (0.0096)

γj              City-level xed     YES           YES            YES           YES
                eects?

                Num. of             2931          2931           2931          2931
                observations

                Neighbor            0.5km         0.3km          0.7km         0.9km
                radius?

                R-squared           0.09          0.05           0.05          0.05

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Estimation of Equation (1). The dependent variable in all specications is the share of reviews that
are   N   star for a given hotel at TripAdvisor minus the share of reviews that are   N   star at Expedia.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. The radius for which neighbors are
calculated for a given hotel is given in the table.
                                                 33
       We also examine the robustness of our results by altering the radius that we use to dene

neighbors. In our base specications in Table 4, we dene a neighbor as a hotel that is very close

to the hotel of interest within 0.5km kilometer of the hotel of interest. Under this denition, 76%

of the hotels in our sample have a neighbor. In Columns 2 through 4 of Table 8 we re-estimate the

specication of Column 2 of Table 4, but using dierent radii to dene neighbors 0.3km, 0.7km,

and 0.9km. Under the narrower radius denition of 0.3km, 65% of hotels have a neighbor. Under

the wider radius denitions of 0.7km and 0.9km, 82% and 85% of the hotels in our sample have

a neighbor, respectively.      These varying radii specications are similar to our base specication.

As the radius widens, the dummy for having any neighbor appears to diminish in magnitude and

signicance (as nearly every hotel has a neighbor), while the neighbor characteristics maintain or

even increase explanatory power. Thus, we conclude that our results change with the radius size in

a sensible way.

       Finally, we examine the robustness of our results to our particular choices of review site. Speci-

cally, we examine the relationship between our results and the results that would obtain by replacing

the data from Expedia analyzed above with data from another site, Orbitz.com. Orbitz.com, like

Expedia, is primarily a travel booking site that hosts user reviews.         Orbitz is a less popular site

than Expedia; Orbitz had approximately 60 percent fewer page views than Expedia in 2012.
                                                                                                     16 In

addition, whereas we expect there to be a large overlap between TripAdvisor and Expedia audiences

due to the companies' co-marketing eorts at the time of data collection (see our discussion above),

we do not have the same expectations for TripAdvisor and Orbitz.

       Until late 2010, Orbitz, like Expedia, only accepted reviews from individuals who had booked

their stay at Orbitz.com.       Starting in late 2010, Orbitz allowed others to submit hotel reviews,

but reviews from veried customers are identied as Veried and are given higher weight in

calculating the Orbitz Reviewer Score for each property.         Here we use only veried reviews from

Orbitz. In our sample, only 1.2% of Orbitz reviews were unveried. Hence, while the Orbitz data

is not a perfect substitute for Expedia data due to Orbitz's hybrid model, its smaller size, and the

fact that there may sharper dierences between TripAdvisor and Orbitz reviewer preferences, we

expect that Orbitz's veried reviews are costlier to manipulate than TripAdvisor's reviews. If our

results are driven by important (and subtle) dierences between the customer pools at Expedia and

TripAdvisor, robustness of our results for Orbitz may be valuable.

  16
       Data from ComScore, found at http://www.newmediatrendwatch.com/markets-by-country/17-usa/126-online-
travel-market, accessed April 11, 2013.




                                                     34
         In particular, in January 2013, a little more than a year after the original sample was collected,

we obtained TripAdvisor and Orbitz reviews for the hotels in our original sample.
                                                                                                    17 For our hotels

in the 2013 sample, we have a total of 105,232 veried Orbitz reviews; in contrast the number of

TripAdvisor reviews is 486,769.            Summary statistics are shown in Table 9.            One characteristic of

Orbitz reviews that stands out is the relatively low share of 5- star reviews.

         We estimate the following equation:




    N StarReviewsTijA            N StarReviewsOrb
                                              ij
                             −                         = Xij B1 + OwnAf ij B2 + Nei ij B3 +
     T otal ReviewsTijA          T otal ReviewsOrb
                                               ij
                                                                                                   X
                                                                             NeiOwnAf ij B4 +           γj + εij    (2)




These results are reported in Table 10. This analysis repeats the regression specications of Table 4,

replacing Orbitz veried reviews with Expedia reviews. Regressions results are qualitatively similar

to the results found in Table 4. Turning to the 1- and 2-star reviews, we nd, as in Table 4, the own

hotel owner characteristics are small and insignicant. However, we also nd small and insignicant

hotel neighbor eects. Note that the neighbor eects are all in the hypothesized direction. As in

Table 4, we nd that independent hotels have more 5-star reviews on TripAdvisor versus Orbitz,

and hotels from large ownership entities have fewer 5-star reviews. In the Orbitz specication, the

magnitude of the independence eect is somewhat larger than in our Expedia specications, while

the magnitude and signicance of the multi-unit owner eect is smaller (albeit the eect is still

signicant at 10% signicance). Overall, we take these results as suggestive that our ndings our

robust when examining alternative sites.




6         Conclusion and Limitations

We propose a novel methodology for empirically detecting review manipulation. In particular, we

examine the dierence in review distributions across Expedia and TripAdvisor, sites with dierent

    17
         The reason behind the later data collection eort is that Orbitz had relatively few reviews in October of 2011:
1) there were 104 hotels that had reviews at TripAdvisor and Expedia but no reviews on Orbitz, and 2) for the
hotels with reviews at both Orbitz and TripAdvisor, the number of reviews at Orbitz was about three-quarters of the
number of Expedia reviews. Unfortunately, during our later data collection eort we also discovered that Expedia
had expanded its reviews in a way that compromised our identication eort. In March of 2012, they merged their
original database of veried reviews with reviews from other sites.      Since we could not ascertain that all the new
reviews had been veried in the same manner as the earlier reviews, we could not re-do the analysis with the more
recent Expedia data. Note, however, that the change took place after our original sample was collected.



                                                             35
                 Table 9: User Reviews at TripAdvisor and Orbitz, January 2013




                           Mean      Standard         Minimum   Maximum
                                     deviation

Number of TripAdvisor      193.78    261.66           1         2468
reviews

Number of Orbitz           41.89     62.68            1         1077
reviews

Average TripAdvisor        3.61      0.70             1         5
star rating

Average Orbitz star        3.61      0.68             1         5
rating

Share of TripAdvisor       0.12
1-star reviews

Share of TripAdvisor       0.10
2-star reviews

Share of Orbitz 1-star     0.10
reviews

Share of Orbitz 2-star     0.09
reviews

Share of TripAdvisor       0.33
5-star reviews

Share of Orbitz 5-star     0.23
reviews

Total number of hotels     2512

The sample consists of the subset of hotels in our base sample that 1) were also available on

TripAdvisor and Orbitz in January 2013, and 2) had at least one review on TripAdvisor and

one veried review on Orbitz at that time.




                                                 36
                               Table 10: TripAdvisor versus Orbitz Results



                                           Dierence in share   Dierence in share     Dierence in share
                                           of 1- and 2-star     of 1- and 2-star       of 5- star reviews
                                           reviews              reviews

Xij              Site rating               0.0035               0.0043                 0.0041
                                           (0.0069)             (0.0070)               (0.0081)

                 Hotel age                 0.0003**              0.0003*                -0.0009***
                                           (0.00015)            (0.0002)               (0.0002)

                 All Suites                0.0027                0.0030                 0.0147
                                           (0.0088)             (0.0088)               (.0104)

                 Convention Center         0.0190**              0.0206**              -0.0405***
                                           (0.0095)             (0.0101)               (0.0124)

                 Restaurant                0.0078                0.0073                -0.0081
                                           (0.0073)             (0.0074)               (.0098)

                 Hotel tier controls?      Yes                  Yes                    Yes

                 Hotel location            Yes                  Yes                    Yes
                 controls?

OwnAfij          Hotel is Independent                            0.0080                 0.045***
                                                                (0.0103)               (0.0107)

                 Multi-unit owner                               -0.0018                -0.0146*
                                                                (0.0060)               (0.008)



N eiij           Has a neighbor            0.0127                0.0151                -0.0044
                                           (0.0082)             (0.0102)               (0.0113)

N eiOwnAf ij     Has independent                                 0.0028                0.006
                 neighbor                                       (0.0085)               (0.0096)

                 Has multi-unit owner                           -0.0044                0.0124
                 neighbor                                       (0.0079)               (0.0095)



γj               City-level xed           YES                  YES                    YES
                 eects?



                 Num. of observations      2512                 2512                   2281

                 R-squared                 0.03                 0.03                   0.07

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. All neighbor eects calculated for 0.5km radius.
Regression estimates of Equation (2). The dependent variable in all specications is the share of reviews
that are   N   star for a given hotel at TripAdvisor minus the share of reviews for that hotel that are   N   star
at Orbitz. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      37
reviewer identity verication policies, and across dierent competitive/ownership conditions. Con-

sistent with our theoretical claims, we nd that an increase in hotel incentives to manipulate reviews

results in an increase in our measures of manipulation. Substantively, we nd that independent ho-

tels engage in more review manipulation (both positive and negative), while hotels with multi-unit

owners as well as hotels that are managed by a multi-unit management companies engage in less

review manipulation (in the former case we nd the eect for positive and negative manipulation,

while in the latter we nd the eect only in the case of positive manipulation).         Thus, we con-

clude from our results that promotional reviewing is suciently economically important that actors

that are dierentially situated economically will indulge in promotional reviewing to a measurably

dierent extent.

   Our paper also contributes to the literature on incentives and organizational form. Our unusually

rich data set allows us to exploit the fact that ownership patterns in the hotel industry are actually

quite complicated.    For example, as discussed previously, a hotel can be franchised to a quite

large franchisee company; we hypothesize that the large franchisee company is less incentivized to

engage in this type of fraudulent activity than a small franchisee. In our paper, we advance the

literature on ownership by utilizing data on these complex ownership structures.         We show that

larger organizations appear to be measurably better at curbing cheating.

   While is it not our primary goal, our paper also contributes to the literature on fake review

detection. Previous methodologies in the computer science literature infer that reviews are more

likely to be fake if they contain certain textual markers of fakery (such as not using spatial language).

We have noted that a concern with these methodologies is that manipulating the textual markers

in response to detection algorithms is relatively inexpensive. In contrast, the organization form of

a hotel and its neighbors are very dicult to alter. Our results suggest that a detection algorithm

could incorporate these factors in assessing the probability that a given review is fake.

   Our paper also has implications for user review system design. Our results suggest that pro-

motional reviews are less common on Expedia than on TripAdvisor. Thus, the policy of verifying

reviews does limit promotional reviews. However, this limitation comes at a cost: there are far fewer

reviews on Expedia than on TripAdvisor. While the policy used by Orbitz (and now Amazon) of

marking veried and unveried reviews is an interesting compromise, it may discourage unveried

reviews and does not fully solve the review site's problem of whether to fully incorporate unveried

reviews into summary data.




                                                   38
   There are a number of limitations of this work. Perhaps the biggest limitation is that we do not

observe manipulation directly but must infer it. This issue is of course inherent in doing research in

this area. In the paper we deal with this limitation by building a strong case that the eects that

we examine are due to review manipulation and not due to other unobserved factors. The second

important limitation is that our measure of review manipulation does not include any content

analysis. That is, one could imagine that one way in which a hotel could increase the impact of a

fake review is by making particularly strong claims in the text of the review. For example, to hurt a

competitor, a traveler could claim to have witnessed a bed bug infestation. This is an interesting

issue for future work.

   Another limitation of this work is that we are unable to measure the impact that this ma-

nipulation has on consumer purchase behavior. Do consumers somehow detect and discount fake

reviews? Do they discount all reviews to some extent? Do they make poor choices on the basis of

fake reviews? These questions are also left for future work.




                                                 39
7         Appendix


7.1         A Simple Model


We propose a very simple and stylized model to x ideas.                      The game consists of two competing

rms,       A   and   B,   and a continuum of consumers. The time line of the game is the following:


     1.    Stage I :    Nature draws the true quality of each rm (qA and             qB ).   We assume that the rms'

           true quality is not observable to any of the game's players.
                                                                                      18 The prior belief on the rm

           qualities are:     qA ∼ N ormal(q0 , σq2 )   and   qB ∼ N ormal(q0 , σq2 ).    Here, the two rms a priori

           are identically distributed, but the model can be easily generalized to the case where the prior

           means are not equal.          Unless otherwise noted, we assume that all other parameters of the

           model are common knowledge.



     2.    Stage II :      The rms set prices (pA and     pB ),    which are observed by all the players.



     3.    Stage III :      Each rm can surreptitiously (and simultaneously) manufacture positive reviews

           for itself and negative reviews for its competitor.            The reviews are posted by a third party

           platform that does not verify the reviewers' identity. That is, consumers can not dierentiate

           between real and manufactured (or biased) user reviews.                  We denote by     ei,i   the eort that

           rm   i    invests into positive self-promotion (manufactured positive reviews), and by                 ei,j   the

           eort that rm       i   invests into negative reviews for rm      j.   While the actual rms' eorts are

           not observed by the consumers, consumers do observe the user ratings for both rms. Hence

           we can think of the set of user ratings (which consists of real and fake reviews) providing a

           signal    to the consumer on the rm's true quality. In particular, the signals arising from user

           ratings are the following:




                                                     sA =qA + eA,A − eB,A                                                 (3)


                                                     sB =qB + eB,B − eA,B                                                 (4)




           That is, the signal generated from user reviews on rm            A's quality consists of the true quality
           (qA ), the positive self-promotion eort by rm            A (eA,A )   and the negative eort by its com-

           petitor (eB,A ). Note that while we model the benet of eort (the signal generated from user

    18
         The case where only rms, but not the consumers, observe each other's true quality yields similar results, but is
considerably more complicated.



                                                               40
                           Table 11: Chain Fixed Eects Robustness Check


                                        Dierence in share   Dierence in share   Dierence in share
                                        of 1- and 2-star     of 1- and 2-star     of 5- star reviews
                                        reviews              reviews

Xij            Site rating              -0.0007              -0.0067              -0.0193**
                                        (0.0100)             (0.0101)             (0.0089)

               Hotel age                 0.0003              0.0002               -0.00006
                                        (0.0002)             (0.0002)             (0.0002)

               All Suites                0.0107              0.0112               0.0097
                                        (0.0090)             (0.0091)             (0.0123)

               Convention Center         0.0185**            0.0193**             -0.0263**
                                        (0.0090)             (0.0092)             (0.0113)

               Restaurant                0.0085              0.0077               0.0271***
                                        (0.0095)             (0.0095)             (0.0100)

               Hotel tier controls?     Yes                  Yes                  Yes

               Hotel location           Yes                  Yes                  Yes
               controls?

               Chain-level xed         Yes                  Yes                  Yes
               eects?

OwnAfij        Hotel is Independent                         0.0053               0.0079
                                                             (0.0135)             (0.0119)

               Multi-unit owner                             0.0053               -0.0194**
                                                             (0.0067)             (0.0086)



N eiij         Has a neighbor           0.0205**             0.0304***            -0.0121
                                        (0.0096)             (0.0118)             (0.0119)

N eiOwnAf ij   Has independent                              0.0162*              -0.0071
               neighbor                                      (0.0094)             (0.0099)

               Has multi-unit owner                         -0.0253***           -0.0018
               neighbor                                      (0.0088)             (0.0097)



γj             City-level xed          YES                  YES                  YES
               eects?



               Num. of observations     2931                 2931                 2931

               R-squared                0.06                 0.06                 0.13

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.
All neighbor eects calculated for 0.5km radius.




                                                   41
       reviews) as linear in the self-promotion eort for the sake of simplicity, in reality the benet

       is more likely to be concave in eort. That is, since a rating can't be higher than 5-stars, an

       increase in the number of manufactured positive reviews is likely to have diminishing marginal

       returns. Similarly, since a competitor's rating can't be lower than 1 star, an increase in the

       number of manufactured negative reviews is likely to have diminishing marginal returns.



  4. We model the manipulation eort as costly to the rm. We can think of this cost as the cost

       of eort associated with writing fake reviews as well as reputation-related risks associated

       with this kind of promotion. That is, if the rm is caught doing this kind of activity, it will

       suer damage to its reputation, which may dier for dierent types of rms.                                                    We assume

       that the cost of writing reviews is a convex function of the eort.                                            That is, consider the

       cost of writing the rst manufactured review to the cost of writing the 30th review. While

       the rst review can reect the owner's own authentic writing style, the 30th review must be

       dissimilar from the reviews that preceded it in order to avoid detection.                                            Hence we assume

              ∂C(ei,i ,ei,j )          ∂C(ei,i ,ei,j )          ∂ 2 C(ei,i ,ei,j )                  ∂ 2 C(e i,i ,ei,j )
       that
                 ∂ei,i          > 0,      ∂ei,j          > 0,       ∂ 2 ei,i
                                                                                     > 0,     and
                                                                                                        ∂ 2 ei,j
                                                                                                                          > 0.    The following

                                                                                                    C(ei,i , ei,j ) =      δi       2 γi        2
       assumed simple functional form satises these conditions:
                                                                                                                           2 (ei,i ) + 2 (ei,j ) .

       Here   δi   signies the damage caused to the rm                      i   if it caught doing self-promotion, and                   γi   the

       damage if it is posting negative reviews for its competitor.



  5.   Stage IV :       Finally, the consumer chooses the product that maximizes her utility. We assume

       that the products are horizontally dierentiated. We use a simple Hotelling model of dier-

       entiation to model consumer choice, where rm                              A    is located at      x = 0,          rm    B   is located at

       x = 1,   and the consumer at location                x   chooses A if




                                            E[qA |sA ] − tx − pA ≥E[qB |sB ] − tx − pB                                                          (5)




       We assume that consumers are uniformly distributed on the interval                                          [0, 1].   Since consumers

       do not observe the true quality directly, their expected utility from                                   A    and    B     is inferred from

       the signals generated from user reviews.



We next solve for the rms' optimal actions by backward induction. We start with the consumer's

inference in stage 4. After observing the signal                    sA    and        sB ,   the consumers' posterior beliefs on the




                                                                     42
rms' qualities are:




                                       E[qA |sA ] = (1 − µs )q0 + µs (sA − ê∗A,A + ê∗B,A )                                      (6)


                                       E[qB |sB ] = (1 − µs )q0 + µs (sB − ê∗B,B + ê∗A,B )                                      (7)



                         σq2
    where     µs =     σε +σq2
                        2         (0   < µs < 1)        is the optimal weight that the consumer puts on the rms'

reviews, and       ê∗A,A   and   ê∗B,A    are the inferred equilibrium eort levels since the consumer does not

observe the rms' manipulation activity directly.

    Assuming market coverage, the consumer who is indierent between the two products is located

at point   x̂,   where



                                                   1 E[qA |sA ] − E[qB |sB ] + pB − pA
                                            x̂ =     +                                                                            (8)
                                                   2                 2t

    Hence, the market shares of rms                        A   and   B   are   x̂   and   1 − x̂,   respectively.   This implies the

following prot functions for rms                  A   and     B,   respectively in stage 3:

                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                       e2A,A      e2A,B
                                                                                               
                                                            1 E[qA |sA ] − E[qB |sB ] + pB − pA
Π∗A,Stage 3 =       max           pA EqA ,qB ,εA ,εB          +                                   − δA       − γA
                  eA,A ,eA,B                                2                 2t                         2          2
                                                                                                                                  (9)
                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                       e2B,B      e2B,A
                                                                                               
                                                            1 E[qB |sB ] − E[qA |sA ] + pA − pB
Π∗B,Stage 3 =       max           pB EqA ,qB ,εA ,εB          +                                   − δB       − γB
                  eB,B ,eB,A                                2                2t                          2          2
                                                                                                                                 (10)



    Substituting (6) and (7) into (9) and (10), and taking the expectation, we can re-write the rms'

maximization problem as the following:

                                                                                                                      !
                                                                 ∗       ∗                           e2A,A      e2A,B
                                           1 µs (eA,A + eA,B − êA,A − êA,B + cA ) + pB − pA
                                                                                             
Π∗A,Stage 3   =     max           pA         +                                                  − δA       − γA
                  eA,A ,eA,B               2                        2t                                 2          2
                                                                                                                                 (11)
                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                 ∗       ∗                         e2B,B      e2B,A
                                           1 µs (eB,B + eB,A − êB,B − êB,A + cB ) + pA − pB
                                                                                                               
Π∗B,Stage 3 =       max           pB         −                                                − δB       − γB
                  eB,B ,eB,A               2                        2t                               2          2
                                                                                                                                 (12)




                                                                        43
      where       cA = −eB,A − eB,B + ê∗B,A + ê∗B,B                 and   cB = −eA,B − eA,A + ê∗A,B + ê∗A,A .          Proposition 1

below presents the optimal manipulation levels for the rms:


Proposition 1.             In stage 3 (after the rms have committed to prices pA and pB ), the optimal
promotional levels are the following:

                                                                 pA µs ∗        p A µs
                                                       e∗A,A =         ; eA,B =                                                           (13)
                                                                 2δA t          2γA t
                                                                 pB µ s ∗       p B µs
                                                       e∗B,B   =       ;e     =                                                           (14)
                                                                 2δB t B,A      2γB t

Proof.    To solve for the optimal promotional levels, we 1) derive the rst order conditions of rm

A's   prot function by dierentiating Equation (11) with respect to                               eA,A    and    eA,B    and by dier-

entiating Equation (12) with respect to                        eB,B   and    eB,A ,   and 2) simultaneously solve the system of
                                                                                               ∂ 2 Π∗A,Stage 3          ∂ 2 Π∗A,Stage 3
the four resulting equations. This yields a unique solution since
                                                                                                   ∂ 2 eA,A
                                                                                                                 < 0,       ∂ 2 eA,B
                                                                                                                                          < 0,
∂ 2 Π∗B,Stage 3               ∂ 2 Π∗B,Stage 3
    ∂ 2 eB,B
                  <0   and
                                  ∂ 2 eB,A
                                                < 0.

      The Corollary below summarizes several key results that we will use in our empirical analysis:


Corollary 1.          The following results are implied by Proposition 1:
      1) A decrease in the reputational costs of manipulation increases the intensity of this activity:
∂e∗B,A            ∂e∗B,A          ∂e∗B,A          ∂e∗B,A
 ∂γB     > 0,      ∂γB     > 0,    ∂γB     > 0,    ∂γB     > 0.
      2) Firms engage in negative manipulation of reviews of their competitors: e∗A,B > 0 and e∗B,A > 0,
and this activity increases as the costs of manipulation decrease. Hence, a rm that is located close
to a competitor will have more negative reviews than a rm has no close competitors (which will
have no fake negative reviews), and the number of fake negative reviews is greater if the competitor
has lower costs of manipulation.

      Finally, we turn to the eect that review manipulation has on consumer choice. In the basic

model consumer can invert the rm's problem and perfectly discounts the amount of manipulation.

That is, in equilibrium,           e∗A,A = eb∗A,A , e∗A,B = eb∗A,B , e∗B,B = eb∗B,B , and e∗B,A = eb∗B,A .          Since fake reviews

are perfectly discounted, the consumer would make the same choices in the current setting where

fake reviews are possible and in one where fake reviews are not possible. Despite the fact that fake

reviews do not aect consumer choices in equilibrium, rms prefer to post reviews. That is, if the

rm chooses not to engage in manipulation, the consumer who expects fake reviews will think that

the rm is terrible.



                                                                        44
      While Corollary 1 is derived assuming exogenous prices, the comparative statics are qualitatively

similar under endogenous prices, which are set in the second stage. As we argue above, the rm does

not expect manipulation to change its market share in expectation, given the optimal discounting

by the consumer. Hence, the maximization problem in the second stage is the following


                                                                                       2                     2
                                                       
                                                           1 pB − pA
                                                                               e∗A,A                   e∗A,B
                                 Π∗A,Stage 2 = maxpA         +       − δA                    − γA                        (15)
                                              pA           2    2t                2                       2
                                                                                       2                     2
                                                       
                                                           1 pA − pB
                                                                               e∗B,B                   e∗B,A
                             Π∗B,Stage 2 = maxpB             +       − δA                    − γA                        (16)
                                              pB           2    2t                2                       2

After the appropriate substitutions (Proposition 1 provides                  e∗A,A ,    etc.), taking the rst order condi-

tions, and some algebra, we have the following expressions for the equilibrium prices:



                                    12t3 δA γA δB γB + 2t2 δA γA (δB + γB )µ2s
    pA =                                                                                                                 (17)
         12t2 δA γA δB γB + 4µ2s t [(γA + δA )δB γB + (γB + δB )δA γA ] + µ4s [(γA + δA )(δB + γB )]
                                    12t3 δA γA δB γB + 2t2 δB γB (δA + γA )µ2s
    pB =                                                                                                                 (18)
         12t2 δA γA δB γB + 4µ2s t [(γA + δA )δB γB + (γB + δB )δA γA ] + µ4s [(γA + δA )(δB + γB )]

For simplicity, let's assume that               δA = γA ≡ ρ     and   δB = γB ≡ 1.       We can show that an increase in
                                                                                                                     ∂e∗i,i
ρ   (an increase in the reputational costs) results in less promotion on the part of the rm:
                                                                                                                      ∂ρ      =
                  h              i
                      ∂pi
∂e∗i,j       µs       ∂ρ
                          ρ−pi
 ∂ρ      =   2t          ρ2
                                     < 0.




                                                                 45
References

J. Altonji, T. Elder, and C. Taber. Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the

  Eectiveness of Catholic Schools.   Journal of Political Economy, 113(1):151184, 2005.

B. Anand and R. Shachar. (Noisy) Communication.            Quantitative Marketing and Economics,    5(3):

  211237, 2009.



M. Anderson and J. Magruder.       Learning from the Crowd:         Regression Discontinuity Estimates

  of the Eects of an Online Review Database.             The Economic Journal,   doi:    10.1111/j.1468-

  0297.2012.02512.x, 2012.



S. Anderson and R. Renault. Advertising Content.         American Economic Review, 96(1):93113, 2006.

K. Bagwell and G. Ramey.       Advertising and Corrdination.       Review of Economic Studies,     61(1):

  153171, 1994.



V. Bennett, L. Pierce, J. Snyder, and M. Toel. Customer-Driven Misconduct: How Competition

  Corrupts Business Practices.   Management Science, forthcoming.

J. Berger, A. Sorensen, and S. Rasmussen. Positive Eects of Negative Publicity: When Negative

  Reviews Increase Sales.   Marketing Science, 29(5):815827, 2010.

R. Blair and F. Lafontaine.   The Economics of Franchising.       Cambridge University Press, 2005.



A. Chakraborty and R. Harbaugh. Persuasion by Cheap Talk.           American Economic Review, 100(5):
  23612382, 2010.



J. Chevalier and D. Mayzlin. The Eect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book Reviews.           Journal
  of Marketing Research, 43:345354, 2006.

P. Chintagunta, S. Gopinath, and S. Venkataraman. The Eects of Online User Reviews on Movie

  Box Oce Performance: Accounting for Sequential Rollout and Aggregation Across Local Mar-

  kets.   Marketing Science, 29(5):944957, 2010.

V. Crawford and J. Sobel.     Strategic Information Transmission.       Econometrica,    50(6):14311451,

  1982.




                                                    46
C. Dellarocas. Strategic manipulation of internet opinion forums: Implications for consumers and

  rms.   Management Science, 52(20):15771593, 2006.

C. Dellarocas and C. Wood. The sound of silence in online feedback: Estimating trading risks in

  the presence of reporting bias.   Management Science, 54(3):460476, 2007.

S. Dellavigna and E. La Ferrara. Detecting Illegal Arms Trade.    American Economic Journal, 2(4):
  2657, 2010.



M. Duggan and S. Levitt.    Winning Isn't Everything: Corruption in Sumo Wrestling.       American
  Economic Review, 92(5):15941605, 2002.

W. Dziuda. Strategic Argumentation.     Journal of Economic Theory, 146(4):13621397, 2011.

A. Harmon. Amazon glitch unmasks war of reviewers.        New York Times, February 14 2004.

I. Horstmann and S. Moorthy. Advertising Spending and Quality for Services: The Role of Capacity.

  Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 1(3):337365, 2003.

N. Hu, I. Bose, N. Koh, and L. Liu.       Manipulation of online reviews:   An analysis of ratings,

  readability, and sentiments.   Decision Support Systems, 52:674684, 2012.

B. Jacob and S. Levitt. Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher

  Cheating.   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):843877, 2003.

M. Ji and D. Weil.     Does Ownership Structure Inuence Regulatory Behavior?       The Impact of

  Franchising on Labor Standards Compliance? Boston U. School of Management Research Paper

  No. 2010-21, 2009.



G. Jin and P. Leslie. Reputational Incentives for Restaurant Hygiene.   American Economic Journal:
  Microecnomics, 1(1):236267, 2009.

N. Jindal and B. Liu. Review Spam Detection. In       WWW '07 Proceedings of the 16th international
  conference on World Wide Web, pages 1189  1190, 2007.

E. Kamenica and M. Gentzkow. Bayesian Persuasion.         American Economic Review,   101(October):

  25902615, 2011.




                                                 47
R. Kihlstrom and M. Riordan. Advertising as a Signal.   Journal of Political Economy, 92(3):427450,
  1984.



L. Kornish. Are User Reviews Systematically Manipulated? Evidence from the Helpfulness Ratings.

  Leeds School of Business Working Paper, 2009.



X. Li and L. Hitt. Self-Selection and Information Role of Online Product Reviewsl.      Information
  Systems Research, 19(4):456474, 2008.

M. Luca. Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of yelp.com. Harvard Business School Working

  Paper, 2012.



D. Mayzlin. Promotional chat on the internet.   Marketing Science, 25(2):155163, 2006.

D. Mayzlin and J. Shin. Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search.    Marketing Science,
  30(4):666685, 2011.



M. Melnik and J. Alm. Does a seller's ecommerce reputation matter? Evidence from ebay auctions.

  Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(3):337349, 2002.

P. Milgrom and J. Roberts. Price and Advertising Signals of Product Quality.    Journal of Political
  Economy, 94(August):796821, 1986.

B. Liu Mukherjee, A. and N. Glance. Spotting fake review groups in consumer reviews.   International
  World Wide Web Conference Committee, April 16-20, 2012.

P. Nelson. Advertising as information.   Journal of Political Economy, 82(4):729754, 1974.

M. O'Fallon and D. Rutherford.    Hotel Management and Operations.     John Wiley and Sons, 2010.



M. Ott, Y. Choi, C. Cardie, and J. Hancock. Finding Deceptive Opinion Spam by Any Stretch of

  the Imagination. In   Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pages 309319, 2011.

L. Pierce and J. Snyder.    Ethical Spillovers in Firms: Evidence from Vehicle Emissions Testing.

  Management Science, 54(11):18911903, 2008.

P. Resnick and R. Zeckhauser. Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis

  of eBay's Reputation System.    The Economics of the Internet and E-Commerce, 11, 2002.

                                                 48
P. Resnick, R. Zeckhauser, J. Swanson, and K. Lockwood.        The value of reputation on eBay: A

  controlled experiment.    Experimental Economics, 9(2):79101, 2006.

Scott and Orlikowski. Reconguring relations of accountability: Materialization of social media in

  the travel sector.   Accounting, Organizations, and Society, 37:2640, 2012.

I. Vermeulen and D. Seegers. "tried and tested: The impact of online hotel reviews on consumer

  consideration".   Tourism Management, 30(1):123127., 2009.

Q. Ye, R. Law, B. Gu, and W. Chen. The inuence of user-generated content on traveler behavior:

  An empirical investigation on the eects of e-word-of-mouth to hotel online bookings.   Computers
  in Human Behavior, 27(2):634639, 2010.




                                                  49
