                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      REFINING LINEAR RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODELS AND EQUILIBRIA

                                           Seonghoon Cho
                                         Bennett T. McCallum

                                         Working Paper 18348
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18348


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




Seonghoon Cho acknowledges that this work was supported by the National Research Foundation
of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2010-327-B00089). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Seonghoon Cho and Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Refining Linear Rational Expectations Models and Equilibria
Seonghoon Cho and Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 18348
August 2012
JEL No. C62,D84

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper proposes forward convergence as a model refinement scheme for linear rational expectations
(LRE) models and an associated no-bubble condition as a solution selection criterion. We relate these
two concepts to determinacy and characterize the complete set of economically relevant rational expectations
solutions to the LRE models under determinacy and indeterminacy. Our results show (1) why a determinate
solution is economically meaningful in most, but not all, cases, and (2) that those models that are not
forward-convergent have no economically relevant solutions.


Seonghoon Cho
School of Economics
Yonsei University
Seoul 120-749, Korea
sc719@yonsei.ac.kr

Bennett T. McCallum
Tepper School of Business, Posner 256
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu
1. Introduction

           Recent macroeconomics literature has utilized the concept of determinacy as a

primary criterion for characterizing the economic properties of a given rational

expectations (RE) model and its solutions. While some researchers argue that

determinacy is necessary and sufficient for a model to be economically relevant, others

argue that multiple rational expectations equilibria (REEs) can be admissible as well in

some cases of indeterminacy. Thus models and their REEs are not dismissed as

implausible simply because they are indeterminate. Furthermore, that determinacy alone

does not automatically guarantee the economic plausibility of a given model and its

determinate equilibrium has been argued by Bullard and Mitra (2002), Cho and

McCallum (2009), Honkapohja and Mitra (2004), and others. Several solution selection

criteria have been proposed to narrow down the set of relevant equilibria in indeterminate

models including, for example, the MSV criterion of McCallum (1983, 2007), the E-

stability criterion of Evans and Honkapohja (2001), and a fairly recent proposal by

Driskill (2006).



           This extent of disagreement over the role of determinacy may have been a

consequence of the absence of any step for refining “models” to begin with.1 Here we

1
    Here the word “determinacy” is being used in the sense that is standard in monetary economics and
frequently utilized elsewhere, namely, to designate a model specification in which there exists only one RE
solution that is dynamically stable — literally a “single stable solution” (SSS). McCallum (2011) has
argued that this terminology is highly inappropriate, however, since the traditional meaning of the word
“determinate” is that the model at hand clearly points to a single relevant solution. Thus the usage in
question proceeds as if the SSS requirement was equivalent to the desired condition—i.e., that the model at
hand provides a unique prediction as to the behavior of the (model) economy. A unique prediction is what
“determinacy” is supposed to mean, however, so it is unsatisfactory for this word to be used as a synonym



                                                      1
propose a model refinement scheme for a general class of linear models, together with a

solution selection criterion for the REEs, and characterize the complete set of

economically relevant equilibria under determinacy and indeterminacy. In particular, we

adopt the forward convergence and no-bubble conditions proposed by Cho and Moreno

(2011), and relate these refinement schemes to determinacy by means of characterization

results developed by McCallum (2007).



         In their study of hyperinflation and monetary reform, Flood and Garber (1980)

introduce the notion of “process consistency” and suggest that it is an essential

characteristic of any model variable that pretends to serve as money. Specifically, in the

context of a Cagan-type monetary model, they argue that any “process inconsistent”

money supply will be rejected by the public because it does not provide a finite solution

for the price level. In this setting, process consistency simply amounts to the case that a

RE model can be solved forward and they argue that any reasonable model should

possess this minimal economic characteristic. Thus their analysis pertains to a prototype

model that can be solved forward recursively since it has no lagged variables. This

method of solving RE models forward had not, however, been developed and applied to

general models with lagged variables until Cho and Moreno (2011) developed the

forward method for such models. Their forward convergence property, which we propose

as a model refinement, amounts to a generalization of process consistency and here we

argue that, indeed, any model that fails to satisfy the forward convergence condition has

no cogent RE solution. Moreover, whenever a model is forward-convergent, the Cho and

for the SSS condition, especially since there are examples in which it is clearly inappropriate. In the
present paper we retain that usage, nevertheless, in order to facilitate communication.



                                                      2
Moreno methodology provides a well-known forward (forward-looking) solution in the

sense of Blanchard (1979).



       When a model is solved forward, there remains a term involving the expectation

of future endogenous variables, often called “bubbles”. Seeking fundamental solutions,

researchers often assume that this expectational term will disappear as the iterative

process goes to the limit. Blanchard and Kahn (1980) in fact impose a restriction to a

given RE model that expectations of the endogenous and predetermined and non-

predetermined variables do not explode , which rules out “bubbles” of the sort

considered by Flood and Garber (1980). While their “bubbles” are not exactly the same

as the expectational term, their no-bubble restriction can be interpreted as a requirement

that any fundamental solution should satisfy. Cho and Moreno (2011) have shown that

this no-bubble condition holds only for the forward solution and that all other

fundamental – often called “bubble-free” – solutions fail to satisfy it. Accordingly, we

contend that the no-bubble condition constitutes a relevant solution refinement scheme.



       Cho and Moreno (2011), however, do not relate their refinement schemes to

determinacy. Accordingly, it is our task here to derive this relationship, drawing on

results of McCallum (2007), and to characterize all the REEs in relation to determinate

and indeterminate models. In the process, we will also extend one of McCallum’s results

so as to apply to non-fundamental, as well as fundamental, solutions.



       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a general class of linear




                                             3
Rational Expectations (RE) models and characterizes the set of REEs. In Section 3,

necessary and sufficient conditions for determinacy are stated. In section 4, we formally

define the concept of forward convergence and study the relation between determinacy

and forward convergence. Section 5 classifies RE models with these two properties and

characterizes the full set of REEs. In section 6, we apply our methodology to an example

based on a standard New-Keynesian model. Section 7 concludes.



2. Linear Rational Expectations Models and Rational Expectations Equilibria

2.1 The Model

           We consider general linear rational expectations models of the form:

(1)        xt  AEt xt 1  Bxt 1  Czt ,   zt  Rzt 1  et ,

where xt is an n  1 vector of endogenous variables and zt is an l  1 vector of

exogenous variables, with R a stable m  m matrix, and et is an l  1 vector of i.i.d and

mean zero shock processes. Also, Et () is mathematical expectation operator conditional

on the information set available at time t . 2 The linear model (1) that we have in mind is a

local linear approximation around the steady state of the underlying dynamic stochastic

general equilibrium model. Hence, we assume that the steady state is well-defined and

known to all economic agents, and we present the model in terms of the deviations of the

endogenous variables from their steady states.




2
    McCallum (2007) shows that any model of the class studied by King and Watson (1998) and Klein (2000)
– which admits any finite number of lags, expectational leads, and lags of expectational leads – can be
written in the form (1).



                                                     4
2.2 Classes of Solutions

           Any process xt that is consistent with the model (1) is a solution to the model. We

decompose it into two components:

(2)        xt  xt FUN  wt ,

where xt FUN is a fundamental solution and wt is a non-fundamental component.3 Note

that for any given xt FUN , there is the corresponding class of wt . That is, the process of wt

is restricted by a particular xt FUN . We discuss the two classes in detail.



A. Fundamental Solutions

Any fundamental solution has the following form.

(3)        xt  xt 1  zt ,

where (, ) must satisfy the following conditions:

(4a)         ( I  A) 1 B ,

(4b)         ( I  A) 1 C  F R ,

where F is given by:

(5)        F  ( I  A) 1 A .

There are in general multiple solutions for  (thus Γ as well).4 But the number of 

satisfying (4a), and thus the number of fundamental solutions, is at most               2n   Cn , hence


3
    A fundamental solution includes no extraneous state variables. This concept differs from McCallum’s
(1983) minimum state variable (MSV) solution, however, in that the MSV solution is in all cases uniquely
defined whereas there may be multiple fundamental solutions.
4
    When there are no predetermined variables ( B  O ), then   O and F  A , implying that the
fundamental solution is unique if it exists.



                                                      5
finite.

B. Non-fundamental Solutions

The class of non-fundamental solutions has the following form:

(6)         xt  xt 1  zt  wt ,

where wt is an arbitrary process satisfying

(7)         wt  FEt wt 1 .5

It is important to note that F is restricted in (5) by a particular  .

For each F , the following proposition characterizes the complete set of solutions to

equation (7), thereby extending the result of McCallum (2007), which refers only to

fundamental solutions.



Proposition 1 Let m be the rank of the matrix F . Any real-valued solution wt to

equation (7) can be written as:

(8)         wt  wt 1  V t ,

where  is an n  n matrix such that   V V ' , V is an n  k matrix with

0  k  m  n such that its columns form a subset of an orthonormal basis associated

with the inverses of non-zero eigenvalues of F ,  is a k  k block-diagonal matrix such

that V  FV  , and t is an arbitrary n  1 stochastic vector such that Ett 1  0 .

           Proof: See Appendix.
5
    To see this, forward equation (6) one period ahead and plug it into (1) as follows:
            xt  A[xt  Rzt ]  AEt wt 1  Bxt 1  Czt .
Rearranging this equation yields:
                          1                   1             1                    1
            xt  ( I  A) Bxt 1  [( I  A) C  ( I  A) AR ] zt  ( I  A) AEt wt 1

               xt 1  zt  FEt wt 1.
where ,  and F are given by equations (4) and (5).


                                                        6
While the class of non-fundamental components is large,  has a simple structure: non-

zero eigenvalues of  are the inverses of some or all of the non-zero eigenvalues of F .

This implies that we have only to study F in order to deduce stability of wt and

determinacy of the model without solving (7) directly. For a compact exposition of

stability and determinacy, we define the spectral radius operator.



Definition (Spectral Radius): r ( X ) = max{1i  n} | i |: R nn  R  where i is the i-th

eigenvalue of an n  n matrix X .



Now we can state that a fundamental solution (3) is dynamically stable if and only if

r ()  1 . In addition, there exist stationary processes wt if r ( F )  1 because  in

equation (8) can always be constructed such that it contains an eigenvalue equal to

1/ r ( F )  1 . Therefore, r ( F )  1 is the condition under which there is no stationary

stochastic process of wt .



3. Determinacy

        A model is said to be determinate if the model has a unique stable RE solution.

Different researchers use different representations of the underlying model, but many use

essentially the same matrix decomposition theorem to derive the conditions for

determinacy, i.e., the main theorem of Blanchard and Kahn (1980). But this method is

available only when A is non-singular. Thus, the procedure of researchers often is to

reformulate a model into a canonical form of Blanchard and Kahn (1980) if it has a


                                                7
singular A , following the steps proposed by King and Watson (1998), for instance.

Instead, however, one can use a simpler way to identify determinacy without

transformation of (1) following Klein (2000) or McCallum (1998, 2007), who utilize the

                                                               I B
generalized Schur decomposition theorem. To do so, define B       and
                                                               I O 

      A O
A       . Solving for real-valued  amounts to choosing n roots out of the 2n
     O I 

generalized eigenvalues of the matrix pencil [ B   A ] , namely,  ( B , A ) =

{ 1 , 2 ,..., 2 n } , where | 1 |  ...  | 2 n | .6

Following McCallum (2007), determinacy can be stated in terms of the matrices  and

F in equations (3) and (5), which govern the stability of fundamental and non-

fundamental components of the REEs, respectively. His definition enables us to relate

determinacy and the property of forward convergence.



           To proceed, we introduce an important property regarding the eigenvalues of 

and F : for any  associated with n eigenvalues in  ( B , A ) , the eigenvalues of the

corresponding F are the inverses of the remaining eigenvalues in  ( B , A ) . For instance,

let  MOD denote the solution associated with n smallest eigenvalues, ( 1 , 2 ,..., n ) .

Then the eigenvalues of F MOD are the set (1/ n 1 , 1/ n  2 ,...,1/ 2 n ) . This implies that if a

model is determinate, the determinate solution must be the MOD solution. Following this

idea of McCallum (2007), determinacy (indeterminacy) conditions can be stated in the


6
    If a complex root is included, its conjugate member must also be included for  to be real-valued.
Modulus equality holds when two eigenvalues form a complex conjugate.



                                                            8
following way.



Proposition 2 Linear RE models of the form (1) can be classified as follows.

1. The model (1) is determinate if and only if r ( MOD )  1 and r ( F MOD )  1 .

2. The model (1) is indeterminate if and only if r ( MOD )  1 and r ( F MOD )  1 .

3. The model (1) has no stable REEs if and only if r ( MOD )  1 .

           Proof: See McCallum (2007). 7



4. The Forward Convergence and No Bubble Conditions

           Nothing in the foregoing determinacy/indeterminacy conditions serves to

establish economic relevance for the determinate or indeterminate solutions on any basis

other than their dynamic stability. The forward method of Cho and Moreno (2011),

however, provides model and solution refinement schemes pertaining to another

dimension —an additional characteristic. Following their method, we solve the model (1)

into the future so as to derive its forward representation as follows:

(9)         xt  M k Et xt  k   k xt 1   k zt ,

where ( M k ,  k ,  k ) is given by: M 1  A , 1  B , 1  C , and for k  1 ,

(10)        M k  Fk 1M k 1 ,

7
    A subtle issue may arise in the case of r ( F )  1 . For instance, consider a univariate model. When r ( F )  1 ,

wt  a solves (7) for any arbitrary constant a . There seems to be no general agreement as to whether this

case is considered as indeterminate or determinate. However, since such a solution is non-stochastic, we
include r ( F )  1 as determinacy. If one alternatively treats this case as indeterminate, then one may define
determinacy that excludes r ( F )  1 in Assertion 1 and includes it in Assertion 2 of Proposition 2.




                                                           9
(11a)     k  ( I  A k 1 ) 1 B ,

(11b)  k  ( I  A k 1 ) 1 C  Fk 1 k 1 R ,

where Fk 1 is given by:

(12)     Fk  ( I  A k ) 1 A ,

provided that the regularity condition det( I  A k )  0 is satisfied for all k  1, 2,3,... .



Definition (Forward Convergence Condition, FCC) The model (1) is said to satisfy the

forward convergence condition if ( k ,  k ) defined in (11) converge as k   .




Note that if ( k ,  k ) converges to (* , * ) , equations (11) fulfill the conditions (4). Note

also that Fk in (11) converges to F * if and only if  k converges. Hence, under the FCC,

the matrix F * defined by equation (12) fulfills the condition (5) as well. Therefore, the

following forward solution,

(13)     xt  * xt 1  * zt

is a fundamental solution and it exists if and only if the model satisfies the FCC. Hence

the FCC and the existence of the forward solution are equivalent. Therefore, ( k ,  k ) is

unique and implied by the model. Accordingly, the forward solution is a model-implied

relation and, consequently, it is economically sensible by itself, i.e., inherently. Evidently,

forward convergence is exactly the same concept for general LRE models as the process

consistency of Flood and Garber (1980), a paper that accordingly seems to have been

undervalued in the literature.




                                                     10
        A key implication of the forward method is that the expectational term M k Et xt  k

depends on the particular solution with which expectations are formed. In principle, the

limiting behavior of this “bubble” term should be verified for each REE, instead of

assuming its behavior. Formally we define the no-bubble condition:



Definition (No bubble condition, NBC) A solution to the model (1) is said to satisfy

NBC if lim k  M k Et xt  k  On1 in (9) when expectations are formed with that solution.



The following proposition provides a central result of the forward method.



Proposition 3 The forward solution is the unique REE that satisfies the NBC.

        Proof: See Appendix.



Thus the NBC is the unique feature that differentiates the forward solution from all other

fundamental solutions. The NBC removes two kinds of equilibria. First, it refines away

all the solutions for those models that fail to satisfy the FCC. Suppose that a stable

fundamental solution xt  xt 1  zt exists for a model where one or both

of ( k ,  k ) explodes as k tends to infinity. Since this solution must satisfy the forward

representation (9) for all k , this implies that the expectational term evaluated with this

solution must explode as well. This would be the major consideration underlying the

restriction in Blanchard and Kahn (1980). In this sense, the FCC can be interpreted as a

model refinement scheme and the NBC refines away all those fundamental solutions. The

role of the NBC is, however, not confined to models that are not forward-convergent. In


                                               11
addition, the NBC also refines away all the stable fundamental solutions, different from

the forward solution for the models that are convergent, that would arise in the case of

indeterminacy. Fundamental solutions are often conceived of and referred to as bubble-

free solutions. Thus, the notion of bubble-free solutions that violate our no-bubble

condition would be basically incoherent. This refinement is a phenomenon that arises

when we consider models with predetermined variables.



        In both cases, since any REE can be written as sum of a fundamental solution and

the associated bubble term, then if any fundamental solutions violate the NBC, any

member of the set of REEs associated with those solutions also makes no economic sense

--i.e., is not analytically coherent.



5. Complete Characterization of the REEs under FCC

        Now we bridge the relation between the FCC and determinacy, which is absent

from Cho and Moreno (2011). Under the FCC, F *  lim k  Fk exists from equation (12).

The following proposition shows that under FCC, determinacy corresponds to r ( F * )  1

[and indeterminacy to r ( F * )  1 ] and thus characterizes the full set of REEs.



Proposition 4 Suppose that the RE model (1) satisfies the forward convergence condition.

1. If r (* )  1 and r ( F * )  1 , then model (1) is determinate and the unique stationary

solution is given by the forward solution:

(14)    xt  * xt 1  * zt .




                                               12
2. If r (* )  1 and r ( F * )  1 , then (1) is indeterminate and the set of stable REEs for

which the fundamental solutions satisfy the NBC is given by

(15)        xt  * xt 1  * zt  wt ,

where wt is an arbitrary stationary process such that wt  F * Et wt 1 and the whole set of

wt associated with F * can be constructed from Proposition 1.

Proof: See Appendix.



            The conditions in Assertion 1 of Proposition 4 are sufficient for determinacy, but

not necessary. This implies that there can be cases in which a model is determinate but

the determinate solution is not the forward solution, i.e., *   MOD from Proposition 2,

and therefore, the determinate solution violates the NBC. An example of this kind is

given by Cho and McCallum (2009). Assertion 1 provides a general way to rule out such

models on the grounds of economic implausibility. Nevertheless, Assertion 1indicates

why a determinate equilibrium is usually economically sensible: it is because *   MOD

for almost all well-formulated models.



            Now we consider the indeterminate case in which the model satisfies the FCC, but

r ( F * )  1 . In this case, there exists a continuum of non-fundamental REEs associated

with the forward solution. But there may well exist fundamental solutions associated with

 different from * and the corresponding F as long as r (
                                                           )  1 and r ( F )  1 .8 Such


8                                                different from  * such that r (
                                                                                   )  1 and r ( F )  1 because this
    There cannot be a fundamental solution with 
would imply that the model is determinate.




                                                            13
a solution must violate the NBC from Proposition 3. Therefore, the set of REEs that are

consistent with the FCC and NBC are the ones associated with the forward solution.



Proposition 4 excludes the following cases as they have no relevant REEs. First, if

r (* )  1 , then the model has no stationary solution of which the fundamental

component satisfies the NBC. Second, those models that are not forward convergent have

no fundamental solutions satisfying the NBC. This latter case is the one for which the

NBC is the most important as a solution refinement: without verifying the FCC, one may

find solutions to a model that fails to satisfy the FCC. We present an example of this kind

in the following section.



       Our results show the importance of examining the FCC of RE models. Moreover,

our methodology is sufficient to identify determinate and indeterminate cases and

provides a complete set of REEs to any LRE models satisfying the FCC. Another

important feature of our methodology is that the solution method and the solution

refinements are obtained using only the rationality assumption and the recursive structure

of the underlying macroeconomic model, without solving for all the mathematical

solutions using matrix decomposition techniques.



6. Example

       In this section, we present a New-Keynesian model similar to the one considered

by Cho and Moreno (2011), but detect determinacy and indeterminacy using Proposition

4 and further investigate the reasons why the fundamental solutions to the model do not



                                            14
make sense when the model is not forward convergent. The model is given by the three

equations.

(16a)  t   Et t 1   yt ,

(16b) yt   Et yt 1  (1   ) yt 1   (it  Et t 1 )  zt ,

(16c) it   Et t 1   y yt ,

where  t , yt , it are respectively inflation, the output gap and the nominal interest rate. zt

is an aggregate demand shock that follows an AR(1) process: zt   zt 1   t where

0    1 and  t is an i.i.d. shock. By substituting out it , the model (16) can be cast into

a bivariate system as xt  AEt xt 1  Bxt 1  Czt where xt  [ t yt ]' and A  B11 A1

B  B11 B2 , C  B11C1 with

     1                            0         0   0           0 
B1              , A1                  , B2           , C1   
     0 1   y           (  1)          0 1           1 

We set the parameter values as   0.99,   0.3,   0.55,   1,  y  0.1,   0.8 .




Case 1. When   1.5 , the FCC holds and r (* )  0.46 with r ( F * )  0.75 . Therefore,

the model is determinate and the determinate forward solution is given by:

     0 0.26          1.66 
xt          xt 1        zt .
     0 0.46          0.62 

This solution implies that when there is a rise in aggregate demand shock of size 1, both

output and inflation increase, which is the case that would be expected from economic

theory.




                                                          15
Case 2. When   0.95 , the FCC holds and r (* )  0.60 and r ( F * )  1.13 . Hence, the

model is indeterminate. The forward solution exists and it is qualitatively similar to the

one under determinacy. There exists, however, another stable fundamental solution:

     0 2.10          -29.53
xt          xt 1          zt .
     0 0.88           2.59 

In contrast to the forward solution, both coefficients in  are negative. This is clearly

counterintuitive because it implies that an exogenous increase in aggregate demand

decreases both inflation and the output gap. We rule out this solution on the ground of the

NBC. Cho and Moreno (2011) show that other solution selection criteria pick up the

forward solution as well. However, it is not the case in the following model, which fails

to satisfy the FCC.



Case 3. When   0.9 , the FCC does not hold: whereas * (and F * ) still exists,  k

explodes as k   . From equation (11b), one can see that the matrix governing

convergence of  k is  F * . In this example, r ( F * )  1.33 and r (  F * )  1.20  1 ,

implying that  k grows without bound. Nevertheless, there are two stable fundamental

solutions and hence technically, the model is indeterminate. Unlike Case 2, however,

none of the solutions is economically sensible. The MOD solution is given by:

     0 0.59          -39.08
xt          x  1   9.15  zt .
     0 0.67 
                t
                              

The other fundamental solution is also qualitatively similar to the MOD solution. Just

like the fundamental solution in Case 2 other than the forward solution, a rise in

aggregate demand decreases both inflation and the output gap. Surprisingly, E-stability,



                                                 16
one of the most popular solution selection criteria, does not distinguish Case 2 and Case 3,

and fails to refine away the MOD solution in the latter case as it turns out to be E-stable.9

This example illustrates the importance of the forward convergence requirement.



7. Conclusion

        The forward convergence and no-bubble conditions generalize and modify the

process consistency criterion of Flood and Garber (1980) and the restrictions on the

expectations of the variables in the future in Blanchard and Kahn (1980), respectively,

both of which have often been assumed to hold but not examined for general RE models

in the literature.

        We demonstrate the importance of forward convergence as a powerful model

refinement scheme for linear RE models. Within the class of forward convergent models,

we completely characterize the set of economically sensible equilibria to a given model

based on the solution refinement scheme. Our analysis indicates that the FCC holds for

almost all determinate economic models and, consequently, provides some economic

justification for emphasis on a determinate equilibrium. In the case of indeterminacy,

moreover, the forward convergence and no-bubble condition detect whether a given

model is by itself economically reasonable, and if so, the forward method provides the set

of relevant equilibria. We show, through a standard New-Keynesian example, that some

indeterminate models may not be forward-convergent and, hence, they have no

economically sensible solutions. Therefore, the FCC must be verified, not assumed, and

should be both useful and important in practice as a model refinement in such cases.


9
  To compare the E-stability criterion with the FCC (and the NBC as well) on the same basis, we assume
that a vector of constants is not included in the perceived law of motion (PLM).


                                                   17
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1 Consider an arbitrary stochastic process wt and let V be a n  k

matrix with 0  k  n where its columns are orthonormal, spanning the support of wt for

all t . This implies that Et wt 1  Col (V ) almost surely as well. Since wt is a solution to

wt  FEt wt 1 , wt must be in the column space of F . Hence, the columns of V can be

interpreted as the members of an orthonormal basis for Col ( F ) without loss of generality.

Note that the number of columns of V cannot be greater than that of F , i.e.,

1  k  m  n . Next, we apply the real Schur decomposition theorem to the matrix F to

find an n  m orthonormal matrix U and an m  m block diagonal matrix  of full rank

such that F  U U ' . This can be written as

(A1)    FU  1U '  UU ' .

Note that since  is block-diagonal, so is  1 . Since the columns of V are some or all

of the columns of U , we can partition U into two parts such that U  [V V0 ] where V0

has the remaining columns of U . We also partition  1 into two parts such that

        O 
 1         where  is the k  k block-diagonal matrix associated with V and  0
        O  0



is the (m  k )  (m  k ) block-diagonal matrix associated with V0 . Since we consider a

real-valued stochastic process wt only, if  contains complex-valued eigenvalues, their

conjugate members must also be the eigenvalues of  .

                                            I              
Then, for any V , U  1U 'V  [V V0 ] 1  k   [V V0 ]           V  . Now post-
                                            0m  k        0m  k 

multiply V to both sides of equation (A1) to yield FU  1U 'V  UU 'V  V . Note that



                                               18
                          I              
U  1U 'V  [V V0 ] 1  k   [V V0 ]         V  . Therefore, we have:
                         0mk          0m k 

(A2)        FV V '  F   VV ' ,

where   V V ' . Post-multiplying V  1V ' to both sides of (A2) yields

FVV '  V  1V ' .10 Note that Et wt 1  VV ' Et wt 1 almost surely. Therefore, the model (7)

is almost surely identical to wt  FVV ' Et wt 1  V  1V ' Et wt 1 . Pre-multiplying  to both

sides of (7), we have

(A3)        wt  VV ' Et wt 1 .11

Finally, we define the vector of rational expectations errors t 1  wt 1  Et wt 1 . Since wt 1

and Et wt 1 are in the column space of V , t 1 must also be in Col (V ) , implying that t 1

can be written as t  V t 1 . Therefore, from (A3), VV ' Et wt 1  wt 1  V t 1  wt ,

which is equation (8). Q.E.D.



Proof of Proposition 3

We basically repeat the formal proof given in Cho and Moreno (2011, p. 266) as it is a

crucial step for establishing our main result. Consider the model (1) and suppose that the

FCC holds. Then the forward solution exists and is given by equation

(13) xt  * xt 1  * zt . Since the pair (  k ,  k ) in equation (11) is unique and real-valued,

so are the limiting values ( * , * ). Since the forward solution is a fundamental solution,

it must solve the forward representation of the model (9) as k goes to infinity:


10
     This operation does not lose any information as we can recover (A2) by post-multiplying V V ' to
               1
FVV '  V  V ' .
11
 This operation does not lose any information as we can recover (7) by multiplying F to (A3).


                                                     19
(A4) xt  lim M k Et xt  k  * xt 1  * zt .
            k 



Therefore, it must be true that lim M k Et xt  k  0n1 when expectations are formed with the
                                      k 



forward solution, implying that the forward solution satisfies the NBC. Suppose that the

NBC holds for another (fundamental or non-fundamental) solution. Since the solution

must solve (A4), (A4) becomes the forward solution, which contradicts the supposition

that this solution differs from the forward solution. When the FCC does not hold,

(  k ,  k ) does not converge or is not well-defined if the regularity condition is violated.

Consequently, for any other solution, lim M k Et xt  k is not well-defined, implying the
                                                   k 



violation of the NBC. Q.E.D.



Proof of Proposition 4

Assertion 1 Note that the eigenvalues of * and the inverses of the eigenvalues of F*

constitute the generalized eigenvalues of the model. Therefore, if r (* )  1 and

r ( F * )  1 , then there are exactly n generalized eigenvalues inside the unit circle.

Therefore, * is  MOD and the model is determinate from Proposition 2.

Assertion 2 Suppose that r (* )  1 and r ( F * )  1 . From Proposition 3, the forward

solution component of (15) satisfies the NBC and all other fundamental solutions violate

the NBC from Proposition 2. Note that F * must contain at least one root outside the unit

circle. Let m be the number of some or all of such unstable roots (1  m  n) . Following

Proposition 1, one can construct a stationary process w*t  Et w*t 1  V t where the non-

zero eigenvalues of  are the inverses of the chosen unstable roots of F * . Q.E.D.




                                                          20
References

Blanchard, O.J., 1979. Backward and Forward Solutions for Economies with Rational

       Expectations. American Economic Review 69 (2), 114-118.

Blanchard, O.J., and C.M. Kahn, 1980. The Solution of Linear Difference Models Under

       Rational Expectations. Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.

Bullard, J.B., and K. Mitra, 2002. Learning About Monetary Policy Rules. Journal of

       Monetary Economics 49, 1105-1129.

Cho, S., and A. Moreno, 2011. The Forward Method as a Solution Refinement in

       Rational Expectations Models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 35

       (3), 257-272.

Cho, S., and B.T. McCallum, 2009. Another Weakness of “Determinacy” as a Selection

       Criterion for Rational Expectations Models. Economics Letters 104, 17-19.

Driskill, R., 2006. Multiple Equilibria in Dynamic Rational Expectations Models: A

       Critical Review. European Economic Review 50 (1), 171-210.

Flood, R.P., and P.M. Garber, 1980. An Economic Theory of Monetary Reform. Journal

       of Political Economy 88 (1), 24-58.

Honkapohja, S., and K. Mitra, 2004. Are non-fundamental equilibria learnable in models

       of monetary policy? Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(8), 1743-1770.

King, R. G., and M. W. Watson, 1998. The Solution of Singular Linear Difference

       Systems Under Rational Expectations. International Economic Review 39,

       1015-1026.

Klein, P., 2000. Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear

       Rational Expectations Model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24,




                                             21
       1405-1423.

McCallum, B.T., 1983. On Non-uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models: An

       Attempt at Perspective. Journal of Monetary Economics 11, 139–168.

McCallum, B.T., 1998. Solutions to Linear Rational Expectations Models: A Compact

       Exposition. Economic Letters 61, 143-147.

McCallum, B.T., 2007. E-Stability vis-a-via Determinacy Results for a Broad Class of

       Linear Rational Expectations Models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and

       Control 31, 1376-1391.

McCallum, B.T., 2012. Determinacy, Learnability, Plausibility, and the Role of Money in

       New Keynesian Models. NBER Working Paper 18215.




                                          22
