                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      R&D AND THE INCENTIVES FROM MERGER AND ACQUISITION ACTIVITY

                                          Gordon M. Phillips
                                           Alexei Zhdanov

                                         Working Paper 18346
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18346


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2012




Phillips was supported by NSF grant #0965328. We would like to thank the editor, Andrew Karolyi
and two anonymous referees who substantially improved the paper, Ulf Axelson, Denis Gromb, Naveen
Khanna, Erwan Morellec, Urs Peyer, Adriano Rampini, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, Merih Sevilir, Rajdeep
Singh, Tony Whited and seminar participants at Boston University, HKUST, Insead, the University
of Lausanne, the University of New South Wales, Tsinghua University, the 2011 Duke/UNC corporate
finance conference, the 2011 Paris Corporate Finance conference, the 2011 Western Finance Association
and the 2011 UBC summer conference for helpful comments and discussion. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gordon M. Phillips and Alexei Zhdanov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
R&D and the Incentives from Merger and Acquisition Activity
Gordon M. Phillips and Alexei Zhdanov
NBER Working Paper No. 18346
August 2012
JEL No. G20,G3,G34,L11,L22,L25,O31,O34

                                            ABSTRACT

We provide a model and empirical tests showing how an active acquisition market affects firm incentives
to innovate and conduct R&D. Our model shows that small firms optimally may decide to innovate
more when they can sell out to larger firms. Large firms may find it disadvantageous to engage in
an "R&D race" with small firms, as they can obtain access to innovation through acquisition. Our
model and evidence show that the R&D responsiveness of firms increases with demand, competition
and industry merger and acquisition activity. All of these effects are stronger for smaller firms than
for larger firms.


Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business, Hoffman Hall
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

Alexei Zhdanov
University of Lausanne
Lausanne
Switzerland
azhdanov@unil.ch




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18346
1 Introduction
      We examine how the market for mergers and acquisitions aﬀects the decision to conduct research
and development (R&D) and innovate. We argue that an active acquisition market encourages in-
novation, particularly by small firms in an industry. Instead of conducting R&D in-house, large
firms can optimally outsource R&D investment to small firms and then acquire those that success-
fully innovate. Successful innovation makes firms attractive acquisition targets and exit through
strategic sales becomes an important motivation to continue to spend on R&D.

      Recent articles in Bloomberg and Forbes describe how acquisitions are often attempts by large
firms to grow by buying innovation.1 This acquisition potential gives stronger incentives for small
firms to engage in R&D. A recent prominent example is Google. Google made 48 acquisitions of
smaller firms in 2010, six years after it went public, and 60 acquisitions in the previous 5 years, for
a combined total of 108 acquisitions in the 6 years post-IPO.2 Early in its life, Google bought three
smaller search engines for their technology assets and patents. Each of these companies operated
search engines with additional features that Google incorporated into its online search.3            Another
example is Cisco. To extend its networking oﬀerings, Cisco has purchased 16 computer networking
companies and 5 computer security companies since 1999.

      We present an illustrative model and empirical tests showing how an active acquisition market
positively aﬀects both small and large firms’ incentives to innovate and conduct R&D. We also
show that mergers can be a way to acquire innovation as a substitute strategy for conducting
R&D inside the existing firm.         This motive is distinct from other motives for acquisitions that
include neoclassical theories or agency theories of mergers4 and is closest to recent theories and
evidence by Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) and Hoberg and Phillips (2010) which emphasize

  1
    Companies “cited” as buying others for their innovation include Cisco, General Electric and Microsoft. See:
Bloomberg, February 29, 2008, “Innovation through Acquisition” and Forbes, Nov. 8, 2005, “Does Innovation
Through Acquisition Work?” and Forbes, January 4, 2008, “Art of Acquiring Growth”.
  2
      See "Google Cranks Up M&A Machine" Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2011.
  3
    These purchases include: Outride see: http://www.google.com/press/pressrel/outride.html, Kaltix (see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaltix ) and Orion (see: http://searchengineland.com/google-implements-orion-
technology-improving-search-refinements-adds-longer-snippets-17038).
  4
    See Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) for neoclassical and q theories and
Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) for an agency motivation for mergers. See Maksimovic and Phillips (2008) for
how conglomerate firms may relax financial constraints in order to acquire other firms.



                                                      1
asset complementarities and product market synergies.

    Our model suggests that large firms optimally may decide to let small firms conduct R&D and
then subsequently acquire the companies that have successful innovated.                     We show that firms’
incentives to conduct R&D increase with the probability that they are taken over and how this
eﬀect decreases with size. This result is consistent with evidence that post-acquisition larger firms
innovate less and with evidence that larger firms conduct less R&D per unit of firm size.                      Seru
(2010) recently finds patenting goes down post-acquisition and concludes that large conglomerate
firms “stifle” innovation, while noting that they are more likely to sign alliances and joint ventures
- a fact consistent with the outsourcing of R&D. Our interpretation of the decrease in innovative
activity is diﬀerent. Our model and evidence shows that R&D may optimally decline for large firms
but increase for small firms with merger activity.            Large firms may find it optimal to buy other
firms to gain access to successful innovations instead of investing in R&D themselves, while small
firms face increased incentives to invest in R&D with an active takeover market.                    An additional
benefit of acquisition results from the ability of the merged entity to apply innovation to both the
bidder’s and the target’s product ranges.

    Specifically, the model provides the following predictions. First, the possibility of an acquisition
induces attempts to innovate by both small and large firms, but this eﬀect decreases with size as
large firms may find it optimal to buy smaller firms who successfully innovate and cannot prevent
small firms from attempting to innovate. The possibility of an acquisition amplifies the potential
gain from successful R&D. Second, we show that larger firms’ R&D is less procyclical than smaller
firms’ R&D. While small firms are always motivated to invest more following a positive demand
change, this is not necessarily true for large firms. Unlike small firms, large firms may find it
disadvantageous to engage in an “R&D race” with small firms at intermediate states of demand,
as they can obtain access to innovation by acquiring a smaller firm that succeeded in its R&D
eﬀorts. Thus, a large firm’s investment in R&D might actually go down with a moderate increase
in demand. The economic intuition for this result is that while the large firm may have a larger
benefit from the innovation, it cannot prevent small firms from trying to successfully obtain the
innovation first, and it still has an option of buying the innovation from the smaller firm.

    Third, greater bargaining power5 of the small firm leads to more aggressive attempts to innovate
   5
     Usually firms engage in negotiations before and/or after there is a public announcement of a bid or an intention
to bid. We refer to the ability of a firm management to negotiate favorable terms of the takeover as the firm’s


                                                         2
by the small firm and to higher likelihood of an acquisition. Having the ability to capture a greater
fraction of the acquisition surplus, the small firm will tend to invest in R&D to increase the odds of
successful innovation and being acquired by the larger firm. Fourth, we show that market structure
and competition are important. A higher number of small firms lead to less innovation by the larger
firms. The economic intuition for this result is that the large firm has more potential innovators
to purchase the innovation from and the increased competition decreases the odds that it will be
the successful innovative firm itself.6

       We empirically examine these predictions of our model. We find that firms’ R&D responds to
demand changes, measures of industry acquisition activity and the probability of being an acquisi-
tion target, and less so for large firms than small firms. We also find that their R&D increases with
competition and with target acquisition excess returns - a measure of bargaining power of small
firms in the acquisition market. We find that while R&D responds positively to competition, larger
firms in competitive industries conduct less R&D than smaller firms.

       In our analysis, we control for the fact that R&D and acquisition activity may be endogenous
and both be aﬀected by fundamentals and thus it may be fundamentals that are driving both
acquisitions and R&D. We have two strategies to help us identify whether acquisition likelihood
increases firm R&D. We first use industry measures of acquisition activity and demand. We use
lagged measures of industry M&A activity to proxy for anticipated demand that potential targets
face for their assets. Second, we also control for endogenous acquisition probability by estimating
the probability of being an acquisition target using an plausibly exogenous instrument, unexpected
mutual fund flow into and out of stocks, that can aﬀect persistent firm valuation and thus acquisition
activity but not aﬀect firm fundamentals.7

       Our research adds to the current academic literature in several areas. First, we provide a new
theory for the incentive eﬀects of M&A that has not been explored in the literature. The existing
literature has emphasized neoclassical models or q-based theories where highly productive firms buy
less productive firms and has also emphasized managerial agency theories of mergers.               It also adds

(relative) bargaining power.
   6
     Fulghieri and Sevilir (2009) model how the optimal response of firms to competition may be to choose to fund
innovation through corporate venture capital and strategic alliances.
   7
   See Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2012) for the description of and successful use of this instrument. We thank
them for sharing this mutual fund flow instrument with us.




                                                       3
to the theories that emphasize asset complementarity or product market synergies, by emphasizing
that new innovations produced through R&D can be used by existing firms with complementary
assets. Our paper directly examines the eﬀect of acquisition probabilities, market structure and
firm size on R&D.

       Secondly, our model and evidence is consistent with large firms optimally reducing innovation,
letting small firms innovate, and acquiring them later. We focus on the selection eﬀect and how
this potential eﬀect may impact pre-acquisition R&D. Other papers focus on treatment eﬀects and
examine R&D or patents post-acquisition. Our evidence is consistent (although the interpretation
is diﬀerent) with other recent papers which examine R&D and patents post acquisition. Seru
(2010) finds conglomerate firms reduce innovation post acquisition. Hall (1999) finds no eﬀect on
R&D expenditures from mergers of public firms, while a reduction in R&D following going-public
transactions.8 A direct implication of our paper is that instead of interpreting low R&D as a sign of
managerial ineﬃciency or myopia, low R&D can be optimal since the firm can instead be intending
to acquire R&D.

       Related literature looks at the relation between competition in product markets and innovation,
without paying attention to acquisitions. Vives (2008) provides a detailed overview of theoret-
ical and empirical work. Recently, Fulghieri and Sevilir (2011) theoretically model the ex ante
eﬀects of mergers and competition on innovation. They model how a reduction in competition
through mergers reduces employee incentives to innovate. The empirical evidence is favorable to
the positive eﬀect of competition on innovation including Porter (1990), Geroski (1990, 1994), Baily
and Gersbach (1995), Nickell (1996), Blundell, Griﬃn, and Van Reen (1999), Galdon-Sanchez and
Schmitz (2002). However, most of these papers look at productivity rather than R&D. Theoretical
work seems to support a negative relation between innovation and competitive pressure. Stan-
dard industrial organization theory predicts that innovation should decline with competition, as
more competition reduces the monopoly rents that reward successful innovators (see, for example,
Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1980.) Other theoretical papers suggest a positive (Aghion et al, 2001) or
U-shaped relation (Aghion et al, 2002) between innovation and product market competition. We

   8
    Note our model and evidence is about small firms optimally deciding to sell out. We do not model agency
conflicts nor anti-takeover amendments that are common for larger firms that may be subject to conflicts between
managers and shareholders. See Atanassov (2009) and Chemmanur and Tian (2010) for articles that deal with
anti-takeover devices or laws. The anti-takeover laws passed in the U.S. apply more to large firm takeovers in more
mature industries as they reduce post-acquisition asset sales and are thus not relevant for acquisitions of smaller
innovative firms.


                                                        4
complement and extend this literature by focusing on the eﬀect of a potential acquisition on firm
innovation incentives.9

       Overall our contribution is to focus on the trade-oﬀ for large firms between innovating themselves
or acquiring small firms that have successfully innovated. Acquiring firms that have successfully
innovated can be a more-eﬃcient path to obtaining innovation than innovating directly oneself.
We illustrate this eﬀect in a theoretical model and provide rigorous empirical tests.                      Second, we
generate new empirical predictions regarding procyclicality of R&D investments and their relation
to firm size, the eﬀect of potential acquisitions on R&D, the link of R&D to industry structure, and
the eﬀect of bargaining power and asset liquidity on small firms’ R&D decisions.

2 The Model
       We present a illustrative model that allows us to draw empirical predictions about the relation
between R&D, acquisitions and firm size.                We begin the model with a simple utility function
for consumers who value product variety but are willing to substitute between products. In the
base version of the model we assume heterogeneous products and price (Bertrand) competition.10
We believe this type of competition fits the case of many industries such as computer networking,
cell phones and consumer products, among others where companies compete based on product
diﬀerentiation. We define the product space broadly, with specific features that can be patented
that represent “local products” - which may aﬀect the demand for existing products. Our idea is
that multiple firms can try for a particular product characteristic ex ante yet only one will obtain
the particular product characteristic with a patent. Ex post, one firm innovating does not preclude
product diﬀerentiation across existing or new products as the patented product/characteristic, when
obtained, may aﬀect the demand for other firms’ existing products. The rationale is that areas of
the product space are large enough to contain subareas with diﬀerentiated products each with their
own particular diﬀerentiation. Thus ex post competition is characterized by product diﬀerentiation.
   9
    Our paper is also related to the literature that studies the procyclicality of R&D (e.g. Aghion et al, 2008, Barlevy,
2007).
  10
     In the online appendix we also examine alternative competition mechanism - Cournot competition whereby
firms produce homogeneous products and innovation results in costs savings and find similar results. Under Cournot
competition with similar competitors mergers will not take place as rival firms expand output after the merger -
this is a well-known Cournot-merger paradox. (See, for example, Salant, Switzer and Reynolds, 1983). However the
literature (see Gaudet and Salant, 1992 and Zhou, 2008, among others ) has shown that under Cournot competition
with cost savings mergers will take place. In our setting if the innovation produces large cost savings, mergers will
take place with positive demand shocks.



                                                           5
What is required is that the cross-partial price elasticity of demand is not zero and not infinity - so
that changes in one product’s price or characteristic aﬀect the other product’s demand but there is
not perfect competition.

       The previously cited examples of Google purchasing smaller search engines for their diﬀerent
ways they conduct search and the diﬀerent features they oﬀered in their search engines fits the
assumption of diﬀerentiated products.           To extend its networking oﬀerings, Cisco has purchased
16 computer networking companies and 5 computer security companies since 1999.                       Since 2004,
Google has bought many advertising firms (Admeld, Admob) and even the Android software firm,
that allow it to develop and extend its advertising business. Note that Admeld and Admob were
close competitors of Google and not just supply-chain related. Google had moved into the business
selling advertising through display ads - not directly connected to search as display ads appear
after you visit a firm’s web site. Admeld and Admob were also selling advertising through display
ads. From an advertiser’s perspective, ads oﬀered through search or through display ads on the
internet are diﬀerentiated products that they purchase.             The pricing for one aﬀects the demand
for the other product but they serve the same function of getting the advertiser’s message out to
consumers. Admeld and Admob had a diﬀerent technology for selling display ads and as such had
product extensions that were useful to Google and were viewed by many industry participants as
competitors with diﬀerentiated products.11

       Our model captures both heterogeneous products and the intensity of product market compe-
tition in a simple setting.      We believe that this setting provides a realistic background for the
issues of interest, as a positive eﬀect of innovation by a small firm is likely to result in a shift in
consumers’ demands. However, our analysis is robust to the scenario in which innovation results
in cost savings and firms compete in quantities (see the online appendix for results). We study one
large firm and up to two small firms but the model can potentially be extended to allow additional
firms. We allow each firm to innovate and introduce a new product but allow firms also to choose
  11
     Admeld’s web site: http://www.admeld.com/about/overview/ highlights the technology and methods that
they use to display advertising on web sites. As their web site says: “Admeld was first to introduce the pri-
vate exchange (November 2010), first to optimize mobile (January 2010), and the first to launch an ad monitor-
ing browser plugin (March 2009). Quite simply, our engineers are building things better and faster to keep our
clients on the cutting edge.” Many articles wrote of the potential for decreased competition post-deal, including
one which wrote “So what is the Admeld deal really about for Google? The company is seeking to expand its
monopoly power in search advertising to other aspects of online advertising, where Google is already the 800 lb.
gorilla between its acquisition of DoubleClick in 2008, and Google’s multi-billion-dollar annual AdSense business.”
(http://www.fairsearch.org/acquisitions/approval-for-admeld-deal-could-make-google-another-category-killer/).



                                                        6
to purchase other firms instead of innovating themselves.

2.1 General Setup
       Consumers We follow Vives (2000, 2008), and Bernile, Lyandres, and Zhdanov (2010), and
consider an industry with n (n ∈ {2, 3}) firms.             Initially, each product is produced by a single
firm. There is a representative consumer, with a general quadratic utility function that allows
for concavity in consumer utility as she consumes more of any given product and also allows for
diﬀerentiated products captured by the parameter γ, the degree of substitutability among the
products.

                                                  "m                      #
                                 √  Xm
                                                1  X           X
                            U(−
                              →
                              q)= x     αi qi −       βqi2 + 2      γqi qj ,                                  (1)
                                    i=1
                                                2 i=1          j6=i


       where αi > 0 represents consumer preferences for product i, β measures the concavity of the
utility function, γ represents the degree of substitutability between products i and j, and m is
the number of diﬀerent products in the market. We assume that β > γ > 0, 12 αi > αj implies
that the consumer prefers product i to product j, but still consumes both products as long as
they are imperfect substitutes (γ < β).          In (1) qi is consumption of good i, n is the number of
active firms in the industry, and, thus, the number of available products, and x is the stochastic
shock to the representative consumer’s utility.         γ > 0 ensures that the products are (imperfect)
substitutes. The higher the γ the more alike are the products and the more intense is competition
in the industry. Furthermore we follow Vives (2008) and assume that in addition to the products
above there is a numeraire good (or money), which represents the rest of the economy, and income
is large enough, so that the income and wealth constraints never bind and all income eﬀects are
captured by consumption of the numeraire good. In what follows we normalize β to 1. (The results
are insensitive to this normalization). In this setting, as γ approaches 1, the consumer becomes
indiﬀerent between the products and is better oﬀ having a high quantity of the product with the
lower price and none of the others.

       Production technology There are n (n ∈ {2, 3}) firms in the industry. Firms have a similar
production technology but we allow heterogeneity in the size of firms, with each firm initially
endowed with capital Ki . The firms’ production functions are of the Cobb-Douglas specification
  12
    This assumption ensures that the utility function is concave. For high values of γ, the consumer is better oﬀ
having a high quantity of one product and none of the other products rather than moderate amounts of all products.


                                                        7
with two factors:
                                                          p
                                                   qi =    Ki Li ,                                               (2)

where qi is the quantity produced by firm i, and Li is the amount of the second factor (e.g. labor)
employed by firm i.


       The cost of one unit of labor is denoted pl . The amount of capital is fixed, hence labor is the
only variable input. Given this specification, firm i’s cost of producing qi units is

                                                               qi2
                                                  Ci (qi ) =       pl .                                          (3)
                                                               Ki

This specification results in profit functions of the following from:


                                               π i = qi pi − Ci (qi ).                                           (4)


       Firms are heterogeneous in the amount of capital. There is one big dominating firm with capital
K1 and one or two small firms with capital K2,(3) < K1 each.                  In what follows we assume that
pl = 1 (the results are insensitive to this assumption).

       R&D and Innovation Each firm in the industry has an option to invest in R&D to potentially
obtain and develop an innovation technology at a cost of RDi . If one firm invests in R&D then it
develops the innovation with 100% percent certainty. If multiple firms invest in R&D, the probability
any individual firm develops the innovation decreases to 1/n.13               The innovative technology, once
developed, can be brought to the market through commercialization. For the sake of simplicity we
assume that commercialization is costless, but we obtain similar results under the assumption that
commercialization requires a certain cost of Ii to be incurred by firm i. Bringing to market the
product based on this innovation results in an enhanced product that results in increased consumer
utility for the product, as reflected in an increase of the parameter αi from αi1 to αi2 , where
αi1 < αi2 . For simplicity, we assume that αi1 = α and αi2 = α0 , i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.


       The Acquisition Market             The big firm, whether or not it has acquired the innovative
technology, has an option to take over one small firm. We assume (for simplicity to focus on

  13
    In section 2 of the online appendix, we also analyze the case in which the probability of innovating successfully
does not depend on the number of firms that attempt to innovate and multiple firms can develop the innovation.
Our results are robust to this case.


                                                          8
innovation) that there are no economies of scale and the merged firms utilize all the pre-merged firms’
capital and do not reallocate capital between their production facilities (or that it is prohibitively
costly to do so). Nevertheless, there are two consequences of an acquisition on the profit of the
merged entity (and its competitors, if any). First, the two firms are now able to coordinate their
pricing strategies, which leads to greater market power and increases equilibrium prices and profits.
Second, the merged entity can apply innovation to its entire product line, resulting in an increase
of the consumer preference parameter from α to α0 for all its products.14 We assume that an
acquisition can be implemented at a fixed cost Im .


       We further assume that the target shareholders get a fraction η of the acquisition surplus, e.g.
the price paid to the target shareholders is given by


                                         P = Vts + η(Vm − Vts − Vbs ),


where Vm is the value of the merged entity if an acquisition is implemented, Vts and Vbs are the
“stand-alone” values of the target and the bidder. Parameter η reflects the relative bargaining
power of the target (small firm), so 1 − η is the relative bargaining power of the acquirer.

       The sequence of events is presented in figure 1.         Initially, firms observe a realization of the
demand shock and decide whether or not they want to invest in R&D. Competition in R&D then
results in each participating firm developing the innovation with probability n1 . The larger firm then
decides whether or not to acquire a smaller one (regardless of which firm, if any, has developed
innovation). Finally, equilibrium profits are earned by the firms.

2.2 Solution
       The equilibrium prices and profits of firms in the industry depend on which firm has successfully
innovated (if any) and on whether an acquisition occurs. In the following subsections, we allow for
a large firm and a small firm with varying degrees of bargaining power.                   We start with a case
  14
     We realize that our assumption that the extension or product that is developed with the R&D can be applied to
the entire product line may be viewed as extreme, as the innovation may only apply to part of the acquirer’s product
line. However this additional complication of modeling multi-product firms is beyond the scope of our paper. We
believe our model does capture the potential for how products may work together or may co-exist separately and
how the acquired firm’s technology can be used with the acquirer’s existing products. An example is Google buying
Motorola Holdings which produces cell phones in addition to having patents that can be used in Google’s Android
product oﬀerings. Google was previously making cell phones (Nexus One) in addition to providing the Android
software.



                                                         9
when a merger is precluded and then proceed by incorporating a possibility of an acquisition. We
also analyze an industry with two small firms and one big firm to illustrate the eﬀect of increasing
competition.

Case 1: One small firm, one large firm and no acquisition is possible

   To find the equilibrium profits we first diﬀerentiate the utility function with respect to quantities
and set the derivatives equal to prices. Solving the resulting system of equations for quantities gives
the demand functions:                   √
                                         x (α1 − α2 γ) − p1 + p2 γ
                                   q1 =                            ,                                (5)
                                                 1 − γ2
                                        √
                                         x (α2 − α1 γ) − p2 + p1 γ
                                   q2 =                            .                                (6)
                                                 1 − γ2
The inverse demand functions are linear in prices. We then substitute these functions into profit
functions (4), diﬀerentiate with respect to prices (firms maximize their profits by setting prices
competitively), set the derivatives equal to zero, and solve the resulting system of equations. This
produces equilibrium prices, provided in the appendix. We then substitute equilibrium prices back
into the inverse demand functions to get equilibrium quantities, then into profit functions (4) to
obtain equilibrium profits.

   Figure 2 plots the equilibrium profit of a firm as a function of “consumer preferences”, equiva-
lently this can be thought of as a firm’s “product innovation parameter”, αi , for its product, that
of its competitor, αj , the relative size of the two firms, K1 /K2 , and the degree of product diﬀeren-
tiation, γ. The comparative statics are based on the following parameter values: K1 = 10, K2 = 1,
γ = 0.5, α1 = 10, α2 = 10. For each graph we compute the profits with these values but vary one of
them as indicated on the x-axis. Consistent with intuition, equilibrium profit of one firm increases
in its own product innovation parameter αi , and decreases with its product substitutability γ, its
rival’s capitalization Kj , and its rival’s product innovation parameter, αj .



                                          Insert figure 2 here

Let us denote the equilibrium profit of firm i by πi (Ai , Aj ), where Ai = NI if firm i decides not to
invest in R&D and Ai = I if it invests. The following Lemma establishes certain relations between
equilibrium profits in diﬀerent scenarios. These relations prove useful in the subsequent analysis of
the optimal R&D and acquisition policies.

                                                  10
Lemma 1 Let K1 > K2 and Im = 015 . Then the following inequalities hold:


       a) π 1 (I, NI) > π 1 (NI, N I) > π1 (NI, I)

       b) π 2 (NI, I) > π2 (NI, NI) > π 2 (I, NI)

       c) Let γ = 0.5. Then π1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, NI) > π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (NI, NI)

       d) π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, I) > π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (I, NI)

       e) Let γ = 0.5 and K2 = 1. Then there exists μ > 1 and αh >> α such that for K1 /K2 > μ and
α < αi < αh the following inequality holds:

                              π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (N I, I)
                                                         > π2 (NI, I) − π 2 (NI, NI)
                                          2

       f) Let γ = 0.5 and K2 = 1. Then there exists μ1 > 1 that for K1 /K2 > μ1 the following
inequality holds:
                             2(π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, NI)) > π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (I, NI)

       g) The following relation holds: π 2 (NI, I) − 2π 2 (NI, NI) + π 2 (I, NI) > 0.

       Proof. See Appendix.

       Parts a) and b) of Lemma 1 simply state that the profit of a firm increases if it innovates
and decreases if a competitor implements innovation, as shown in Figure 1. Parts c) and d) state
that a successfully implemented innovation has a greater eﬀect on the profit of the larger, more
capital intensive firm. While we impose some parameter restrictions in parts c), e), and f), we also
perform numerical simulations to investigate the robustness of our results and find that in general
the statements of lemma 1 hold for a large set of reasonable parameter values, and even when some
of these statements are violated, our major predictions still go through. See online appendix for
details.16
  15
    Our results hold for positive merger cost Im > 0. Assuming a positive merger cost is only useful to illustrate
procyclicality of takeovers.
  16
     Lemma 1c) and lemma 1f) hold for a large set of parameter values, for example both these conditions hold if
K1 = 10; a = 10; 0.1 6 γ 6 0.9; 1 6 K2 6 9; 11 6 α0 6 30. Lemma 1e is, however, more restrictive. It holds
well when the ratio of the capital stocks of the two firms K1 /K2 is relatively high. For example, it holds for the
following parameter combinations: K1 = 10; a = 10; 0.25 6 γ 6 0.75; K2 6 1; 11 6 α0 6 18, or K1 = 10; a = 10;
0.05 6 γ 6 0.95; K2 6 0.5; 11 6 α0 6 30. We believe that our story is more relevant for large firms acquiring much
smaller ones, and less for a merger of similar firms. However, numerical analysis suggests that even when lemma 1e)
is violated, our major predictions still obtain.


                                                        11
   Let us now introduce the following threshold boundary parameters. These boundary parameters
are useful as they define important thresholds that shape firms’ equilibrium R&D policies.

                                    RD                                RD
                  x1 =                             ; x2 =                            ;
                         π1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, NI)        π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (NI, NI)

                                    2RD                              2RD
                    x3 =                            ; x4 =                           .
                           π2 (NI, I) − π 2 (I, NI)        π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, I)

   Note that Lemma 1 a) and b) ensure that all these values are positive, while Lemma 1 e) ensures
that x4 < x2 . Lemma 1 c) ensures that x1 < x2 . Lemma 1 d) ensures that x4 < x3 . Lemma 1 f)
ensures that x1 < x3 . Lemma 1 g) ensures that x2 < x3 .

   The optimal R&D policy of each firm depends on the current state of demand x and on the
actions of its opponent. Each firm first decides whether it wants to invest in R&D. If neither
firm invests then neither develops the innovation and the profits of the two firms are given by
π 1 (NI, NI) and π 2 (NI, NI). If only one firm invests in R&D, then it acquires the new technology
with certainty. If both firms invest in R&D, then each of them has a 50% chance of obtaining the
patent. The successful firm then commercializes the innovation.

   The following proposition defines the equilibrium R&D strategies of the two firms in the absence
of takeovers.



Proposition 2 Assume that conditions a) - f) of Lemma 1 hold. Then there are three Nash equi-
libria in pure strategies, depending on the value of x. In particular, for x < x1 the only Nash
equilibrium is (NI, NI) (no firm invests). For x1 < x < x3 the only Nash equilibrium is (I, NI)
(the big firm invests and the small firm does not). For x > x3 the only equilibrium is (I, I) (both
firms invest).


   Proof. See Appendix.

   Figure 3 presents the equilibrium strategies of the two firms in the space (α0 , x).


                                          Insert figure 3 here


   The results in figure 3 are based on the following set of parameter values: K1 = 10, K2 = 1,
γ = 0.5, α = 10, α0 = 15, RD1 = RD2 = 15. There are three regions in figure 3. For very low

                                                    12
states of x, the NPV of investing in R&D for the big firm, NP V1 , is negative, and so is the NPV
of investing in R&D for the small firm, NP V2 , so both firms optimally choose not to invest (region
I). For suﬃciently high values of x NP V1 becomes positive and the big firm invests, while NP V2
is still negative - the benefit of applying innovation to the capital stock of the small firm is less
valuable than that of the big firm with more abundant capital (region II). Finally, for even higher
states of x the small firm chooses to join the R&D race with the big firm, as the value of the option
to join becomes positive (region III). Regions I and II are separated by threshold x1 , while regions
II and III are separated by threshold x3 . As shown in figure 3, the incentive to invest in innovation
for both firms is greater when the benefit of innovation α0 is high.

Case 2: One small firm, one large firm, and acquisitions are possible

       We now assume that the big firm has an option to acquire the small one. A successful acquisition
results in a single firm in the industry, which sets prices to maximize its total (monopoly) profits. If
either the small or the big firm has developed the innovation, then the merged firm will commercialize
it. Note that the merged entity still produces two separate products, and demand for each product
will be characterized by the parameter α = α0 . The profit of the merged entity is given in the
appendix. We denote by π m (I) the profit of the merged entity if it implements innovation and by
π m (NI) its profit if it does not implement innovation.

       The equilibrium investment choices of firms are found similarly to the previous case by comparing
expected firm values in diﬀerent scenarios. When deciding whether or not to invest in R&D, the
big firm now takes into account the possibility to acquire the small firm if the latter develops
innovation. Likewise, the small firm incorporates the possibility of being acquired by the big firm
in its optimization problem.

       The following proposition establishes the equilibrium R&D strategies of the two firms if an
acquisition is possible.

Proposition 3 Assume η = 0 (the big firm captures 100% of the takeover surplus). Also assume
that the following conditions hold: π m (I) − π m (NI) > π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, NI)17 and π 2 (NI, I) −
π 2 (NI, NI) > π 2 (NI, NI) − π 2 (I, NI).18 If takeovers are possible then the following are the Nash
  17
    This condition stipulates that the acquisition benefit is greater for the merged entity than it is for the big firm
(as a stand-alone entity). It is intuitive and holds for a large set of reasonable parameter values.
  18
       This condition also holds for a large set of reasonable parameter values. It is also intuitive and implies that the

                                                            13
equilibria in pure strategies. If x < x1m , where

                                                          RD
                             x1m =
                                     π m (I) − π m (NI) + π 2 (NI, NI) − π2 (I, NI)

then the only Nash equilibrium is (NI, NI) (no firm invests). If x1m < x < x2 then the only Nash
equilibrium is (I, NI) (big firm invests). If x2 < x < x3 then there are two pure strategy Nash
equilibria - (NI, I) (small firm invests and big firm does not) and (I, NI) (big firm invests and
small firm does not). In addition there is a mixed strategy equilibrium in which the big firm invests
with probability p1 and the small firm invests with probability p2 (these probabilities are determined
in the appendix). If x > x3 then the only equilibrium is (I, I) (both firms invest).


    Proof: See Appendix.


    Figure 4 illustrates the equilibrium innovation strategies of the two firms. There are two impor-
tant diﬀerences between figures 3 and 4. First, innovation by the big firm starts at a lower state
of demand x, because the potential benefit of innovation is greater - the big firm has an option to
acquire the small one and apply innovation to both its capacity and production and the production
capacity acquired from the non-innovating small firm so x1m is less x1 (see proof of proposition 2 in
the Appendix for details). Second, there is a region in which there is a pure-strategy equilibrium, in
which the small firm innovates while the big firm does not, and another mixed-strategy equilibrium,
in which the small firm innovates with a certain probability φ2 . (For the set of parameter values used
in figure 4, the state of demand x = 1.5, and the innovation parameter α0 = 12 the corresponding
probabilities are φ1 = 0.58 and φ2 = 0.91).


                                                Insert figure 4 here


    Note that while our modeling framework does not allow us to determine which firm is going
to invest in the intermediate region, any advantage in terms of flexibility or speed of reacting to
current market conditions would lead to a first-mover advantage and would make the more inert
firm less likely to invest. Since it cannot outpace the faster firm it would be forced not to invest. It
is reasonable to think of small firms as being more flexible and able to adapt faster to changes in

positive eﬀect of its own innovation on the profit of the small firm is greater in absolute value than the negative eﬀect
due to the large firm innovating. See online appendix for details.


                                                           14
the market. In this case by investing first a small firm would rule out the (I, NI) equilibrium and
the mixed strategy equilibrium. Furthermore, numerical results show that in the mixed-strategy
equilibrium the probability of the small firm investing is typically higher than that of the large firm.
On the other hand, for larger, capital-intensive R&D projects the large firm can potentially commit
more capital than the small one and that can give it a competitive edge and result in the (I, NI)
outcome.

   Overall by comparing figures 3 and 4 we tend to conclude that the possibility of takeover
intensifies the small firm’s R&D investment. Indeed, in region III in figure 4 there is no equilibrium
in which the small firms invest if takeovers are not allowed (figure 3), while there are multiple
equilibria in this region if takeovers are possible (figure 4). Furthermore, when we analyze below (in
extensions of the model) the case where bargaining power of the target may vary, for some values
of the bargaining parameter η there is a region in which (NI,I) is the only equilibrium.



   We proceed to analyze the eﬀect of takeover cost Im on the dynamics of takeovers. A takeover
always results in a reduction in the number of firms and therefore in greater market power and
increased combined profits, as the firms can now internalize their pricing decisions. Thus, π m (I) >
π 1 (I, I) + π 2 (I, I). As shown by proposition 2, at high values of x both firms optimally decide to
innovate even if takeovers are precluded, because the benefit of innovation is proportional to x.
Given the bargaining power parameter η, the fraction of the surplus captured by the large firm is
η(π m (I) − π 1 (I, I) − π 2 (I, I))x and increasing in x. Clearly, for

                                                                Im
                                        x>
                                                η(π m (I) − π 1 (I, I) − π 2 (I, I))

the takeover benefit outweighs the cost and the large firm initiates the takeover. On the other
hand for very low x the benefit of the takeover is not enough to compensate for the cost. Thus,
                         Im
if x <   η(π m (NI)−π1 (N I,N I)−π 2 (NI,NI))
                                                takeover does not occur. This leads to the procyclicality of
takeovers - they always happen at suﬃciently high values of x and never happen at low x, as long
as the takeover cost Im is positive. This logic is summarized in the following proposition and is
illustrated in figure 5.


Proposition 4 If Im > 0 then takeovers are procyclical.



                                                             15
   This result is consistent with the large theoretical literature on acquisitions and capital realloca-
tion (e.g. Lambrecht 2004, Morellec and Zhdanov 2005, Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2006) and supported
by empirical evidence (Mitchell and Mulherin, 1996, Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001, and Harford,
2005). Figure 5 plots the demand threshold, x, at which the acquisition just becomes profitable
- as a function of the acquisition cost Im . We solve the model numerically for positive values of
Im . Acquisition is optimal for the states of demand exceeding x. As figure 5 shows, acquisitions
are procyclical and acquisition thresholds increase in the cost of merger Im . Note that in general
there are two acquisition thresholds that divide the space (x, Im ) into three diﬀerent regions. In the
bottom region (region I), acquisitions never occur. The cost of merger is too high in that region
for an acquisition to be optimal. In the top region (region III) acquisitions occur with probability
one. In that region, even if the big firm develops innovation it still wishes to acquire the small
one because it can apply innovation to its capital stock as well. On the other hand, it will also
benefit from reduced industry competition. In the middle region (region II) an acquisition occurs
only if the small firm has successfully developed innovation. Because of the relatively large cost
of an acquisition, the big firm does not find it optimal to acquire the small one if the former has
accessed innovation through its own R&D program. It can commercialize without performing an
acquisition. By contrast, if the small firm obtains the innovative technology, the big firm has more
incentives to initiate an acquisition, because it will also result in gaining access to innovation. Note
that in our model a merger always has a positive eﬀect on the combined profit of the merged entity
even if innovation is not commercialized. This pure market power eﬀect arises because competition
becomes less intense following the merger and the equilibrium profits rise. Therefore, even in the
absence of innovation, takeovers occur with 100% certainty at very high states of x.


                                         Insert figure 5 here



   2.3 Extensions of the model

   In this section, we allow for varying bargaining power of the small firm and for multiple small
firms and analyze the eﬀect of these features on firm incentives to invest in R&D. We start with the
analysis of varying bargaining power. For our analysis, it is convenient to introduce the following




                                                  16
notations:

                                                          RD
        x1η =
                η(π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, NI)) + (1 − η)(π m (I) − π m (NI) + π2 (NI, NI) − π 2 (I, NI))

                                                           2RD
                      x5η =
                              (1 − η)[π 2 (NI, I) − π2 (I, NI)] + η[π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (NI, I)]
                                                           RD
        x2η =                                                                                            .
                (1 − η)(π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (N I, NI)) + η(π m (I) − πm (NI) + π 2 (NI, NI) − π 2 (I, NI))
The following proposition establishes the equilibrium R&D strategies of the two firms if an acqui-
sition is possible and the small firm has positive bargaining power


Proposition 5 Assume 0 < η < 1 (the small firm captures a fraction of the takeover surplus). Also
assume that the following inequalities hold19 : x2η < x5η and x1η < x5η . If takeovers are possible then the

following are the Nash equilibria in pure strategies:

       a) if x1η < x2η then if x < x1η , then the only Nash equilibrium is (NI, N I) (no firm invests).      If

x1η < x < x2η then the only Nash equilibrium is (I, NI) (only big firm invests). If x2η < x < x5η then
there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria - (NI, I) (small firm invests and big firm does not) and (I, NI)
(big firm invests and small firm does not). In addition there is a mixed strategy equilibrium in which the
big firm invests with probability p1 and the small firm invests with probability p2 . If x > x5η then the only
equilibrium is (I, I) (both firms invest).

       b) if x2η < x1η then if x < x2η , then the only Nash equilibrium is (NI, NI) (no firm invests).       If
x2η < x < x1η then the only Nash equilibrium is (NI, I) (only small firm invests). If x1η < x < x5η
then there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria - (NI, I) (small firm invests and big firm does not) and
(I, NI) (big firm invests and small firm does not). In addition there is a mixed strategy equilibrium in
which the big firm invests with probability p1 and the small firm invests with probability p2 If x > x5η then
the only equilibrium is (I, I) (both firms invest).


       Proof. See Appendix.


Corollary 6 x5η is decreasing in η, furthermore, if π m (I) − π m (NI) > π 1 (I, NI) − π 1 (N I, NI) then
x1η is increasing in η and x2η is decreasing in η

  19
    These inequalities hold for a large set of reasonable parameter values. See online appendix for a
discussion.


                                                         17
   Proof: The first statement follows from Lemma 1 d). The last two statements follow from Lemma
1 a) and b) and the definitions of x1η and x2η .

   Corollary 6 implies that the small firm invests more aggressively as its bargaining power, η,
increases. When η goes up, x2η declines. Note that x2η is the border of the region in which there
are equilibria with the small firm investing, so this region expands downwards when η increases.
Furthermore, as seen in figure A.1 of the online appendix, for low enough η x2η falls below x1η and
there appears a region in which the only equilibrium entails the small firm investing. At higher states
of demand the small firm is again more aggressive as x5η is decreasing in η. The big firm responds
to a greater bargaining power of the small firm in a diﬀerent way: on one hand it invests more
aggressively at higher states of demand (x5η goes down), on the other, it invests less aggressively
at low states of demand (x1η goes up). Because it has to share the takeover surplus with the small
firm, it becomes less motivated to invest when expected profits are low.

   Figure 6 shows the equilibrium R&D strategies of the firms when the small firm has greater
bargaining power and captures a fraction of acquisition surplus η = 0.5.


                                         Insert figure 6 here


   There are two important diﬀerences between figure 4 (η = 0) and figure 6 (η = 0.5). First, the
intermediate region (region III) is much wider. Since the small firm gets a share of the acquisition
benefit, it is more motivated to engage in R&D, so it could sell out to the big firm at a higher price.
Because of a high potential payoﬀ in the event of successful innovation and subsequent acquisition,
the small firm is motivated to pursue an aggressive R&D strategy. Second, the boundary at which
both firms decide to invest in R&D shifts down, consistent with corollary 6.

   In addition, we show in section 2 of the online appendix that further increasing the bargaining
power of the small firm gives rise to a new region in which the only equilibrium is the one in which
only the small firm invests (and the big firm does not, see figure A1 in the online appendix).

   Lastly, we consider the case when there are multiple small firms and one large firm. Due to
complexity of this case we solve it numerically. We analyze this case in section 3 of the online
appendix. Analysis of this case gives us two new results. First, the aggregate investment in R&D
is higher when there are two small firms in the industry than when there is only one small firm
Second, and more importantly, a small firm has a stronger motivation to engage in R&D and get a

                                                   18
better chance of being acquired by the larger firm. A small firm that does not become a takeover
target will face intensified competition with the bigger entity (formed in result of the acquisition
of its rival) that also commercializes the new technology. While it faces potential competition in
the R&D market with the other small firm, it has a stronger incentive to become a takeover target
and to avoid becoming an outsider. On the other hand the big firm is less motivated to invest
when there are two small firms, given more aggressive investment in R&D by the small firms and
because it has a lower probability of success facing competition with two firms. Therefore the big
firm prefers to let one of them develop innovation and consequently acquire the innovation through
an acquisition. As a consequence there exists a region which is shown graphically in which in the
only pure strategy equilibrium both small firms invest, while the big firm does not.

   2.4 Discussion of Modeling Assumptions

   In this section we discuss the main modeling assumptions that we have made in the paper. We
also discuss the potential limitations, robustness and extensions of these assumptions.

   1. We assume in our analysis that the amount of R&D spending is fixed and also that it is the
same for the large and the small firm. An interesting extension would be to examine continuous
investment whereby each extra dollar spent on R&D increases the probability of success. Incorpo-
rating this assumption would, however, make the model much more complex. We believe, however,
that our major qualitative results will still obtain in this case. R&D will still be procyclical (though
the relation between R&D spending and x will be continuous and not binary as in our model). If
acquisitions are allowed, then the same economic mechanism will apply and the big firm will have
less incentives to invest in R&D at intermediate demand states as it will have an option to obtain
access to innovation through acquisition. At high levels of demand, big and small firms will invest
in R&D given the large gains from successful innovation.

   2. We assume that the probability of successful innovation equals 1/n, where n is the number
of firms that invest in R&D. As shown in the online appendix, our general results hold if the
probability of successful innovation by a firm is independent of the number of other firms that
invest in R&D. We thank the referee for suggesting this alternative specification.

   3. We need to impose some restrictions on parameter values to be able to analytically prove some
of our results. However, further analysis shows that our results are robust to reasonable variations
of parameter values. We present this additional analysis in our online appendix.


                                                  19
    4. In generating our predictions we implicitly assume that a wide range of the values of x is
feasible so there is a positive probability of finding the firm in various regions in figures 3, 4, 6.
Thus, substantial variation in demand is required to generate the full spectrum of our predictions.

2.5 Predictions of the Model

    Below we summarize the empirical predictions generated by the model. We test these predictions
in the empirical section of this paper.


 P1. Acquisitions are procyclical.

       This result is illustrated in figure 5 and follows from the fact that equilibrium profits as well as
       the benefit of acquisitions are increasing in the demand level x. It is supported by proposition
       4.

 P2. Firm R&D is procyclical.

       This prediction follows from propositions 2 and 3 and is illustrated in figures 3 and 4. Higher
       values of demand make it more attractive for firms to invest in R&D either to keep innovation
       to themselves or to become an attractive acquisition target, if an acquisition is possible.

 P3. Large firms’ R&D is less procyclical than small firms’ R&D.

       Unlike small firms, large firms may find it disadvantageous to engage in an “R&D race” with
       small firms at intermediate states of demand, as they can obtain access to innovation by later
       acquiring a small firm that succeeded in its R&D eﬀorts. It follows from proposition 2 that
       there is a non-monotonic relation between the large firm’s investment policy and the state
       of x. This is also illustrated in figure 4. It always invests in regions II and IV in figure 4,
       never invests in region I and there are equilibria in region III in which it does not invest either.
       Furthermore, propositions 4 and 5 show that there exists an intermediate region in which only
       the big firm invests. A similar situation occurs with two small firms, as illustrated in figure
       A.2 of the online appendix. The regions in which the big firm invests alternate with the ones
       in which it does not, giving rise to a non-monotonic relation between demand and the large
       firm’s R&D investment.20
  20
     To generate this prediction we implicitly assume that a wide range of the values of x is feasible, including those in
regions I through IV in figure 4. Thus a substantial variability of demand conditions is necessary for the mechanisms
in our model to work. We thank the referee for pointing this out.



                                                           20
P4. Possibility of being acquired induces innovation eﬀorts by large and small firms, but especially
    by the small firms.

    This prediction is illustrated in figures 3 and 4 and follows from the fact that the possibility
    of an acquisition amplifies the potential gain from successful R&D. It follows from lemma
    1g) that x2 < x3 so there always exists a region (x2 , x3 ) such that there is no equilibrium
    with the small firm investing if takeovers are precluded, while there are equilibria in the same
    region that involve the small firm investing if takeovers are allowed. Thus, possibility of being
    acquired leads to more R&D by small firms.

P5. Greater bargaining power of the small firm leads to more aggressive innovation eﬀorts by the
    small firm.

    This prediction follows from the fact that having the ability to capture a greater fraction of
    the acquisition surplus, the small firm will tend to invest in R&D more aggressively to increase
    the odds of being acquired by the larger firm. This prediction follows from proposition 5 and
    corollary 6. It is also illustrated in figure 6 and figure A.1 in the online appendix. The region
    in which only the big firm invests shrinks with increased bargaining power of the small firm
    as shown in figure 6 and completely disappears with very high bargaining power of the small
    firm (η = 0.9, fig A.1), while the region in which both firms invest expands.

P6. Increased product market competition leads to more R&D but less so for large firms.

    The intuition for this prediction is similar to that of prediction 3. With more small firms in
    the industry, big firms become less motivated to invest in their own R&D programs (and face
    intense competition with small firms) and are more inclined to let small firms innovate and
    then acquire those that innovate successfully. This result is illustrated in figure A.2 of the
    online appendix. We show that small firms invest more aggressively when facing competition
    with another small firm in both R&D and acquisition markets. The regions with at least one
    equilibrium in which a small firm invests expand. In addition there emerges a region in which
    in the only pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, both small firms invest, while the big firm does
    not.




                                                21
3 Data and Empirical Methodology
3.1 Sample
       Our data come from the Merged CRSP-Compustat Database, the Securities Data Corporation
(SDC), the St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED), and the Census of Manufactures.
We start with the Merged CRSP-Compustat Database and exclude companies in the financial (SIC
codes 6000 to 6999) and utilities (SIC codes 4900 to 4999) industries. Our initial sample includes
12,941 firms operating in 181 diﬀerent three-digit SIC industries and 117,151 firm-year observations
during the period 1984-2006. We merge to this data a sample of mergers and acquisitions from
Securities Data Corporation (SDC) from the same period of time.                  We also drop companies for
which we are unable to compute acquisition liquidity or our main control variables.                     Our final
sample of firms with matched industry demand data, lagged and contemporaneous non-zero assets
includes 11,288 firms with 84,471 firm-year observations.

       Table 1 presents the summary statistics of our main variable, annual R&D expenditures scaled
by sales,21 and also annual acquisition rate by diﬀerent size groups. Panel A shows that the highest
R&D activity as a percentage of sales is concentrated among firms with below median size. R&D
for firms between the 25 and 50th percentile of market capitalization is 2.4 percent of sales. Given
market capitalization reflects growth options and R&D may capture many growth options, the fact
that R&D is very low at the lowest size decile is not surprising. At the highest size decile, R&D
is also a low fraction of market capitalization consistent with many growth options being already
exercised for these large firms.     Panel B shows the acquisition rates of firms based on their market
capitalization.    Firms in the lowest size groups are more likely to be acquired.

                                              Insert Table 1 here

3.2 Identification Strategy: Acquisition Activity and Industry Demand
and Supply
       In our analysis, we wish to examine the eﬀect of expected acquisition activity on firm R&D.
We face a fundamental identification problem that R&D and acquisitions may both result from
  21
    We note that the distribution of R&D / Sales is skewed to the right, with many firms reporting zero R&D.
We examined whether this had an eﬀect on our regression results and found that it did not.        Our results hold
using quantile regressions at the 50th (median regression) and 75th percentiles and the results with these quantile
regressions are actually slightly stronger than the results we report. We also examine R&D scaled by assets and our
results, including later regression results, are robust to this alternative scaling.

                                                        22
fundamental demand conditions.               Firms conduct R&D not just because they may sell out to
another firm but also because of fundamental demand conditions. Acquisitions as well also respond
to these fundamental demand conditions. Thus to separate out the eﬀect of expected acquisition
activity on R&D we have to control for industry demand and also find exogenous asset liquidity
shift variables or instruments that aﬀect acquisition activity but do not aﬀect firm-level corporate
R&D. We thus construct several diﬀerent measures of industry asset liquidity and also construct
the direct probability a firm is a target using an instrumental variable approach. Thus we do not
rely solely on exogenous variables or our instrumental variable approach. This dual approach gives
reassurance that our results are robust to diﬀerent methods to control for endogeneity.

       To begin we discuss our controls for fundamental industry demand conditions. We then discuss
our measures of acquisition activity and liquidity in the market for acquisitions. Lastly, we discuss
our instrumental variable regression approach where we endogenize the probability a firm is an
acquisition target and the instruments we use to help with identification.

3.2.1 Industry Demand Conditions
       To capture industry demand we use measures of downstream demand that we obtain from
the Federal Reserve on the value of industrial production seasonally by industry, converted into 4
digit SIC codes. The industrial production data are publicly available series available at Federal
Reserve based on data from Census Bureau.22 We aggregate these measures to the three digit level
and then calculate the annual change for each year. We then link these data to each industry
by “downstream” industries using the input output matrix of the U.S. economy from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis in the closest lagged census year (this matrix is published every five years)
using the Bureau of Economic Analysis “use” tables, where a downstream industry is one that uses
1 percent or more of the industries output.23 Given most industries sell to multiple downstream
industries, to construct our final measure of changes in demand we weight the percentage change of
each downstream industry by the percentage sold to that industry at the 3 digit level. For industries
that sell directly to consumers we use the change in consumer income in real dollars. For industries
that sell directly to the government, we use the change in government military expenditures in real
  22
       These data are available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/table1_2.htm, starting from year 1919.
  23
    Input output tables are from Bureau of Economic Analysis web site and are publicly available at:
http://www.bea.gov/industry/#io. The latest input-output table currently available is for 2007. We match this
data into SIC codes using publicly available correspondence tables.



                                                          23
dollars as the downstream demand index - as military expenditures are plausibly exogenous to each
industry’s shipments itself.

   We construct two measures of demand changes using these data.           First, following Maksimovic
and Phillips (2001), Vdshock is the detrended annual percentage change in the downstream industry
using the input-output matrix. To detrend this variable we regress it on industry and year fixed
eﬀects indicator variables and then take the residual from this regression.     The detrended variable
represents the “shock” or unanticipated change to demand. Vexpand is a “discretized” version of
Vdshock which equals one when Vdshock is positive and zero otherwise. We use both variables in
our tests because of potential non-linearities in the eﬀect of increases in demand on R&D. In our
model, the response of R&D intensity to changes in demand is highly non-linear. These demand
indices are available directly from the authors.

3.2.2 Industry Acquisition Activity
   Our first measure of expected asset liquidity in the market for acquisitions is a three year lagged
average measure of industry asset transactions - broken up into inside and outside industry trans-
actions.   It follows Schlingemann, Stulz, and Walkling (SSW) (2002) in that SSW examine how a
firm’s probability of selling is related to overall industry acquisition activity. We diﬀer from SSW
as we average the lagged industry M&A activity to capture what a firm might expect will be the
potential market for its assets.   It captures the historical liquidity of an industry’s assets using the
value of past M&A activity in the firm’s industry over the last three years (we also examine the
last five years and our results are robust to this change). Shleifer and Vishny (1992) argue that a
high volume of transactions in an industry is evidence of high liquidity because the discounts that
sellers must oﬀer to attract buyers are smaller in more active resale markets.

   We thus obtain the value of all M&A activity involving publicly traded targets in each three-
digit SIC industry and in each year from the Securities Data Corporation (SDC). We include both
mergers and acquisitions of assets. For full firm purchases, deal value is the purchase price paid to
target shareholders. For acquisition of assets, deal value is the reported purchase price. Acquisitions
of assets are important conceptually and economically to our argument. Conceptually there are
many firms who develop R&D in divisions and then sell that division.            In our sample, overall
acquisitions of assets are particularly important as they comprise approximately 75% of the total
deals by number.


                                                   24
       If SDC does not report corporate transactions in an industry-year, we set the value of transac-
tions equal to zero. We then scale the value of transactions in the industry by the total book value
of assets in the industry, and further average this ratio over the past three years, not including the
contemporaneous year. To compute the value of the assets in each industry, we sum the assets in
the industry reported by single-segment firms and the segment level assets reported by multiple-
segment firms in the Compustat Segment data, breaking up the multiple-segment firms into their
component industries using the value of reported assets by their component industries. Averaging
over past years smooths the temporary ups and downs in M&A activity and allows us to better
capture the intrinsic saleability of an industry’s assets.24

       We decompose our measure of asset liquidity to distinguish between inside buyers of assets —
those who operate in the same three-digit SIC industry as the target — and outside buyers — those
who do not currently operate in the industry. Again we use the Compustat Segment tapes to
further refine this calculation. We classify a purchase as an inside purchase if the buyer has any
segments with the same three-digit SIC code as the assets purchased — checking over each reported
SIC code of the target if the target reports multiple SIC codes. Inside Industry M&A is the value
of M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate within the industry, scaled by the
book value of the assets in the industry. Outside Industry M&A is the value of M&A activity in
the industry involving acquirers that operate outside the industry, scaled by the book value of the
assets in the industry. Both of these variables are again averaged over the past five years.

       We also calculate the cumulative abnormal announcement return to past targets in each industry
in the prior year as an additional measure of what a target firm might expect to receive if they receive
a buyout oﬀer. We calculate the cumulative abnormal return for each past deal in the industry and
average over all deals in each industry at the 3-digit SIC code level. Excess returns are cumulated
from 30 days prior to the announcement date of each deal to 10 days post-deal. Parameters of the
market model (α, β) used to calculate excess returns are estimated from regressions of each stock
return on the S&P market return using trading days -255 to - 31 prior to the announcement date.

3.2.3 The Probability of Being a Target
  24
    Our analysis is unaﬀected if we use five years of M&A data instead of three years. We have calculated the
persistence of lagged industry M&A and found it to be very persistent. The correlation between 1 and 3 years
lagged inside industry M&A activity is .752. The correlation between 1 and 5 year inside M&A activity is .640. The
correlation between 3 and 5 year lagged inside industry M&A activity is .898.




                                                       25
       Our second main measure of expected asset liquidity in the market for acquisitions is a firm’s
individual probability of being an acquisition target. We thus include the target dummy variable
in the R&D regressions and instrument this endogenous variable using as an instrument a measure
of the unexpected mutual fund flow following Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2012). This method
is analogous to a two-stage least squares method, where the first stage is a linear probability model
of the probability a firm is a target.

       We use this second approach as there is the concern that the previous lagged industry acquisition
activity may itself be caused by something fundamental that is driving both industry acquisition
activity and R&D. For example, if demand shocks are persistent they may aﬀect both the prob-
ability of a merger (historically) and may continue to aﬀect the demand for the product.                       The
IV approach combined with the industry lagged fundamentals gives us additional confidence in our
results and conclusions.

       The unexpected mutual flow variable captures the pricing pressure from changes in mutual
fund holdings that are caused by redemptions that induces the mutual fund to sell stocks. This
unexpected mutual fund flow has been shown to have persistent valuation eﬀects that extend up to
24 months by Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2012).                It is likely to be exogenous to fundamentals
but may impact acquisition likelihood through a firm’s discount from fundamentals as it captures
deviations from predicted valuation that are caused by investors redeeming mutual fund shares that
subsequently cause the mutual funds to sell stocks.             The mutual fund flow instrument has been
used successfully recently by Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2012) as an exogenous instrument that
aﬀects firm’s acquisition probability through the discount or valuation channel.                  We test in the
next section whether the eﬀect of this variable aﬀects firm R&D only through the probability of an
acquisition and find that this is indeed the case.25

       We estimate the regression using an instrumental variable approach (see command ivreg2 in
Stata). In unreported results we also used a two-step generalized method of moments (GMM) ap-
proach and obtained similar results. Standard errors are estimated that allow for heteroskedasticity
and industry-year clustering of the errors. While we use a single-equation instrumental variable ap-
proach, for general interest and to motivate the other control variables for the R&D regression, we
  25
    Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2009) show that Mﬄow only aﬀects takeovers indirectly, through its eﬀect on
firm valuation. It is still a valid instrument for our purpose as long as it is exogenous to fundamentals but aﬀects
takeover probability either directly or indirectly.



                                                        26
also the results of the first-stage target prediction model using a linear probability model.      The
variables used in this target prediction model include variables motivated by Ambrose and Meggin-
son (1992), Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), and Harford (2005) as well as the mutual fund flow
instruments excluded from the R&D regressions.

3.2.4 Control Variables
   The firm-specific control variables included in both the target prediction regression and the
R&D regressions follow the basic specification of Ambrose and Megginson (1992) and Harford
(2005).    We lag these variables one period.      These control variables include Log(Cash/Sales),
which is the natural log of the ratio of cash to sales, NWCNA, which is net working capital divided
by sales. Tangibility, which is the proportion of tangible assets, and P-E ratio which is the price-to-
earnings ratio. The institutional ownership variable follows Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2009).
Institutional ownership is the percentage of stock owned by institutional investors.

   We also include an economy-wide variable to the supply of capital. We use the spread between
the rate on Commercial & Industrial (C&I) loans and the Fed Funds rate as a measure for aggregate
liquidity following Harford (2005). Lown et al. (2000) find that this spread is strongly correlated
with the tightening of liquidity measured from Federal Reserve Senior Loan Oﬃcer (SLO) survey.
We also control for industry competition and firm misvaluation or unexplained valuation.           Our
measure of industry competition is based on the Census Herfindahls as updated and extended to
non-manufacturing industries by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). The variable “compete” is equal
to one minus the Herfindahl index. We also examine if our results are robust to the text-based
industry concentration measure developed in Hoberg and Phillips (2010b). This later measure is
only available for years 1997 onwards and thus these results are only available for a subset of our
sample period.

   In addition, several authors have also recently argued that a significant fraction of merger activity
of public firms can be explained by misvaluation or unexplained valuation. For example, Rhodes-
Kropf, Robinson and Viswanathan (2005) (RKRV) argue that while economic shocks might be
fundamental determinants of merger activity, misvaluation by public markets may determine who
buys whom and how mergers are clustered in time. We adopt a variant of the RKRV measure of
firm- and industry-specific unexplained valuation and check whether the addition of this variable
aﬀects our findings. We label this variable in our tables UV, RKRV to indicate that it is unexplained


                                                  27
valuation based on the RKRV model.            To calculate the measures of unexplained valuation, we use
model (3) from RKRV, as updated by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a).26 First, we regress log market
value of equity on log book value of equity, net income, an indicator for negative net income and
leverage ratio by industry using a historical lagged 10-year rolling window. Following Hoberg and
Phillips, we use only lagged data in the calculation of these coeﬃcients to avoid any look ahead
bias. Then, we use the estimated industry-specific regression coeﬃcients to compute the predicted
market value of equity assuming that a firm’s market value at time t is a function of its current
characteristics and the industry specific value of characteristics estimated from past years.                 The
unexplained valuation measure is then the diﬀerence between the actual valuation and the predicted
valuation both at time t. For robustness we also calculate a second unexplained valuation measure
using the valuation model from the Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (PV), model 1, as described in
Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). In our tables this variable is reported as UV, PV. Firm-level UV,
PV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed based on the PV model. Firm-level UV,
RKRV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed based on the Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson,
and Viswanathan (RKRV) model. Industry-level UV, RKRV and Industry-level UV, PV are the
industry-level unexplained valuation variables based on RKRV and PV respectively.27

3.3 Summary Statistics
       Table 2 presents summary statistics for our sample of Compustat Firms.


                                              Insert Table 2 here


       Our demand variables are presented in the first group.                We present the detrended annual
percentage change (Vdshock) in the downstream industry and also its discretized version (Vexpand).
We study the eﬀect of both demand shock variables in our regressions

       The second group of variables represent measures of the liquidity in the market for mergers.
Industry M&A Activity is the asset liquidity measure capturing the value of M&A activity in
the industry, while.          Inside Industry M&A is the value of M&A activity involving acquirers
  26
    As discussed by Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005), the key to investigating these eﬀects is
obtaining a good measure of misvaluation. Just using reported Tobin’s q cannot distinguish fundamental value from
potential misvaluation. Measures of misvaluation are of necessity valuation anomalies relative to a model of market
expectations. While intended to measure misvaluation they may also pick up the market’s expectation of future
performance.
  27
       In our sample correlation between the PV and RKRV measures is 0.93.

                                                        28
from the same industry. Outside Industry M&A is the value of M&A activity involving acquirers
operating outside the industry. Cum. Abn. announcement return is industry-level mean abnormal
announcement returns to acquisition targets in the previous year.

   The third group of variables is our unexplained valuation variables which may capture either
unexplained future growth prospects or misvaluation. The last group of variables is our ownership
and the instruments for the target instrumental variable regression, unexpected mutual fund flow,
from Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2009).


4 Firm R&D Multivariate Results
4.1 R&D and Industry M&A Activity
   We now turn to our main results where we examine firm level R&D. We examine R&D scaled
by sales. We examine whether industry merger activity aﬀects firm R&D.          We include variables
capturing size, demand changes and also variables capturing both the liquidity and competitiveness
of industries. We test the predictions outlined earlier in section 2 from the model. We examine two
diﬀerent demand shock variables, “Vexpand” in Panel A and“Vdshock” in Panel B.           We interact
these demand variable with firm size to test Prediction 2 and Prediction 3.


                                         Insert Table 3 here


   Table 3 presents results for inside industry M&A activity. Panel A presents results for Vexpand
and Panel B presents results for Vdshock. Table 3, Panel A shows that R&D increases with demand
but less so for large firms as evident by the negative coeﬃcient on the demand shock variable
interacted with size.   Thus small firms’ R&D is more sensitive to demand. The results in Panel
B also show overall similar results.

   The table also shows that M&A activity increases firm R&D in several ways.           Inspection of
the results reveals that the value of M&A activity increases firm R&D as shown by the positive
coeﬃcients on the inside industry M&A activity measure in the regression specifications. We also
find the interaction variable of inside industry M&A activity variable with size is negatively related
to firm R&D. Thus, large firms increase their R&D less than small firms in industries with high
acquisition activity.   These results are consistent with our Prediction 5 that greater bargaining
power increases firm R&D and in particular for small firms.

                                                 29
   We also examine outside industry M&A purchasing activity. In this case the we sum the value
of all M&A activity when the acquirer is outside the target’s 3 digit SIC code.         We find that
outside M&A activity does not significantly impact R&D, consistent with targets getting lower
premiums from outside industry purchasers and thus facing lower incentive eﬀects. The coeﬃcients
are significantly lower than those for inside M&A activity.      In the interest of space we do not
present these results for outside industry M&A purchasing activity.

   The much stronger, significant results for inside industry M&A activity are consistent with firms
looking to competitor inside-industry firms as potential acquirers when they evaluate the payoﬀs of
conducting R&D. The overall results are consistent with Shleifer and Vishny (1992) where inside
industry acquirers are willing to pay more for competitor firms. and with increased competition
from potential buyers leading small firms to invest more in R&D.

   Our final test is to examine Prediction 6 that product market competition increases firm R&D
and more so for small firms. We test this prediction by including the variable “Compete” and then
interact it with firm size. We find that product market competition increases firm R&D but less
so for large firms. The intuition is that firms have to do more R&D to stay current in competitive
industries and that small firms incentive to increase R&D is particular large - either because they
can sell out to larger firms or it enables them to survive in the longer run.

   The results in Table 3 are economically significant. For example, a one standard deviation de-
crease in Size (log of net assets) results in an increase in the R&D-to-Sales ratio by 25.9 percentage
points (0.259). Increasing Inside industry M&A Activity by one standard deviation leads 8.1 per-
centage points more R&D per dollar of sales. Also, firms spend 24.8 percentage points less (.248) on
R&D in times of economic expansions (Vexpand = 1) than in times when industries are contracting
(Vexpand = 0).

   Table 4 extends these results of Table 3 by examining an alternative to the industry asset
liquidity variable and to test Prediction 5 that the bargaining power of target firms increases firm
R&D. We examine the average cumulative abnormal returns to acquisition announcements in the
previous year by other target firms in the same 3 digit SIC code industry.

   The rationale is that abnormal announcement returns to past industry targets are likely to be
related to the expected return a target will get if they receive a takeover oﬀer. The returns are
likely to be correlated with the probability a firm is a target and we thus do not include other M&A


                                                 30
activity variables in this regression.    The idea is that following periods of high abnormal returns
to other firm’s acquisition announcements in their industries, target shareholders may naturally
anticipate high returns to their firms and higher bargaining power in the event of an acquisition.
This anticipation may encourage potential target firms to intensify their R&D programs in an eﬀort
to create a successful innovation and attract potential bidders.


                                           Insert Table 4 here


   Inspection of Table 4 shows that we find strong support for Prediction 5. The bargaining power
of target firms strongly increases firm R&D as shown by the significant positive coeﬃcients on the
lagged cumulative abnormal returns (lagCARsic).          The table also shows that this eﬀect is larger
for smaller firms as the coeﬃcient on the interaction variable of “lagCARsic” with firm size is
negative. Overall this table supports the conclusion that small firms’ R&D increases strongly when
their bargaining power in acquisitions increases.

4.2 R&D and The Probability of Being a Target
   In this section, when examining R&D, instead of variables capturing industry M&A activity, we
compute a firm specific measure of the probability a firm is a target. As discussed earlier, there is a
potential identification problem given a firm’s predicted probability of being a target and its R&D
may respond to the same demand changes. We thus reexamine our results using as an instrument
unexpected mutual fund redemption flow, Mﬄow, for an indicator variable “target” thus capturing
the predicted probability of being a target in the R&D regression         The assumption is that the
instrument, the unexpected mutual flow variable, only aﬀects R&D through the channel of aﬀecting
a firm’s probability of being a target.

   In this section, given general interest, we first report the results of the first stage regression
where we predict mergers and acquisitions.       We report several diﬀerent specifications.     For all
specifications, the dependent variable equals one if the firm was a target in an acquisition attempt
in a given year and zero otherwise. In Table 5, we estimate a linear probability model to predict the
probability of being a target given we include interaction variables. We also use both fundamental
demand and supply variables and other lagged firm-specific variables, Log(Cash/Sales), NWC, which
is net working capital divided by sales, Tangibility, P-E ratio, following the basic specification of
Ambrose and Megginson (1992) and Harford (2005). In the last two specifications we include the

                                                    31
unexpected mutual fund flow, Mﬄow.28


                                              Insert Table 5 here


       Table 5 shows that coeﬃcients of most variables have the expected signs. The coeﬃcient for
Vdshock is positive and marginally significant in regressions with no year dummies. Vdshock is an
annual measure, so inclusion of year dummies makes it insignificant. Size is positively related to
the probability of being taken over, however, size interacted with demand shock is negative - small
firms have a relatively higher probability of acquisition at high industry demand states.

       Columns 1 and 2 use the unexpected valuation from RKRV and columns 3 through 6 use the
unexpected valuation measures based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) paper, model 1, as adapted by
Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). Industry-level unexplained valuation is positive throughout perhaps
reflecting industries that are viewed as having positive future cash flows or that industries that
are more positively “misvalued” may have higher acquisition intensity. However, within industries,
firm-level unexplained valuation is negative, as acquirers target relatively undervalued firms. These
facts are consistent with RKRV and also Maksimovic and Phillips (2001). Lastly, the coeﬃcient on
C&I spread is negative as expected, as low spreads make debt capital very accessible.

       With respect to our controls, the coeﬃcient on institutional ownership for all specifications is
positive, consistent with institutional owners facilitating acquisitions, and the evidence in Ferreira,
Massa, and Matos (2010). In columns 5 and 6 we report the results that include our instrument,
unexpected mutual fund redemption flow. Unexpected mutual fund redemption flow, Mﬄow, is
positive and significantly related to the probability of an acquisition.

       We now present the regression for firm R&D with the merger target dummy variable that is
instrumented with, Mﬄow and its squared value.                 We also include all control variables.           We
estimate the model using a single-equation instrumental variable estimator allowing for the target
indicator variable to be endogenous. All models are estimated allowing for robust standard errors
with industry, year clustering.


                                              Insert Table 6 here
  28
    We also estimate the IV model using a probit model as the first stage. These results are presented as Tables 3
and 4 of the online appendix. Angrist and Krueger (2001) (p. 80) note serious potential concerns with the probit
2-stage model and as such we rely on the linear probability model. The misspecification worry is that the errors are
not normal.

                                                        32
   Table 6 presents the results using the excluded mutual fund flow instrument, Mﬄow.              The
control variables include all control variables that we use in the previous linear probability target
model of the previous table. The results for all specifications show that firms invest more in R&D
when the predicted probability of being acquired is higher. Firms also invest more in R&D when
there are positive demand realizations, particularly so for small firms. Firms also invest more in
R&D in more competitive industries but less for large firms. The interaction variables with firm size
show that the eﬀects are stronger for small firms than for large firms as the size interaction variables
are negative and significant. Results in table 6 show that takeover probability has an economically
significant eﬀect on firms’ R&D. Thus, a 10 percentage point increase in the probability of being
taken over results in 35.3 to 38.9 percentage points (0.353 in column 1, to 0.389 in column 2) more
R&D expenditures per dollar of sales.

   In Table 7, instead of the Census Herfindahl-based competition measure, we estimate the regres-
sion using the text-based industry concentration measures developed in Hoberg and Phillips (2011).
We use their text-based network variable classification - similar to a Facebook circle of friends -
where each firm has its own distinct set of competitors. Thus each firm has its own firm specific
Herfindahl. This measure is only available since 1997, so we use it for the subsample starting in
1997 (resulting in a loss of observations) and we also extrapolate it over the whole sample using the
1997 value for earlier years.

   Table 7 shows that results are similar to those presented in Table 6 across our target prediction
dummy, with text-based concentration measures being more significant and precise than the Census
Herfindahls used in Table 6 for all regression specifications. Table 7 shows that R&D increases with
product market competition, but less so for large firms in all specifications.    The product-market
competition eﬀect is largest for the HP text-based network industry (TNIC) Herfindahl, consistent
with this measure capturing competition that is localized around each firm.

   Overall the results are similar to the previous results that show that industry M&A activity is
correlated with R&D. Firms invest more in R&D when the market for acquisitions is stronger as the
acquisition market presents an additional way for firms to monetize their investment.       Results are
stronger in competitive markets as firms are more likely to find a buyer in more competitive markets.
The results are also consistent with acquirers buying other firms to diﬀerentiate themselves from
their competition and to potentially reduce the competition they face.



                                                  33
5 Conclusions
   In this paper we examine how merger and acquisition activity and competition aﬀect the decision
to conduct R&D and innovate. Our illustrative model and empirical tests show that the acquisition
market impacts the decision to conduct R&D. We model the incentives for large and small firms
to conduct R&D based on their size, the gains of commercialization and the potential for firms to
merge or acquire other firms post innovation.       Our model shows that large firms optimally may
decide to let small firms conduct R&D and innovate and then subsequently acquire these small
innovative companies.       Unlike small firms, large firms may find it disadvantageous to engage in
an “R&D race” with small firms at intermediate states of demand, as they can obtain access to
innovation by acquiring small innovate firms.

   Our results show that the possibility of an acquisition amplifies the potential gains from innova-
tion - particularly so for smaller firms.   We show that firms’ incentives to conduct R&D to innovate
increase with industry acquisition activity and more so for small firms than large firms. R&D also
varies positively with industry demand and also expected probability a firm is an acquisition target.
Both of these eﬀects are stronger for small firms than for large firms.

   We also show that greater bargaining power of small firms, captured by the past target excess
returns on acquisition announcements, and higher inside asset liquidity in the M&A market lead
to more investment in R&D by small firms.         Having the ability to capture a greater fraction of
the acquisition surplus gives incentives for firms to increase their investment in R&D to increase
the odds of being acquired. Lastly we show that market structure and competition are important.
Increased competition leads to more R&D by firms but less so for large firms.

   We conclude that merger and acquisition activity strongly increases firms’ incentives to conduct
R&D, but less so for large firms as they may buy smaller firms for their technology and use it in their
existing business. Competition also increases incentives for firms to conduct R&D and especially
so again for small firms.




                                                   34
References
Aghion, Phillipe, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃn, and Peter Howitt, 2002, Com-
    petition and Innovation: An Inverted U-shaped Relationship, Harvard University working
    paper.

Aghion, Phillipe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, 2001, Competition, Imita-
    tion and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation, Review of Economic Studies, 68, 467-492.

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Askenazy, Nicolas Berman, Gilbert Cette, and Laurent Eymard, 2008,
    Credit Constraints and the Cyclicality of R&D Investment: Evidence from France, Harvard
    University working paper.

Brent W. Ambrose and William L. Megginson, 1992, The Role of Asset Structure, Ownership
    Structure, and Takeover Defenses in Determining Acquisition Likelihood, Journal of Financial
    and Quantitative Analysis, 27, 4, 575-589.

Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell and Erik Staﬀord, 2001, New Evidence and Perspective on Merg-
   ers, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103-120.

Atanassov, Julian, 2009, Do Hostile Takeovers Stifle Innovation? Evidence from Antitakeover
    Legislation and Corporate Patenting, University of Oregon working paper.

Baily, Martin and Hans Gersbach, 1995, Eﬃciency in Manufacturing and the Need for Global
     Competition, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Macroeconomics, 307-347.

Barlevy, Gadi, 2007, On the Cyclicality of Research and Development, American Economic Review,
    97(4), 1131—1164.

Bernile, Gennaro, Evgeny Lyandres and Alexei Zhdanov, 2012, A Theory of Strategic Mergers,
    Review of Finance, 16, 517-575.

Blundell, Richard, Rachel Griﬃn, and John Van Reenen, 1999, Market Share, Market Value and
    Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms, Review of Economic Studies, 66, 529-
    554.

Chemmanur, Thomas and Xuan Tian, 2010, Do Anti-Takeover Provisions Spur Corporate Inno-
   vation? Boston College working paper.

Comin, Diego and Mark Gertler, 2006, Medium Term Business Cycles, American Economic Review
   ,96, 523—551

Dasgupta, Partha and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, Industrial Structure and the Nature of Innovative
    Activity, Economic Journal, 90, 266-293.

Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012, The Real Eﬀects of Financial Markets: The
   Impact of Prices on Takeovers, Journal of Finance, 67(3), 933-971.

Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, 2006, Capital Reallocation and Liquidity, Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 53, 369-399.



                                              35
Ferreira, Miguel, Massimo Massa and Pedro Matos, 2010, Shareholders at the Gate? Institutional
    Investors and Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 601-
    644.

Francois, Patrick and Huw Lloyd-Ellis, 2009, Schumpeterian cycles with pro-cyclical R&D, Review
    of Economic Dynamics, 12, 567-591.

Fulghieri, Paolo and Merih Sevilir, 2009, Organization and Financing of Innovation, and the Choice
    between Corporate and Independent Venture Capital, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis, 44, 6, 1291-1321

Fulghieri, Paolo and Merih Sevilir, 2011, Mergers, Spin-Oﬀs, and Employee Incentives, Review of
    Financial Studies, 24, 2207-2241.

Gaudet, Gerard and Stephen Salant, 1992. Towards a Theory of Horizontal Mergers. In: Norman,
   G., La Manna, M. (Eds.), The New Industrial Economics. Edward Elgar, Brookfield, VT.,
   USA, 1992.

Hall, Bronwyn H., 1999, Mergers and R&D Revisited, University of California at Berkeley working
     paper.

Harford, Jarrad, 2005, What Drives Merger Waves, Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 529-560.

Hoberg, Gerard and Gordon Phillips, 2010a, Real and Financial Industry Booms and Busts, Jour-
   nal of Finance, 65, 45-86.

–, 2010b, Product Market Synergies and Competition in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-
   Based Analysis, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 3773-3811.

–, 2011, Dynamic Product-Based Industry Classifications and Endogenous Product Diﬀerentia-
    tion, working paper University of Maryland.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau, 2002, The Q-Theory Of Mergers, American Economic
   Review, 2002, 92, 198-204.

Lambrecht, Bart, 2004, The Timing and Terms of Takeovers Motivated by Economies of Scale,
   Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 41-62.

Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages
   in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are there Eﬃciency Gains, Journal of Finance, 56, 2019-2065.

Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon Phillips, 2008, The Industry Life-Cycle, Acquisitions and In-
   vestment: Does Firm Organization Matter? Journal of Finance, 63, 629-64.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Phillips and Liu Yang, 2012, Public and Private Merger Waves,
   forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.

Mitchell, Mark and Harold Mulherin, 1996, The Impact of Industry Shocks on Takeover and
    Restructuring Activity, Journal of Financial Economics, 41, 193-229.

Moeller, Sara, Frederik Schlingemann and René Stulz, 2004, Firm Size and the Gains from Acqui-
   sitions, Journal of Financial Economics, 73, 201-228.


                                               36
Morck, Randall & Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W, 1990.Do Managerial Objectives Drive
   Bad Acquisitions?, Journal of Finance, 45(1), 31-48.

Morellec, Erwan and Alexei Zhdanov, 2005, The Dynamics of Mergers and Acquisitions, Journal
   of Financial Economics 77, 649-72.

Ortiz-Molina, Hernan, and Gordon Phillips, 2010, Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital, Uni-
    versity of Maryland working paper.

Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Technological revolutions and stock prices, American
    Economic Review, 99, 1451—1463

Perry, Martin and Robert Porter, 1985, Oligopoly and the Incentive for Horizontal Merger, Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 75, 219-227.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew and S. Viswanathan, 2004, Market Valuation and Merger Waves, Journal
   of Finance, 59, 2685-2718.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David Robinson and S. Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation Waves and Merger
   Activity: the Empirical Evidence, Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 561-603.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew & David T. Robinson, 2008. The Market for Mergers and the Boundaries
   of the Firm, Journal of Finance, 63(3), 1169-1211

Salant, Stephen, Sheldon Switzer and Robert Reynolds, 1983, Losses from Horizontal Merger:
    the Eﬀects of an Exogenous Change in Industry Structure on Cournot-Nash Equilibrium,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 185-199.

Stephen J. Nickell, 1996, Competition and Corporate Performance, The Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 104, 724-746.

Schlingemann, Frederik P., René M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2002, Divestitures and the
     liquidity of the market for corporate assets, Journal of Financial Economics, 64, 117-144.

Schwert, William, 2000, Hostility in Takeovers: In the Eyes of the Beholder, Journal of Finance,
    55, 2599-2640.

Seru, Amit, 2010, Firm Boundaries Matter: Evidence from Conglomerates and R&D Activity,
    forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 2003, Stock Market Driven Acquisitions, Journal of Financial
     Economics, 70, 295-311.

Vives, Xavier, 2000, Oligopoly Pricing — Old Ideas and New Tools, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Vives, Xavier, 2008, Innovation and Competitive Pressure, Journal of Industrial Economics, 56,
    419-469.

Zhou, Wen, 2008, Endogenous Horizontal Mergers under Cost Uncertainty, 2008, International
    Journal of Industrial Organization, 26, 903-912.




                                              37
Figure 1. Sequence of events This figure presents the sequence of events and the nature of the game.
Initially, firms observe a realization of the demand shock and decide whether or not they want to invest in
R&D. Competition in R&D then results in each participating firm developing innovation with probability
1
n
  . The larger firm then decides whether or not to acquire a smaller one (regardless of which firm, if any,
has developed innovation). Finally, equilibrium profits are earned by the firms.




          Firms that invested                     The bigger firm decides
          in R&D develop innovation               whether to acquire a
          with probability 1/n                    smaller one




     Demand shock x                                                 Firms compete in the
     is realized.                                                   product markets, equilibrium
     Firms decide                                                   profits are collected
     whether to
     invest in R&D




                                                    38
Figure 2. Equilibrium profits - 2 firms, no acquisition possible
This figure presents the equilibrium profit of a firm as a function of its “innovation parameter” α, the
capital ratio of the firms K1 /K2 , and the degree of product diﬀerentiation, γ, for the following set of input
parameters: K1 = 10, K2 = 1, γ = 0.5, α1 = 10, α2 = 10. For each graph we compute the profits with
these values but vary one of them as indicated on the x-axis. Consistent with intuition, equilibrium profit
of one firm increases in its own innovation parameter αi , and decreases with its product substitutability
γ, its rival’s capitalization Kj , and its innovation parameter αj .




                                                      39
Figure 3. Equilibrium strategies - two firms, no acquisition possible
This figure presents the equilibrium investment thresholds of the two firms in the case when an acquisition is
precluded, as functions of the innovation parameter α0 . The set of input parameters is as follows: K1 = 10,
K2 = 1, γ = 0.5, α1 = α2 = 10, α0 = 15, RD1 = RD2 = 15. No firm invests in region I, only the big firm
invests in region II, both firms invest in region III. Regions I and II are separated by x1 , regions II and III
are separated by x3




                                                      40
Figure 4. Equilibrium strategies - two firms, an acquisition is possible
This figure presents the equilibrium investment thresholds of the two firms in the case when an acquisition
is possible, as functions of the innovation parameter α0 . The set of input parameters is as in figure 3. In
addition, the relative bargaining power of target is assumed to be zero (η = 0). At low states of the demand
shock x both firms prefer not to invest in R&D (Region I). In region II only the big firm invests. In region
III there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria (small firm invests , big firm does not) and (big firm invests,
small firm does not) and a mixed-strategy equilibrium in which the small firm invests with probability φ2
and the big firm invests with probability φ1 . φ2 and φ1 are determined in the appendix. Both firms invest
in region IV.




                                                      41
Figure 5. Acquisition thresholds This figure presents the equilibrium acquisition strategy as a func-
tion of the demand shock x and the takeover cost Im . The set of input parameters is as in figure 3. Above
the higher boundary (Region III), an acquisition occurs with certainty. Between the lower and the upper
thresholds (Region II), an acquisition is optimal only if the small firm obtains the innovation. Below the
lower threshold (Region I) acquisition never occurs. Thus, the probability of an acquisition is positively
related to the state of the demand shock x and acquisitions are procyclical.




                                                   42
Figure 6. Equilibrium strategies - 2 firms, with target bargaining power Figure 6 presents the
equilibrium investment thresholds of the two firms in the case when an acquisition is possible, as functions
of the innovation parameter α0 . The set of input parameters is as follows: K1 = 10, K2 = 1, γ = 0.5,
α1 = α2 = 10, α0 = 15, RD1 = RD2 = 15. In addition, the relative bargaining power of target shareholders
η = 0.5. In region II only the big firm invests. In region III there are three Nash equilibria - two pure
strategy ones (small firm invests, the big firm does not) and (big firm invests, small firm does not) and a
mixed-strategy equilibrium. Both firms invest in region IV. It follows from comparing with figure 4 that
greater bargaining power of the potential target (small firm) increases its innovation incentives.




                                                    43
Appendix


1. Equilibrium profit functions

 One small firm, no acquisition: equilibrium profits The inverse demand functions (5) and (6)
are linear in prices. We then substitute these functions into profit functions (4) , diﬀerentiate with respect
to prices (firms maximize their profits by setting prices competitively), set the derivatives equal to zero,
and solve the resulting system of equations. This produces equilibrium prices:
                         ¡      ¡        ¢ ¢¡                ¡       ¡        ¢ ¢¢ √
                     p1 = −2 + −1 + γ 2 K1 α2 γK2 + α1 −2 + −2 + γ 2 K2 κ x,
                         ¡      ¡        ¢ ¢¡                ¡       ¡        ¢ ¢¢ √
                     p2 = −2 + −1 + γ 2 K2 α1 γK1 + α1 −2 + −2 + γ 2 K1 κ x,


   where               £     ¡        ¢       ¡                                    ¢¤−2
                    κ = 4 − 2 −2 + γ 2 K2 + K1 γ 4 K2 + 4(1 + K2 ) − γ 2 (2 + 5K2 )


   We then substitute equilibrium prices into inverse demand functions (5) and (6) to get equilibrium
quantities, then into profit functions (4) to obtain profits.
   The equilibrium profits of the two firms are given by:

                     π 1 (α1 , α2 ) = xκK1 (1 + (1 − γ 2 )K1 )(α2 γK2 + α1 ((γ 2 − 2)K2 − 2))2 ,

                     π 2 (α1 , α2 ) = xκK2 (1 + (1 − γ 2 )K2 )(α1 γK1 + α2 ((γ 2 − 2)K1 − 2))2 .



 The profit of the merged firm The profit of the merged firm is obtained by optimizing over the
product prices and is given by

                                           α2m x [−2γK 1 K2 +(1 + K 1 )K 2 +(1 + K 2 )K 1 ]
                          π m (x, αm ) =                                                    ,                 (7)
                                                 −4(1 + K 2 ) + 4K 1 ((γ 2 −1)K 2 −1)

where αm = α0 if the merged entity commercializes innovation and αm = α otherwise.


 Two small firms, equilibrium profits For ease of exposition we assume α1 = α2 = α3 = α. When
there are two small firms the profit functions are computed analogously to the case with one small firm
and are given by (for K1 = 10, K2 = 1) :

                   π 1 (α, α, α) = −5α2 x(1 + γ)(4 − 3(−1 + γ)γ)2 (−11 + γ(−11 + 20γ))κ1 ,

                   π 2 (α, α, α) = π 3 (α, α, α) = −2α2 x(11 + 3(2 − 5γ)γ)2 (−1 − 2γ + γ 3 )κ1 ,
where
                                      κ1 = (44 − 3γ(−33 + γ(2 + 27γ)))−2
if neither firm innovates;

           π 1 (α0 , α, α) = 5x(1 + γ)(−11 + γ(−11 + 20γ))(2αγ(1 + γ) + α0 (−4 + (−5 + γ)γ))2 κ1 ,

        π 2 (α0 , α, α) = π 3 (α0 , α, α) = −2x(−1 − 2γ + γ 3 )(5α0 γ(1 + γ) + α(−11 + γ(−11 + 10γ)))2 κ1 ,

                                                           44
if the big firm innovates; and

         π 1 (α, α0 , α) = −2.5x(1 + γ)(−11 + γ(−11 + 20γ))(α0 γ(1 + γ) + 2α(−2 + (−2 + γ)γ))2 )κ1 ,

      π 2 (α, α0 , α) = x(αγ(1 + γ)(−31 + 3γ(−7 + 10γ)) + α0 (44 + γ(88 + γ(−23 + 3γ(−24 + 5γ)))))2 κ2 ,
where
                                                      −2(−1 − 2γ + γ 3 )
                                               κ2 =                      κ1
                                                      (4 − 3(−1 + γ)γ)2
                  π 3 (α, α0 , α) = x(11 + 3(2 − 5γ)γ)2 (α0 γ(1 + γ) + 2α(−2 + (−2 + γ)γ))2 κ2 ,
if one small firm (firm 2) innovates.


2. Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1.

   a) Using the profit functions in the appendix,



  π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (NI, N I) =
                            xκK 1 (1 + (1 − γ 2 )K 1 )[(αγK 2 +α0 ((γ 2 −2)K 2 −2))2 −(αγK 2 +α((γ 2 −2)K 2 −2))2 ]

and

  π 1 (N I, N I) − π 1 (N I, I) =
                            xκK 1 (1 + (1 − γ 2 )K 1 )[(αγK 2 +α((γ 2 −2)K 2 −2))2 −(α0 γK 2 +α((γ 2 −2)K 2 −2))2 ]

      It is easy to see that the term (α2 γK 2 +α1 ((γ 2 −2)K 2 −2)) is negative for α1 > α2 and its absolute
value is increasing in α1 and decreasing in α2 . Therefore, because α0 > α, π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, N I) > 0 and
π 1 (N I, N I) − π 1 (N I, I) > 0.

   b) The proof is identical to the proof of a). Replace K1 with K2 .

   c)

  [π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, N I)] − [π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (N I, N I)] =
                       xκ(K 1 −K 2 )(α0 −α)((4 + 3K 2 )(α0 +α) + K 1 (3(α0 +α) + K 2 (2.4375α + 2.1875α0 ) > 0

   d)



  [π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, I)] − [π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (I, NI)] =
                                xκ(K 1 −K 2 )(α02 −α2 )(4(K 2 (1 − γ 2 ) + 1) + K 1 (1 − γ 2 )(4 + (4 − 3γ 2 )K 2 ) > 0

   because K1 −K 2 > 0, α02 −α2 > 0, 4(K 2 (1 − γ 2 ) + 1) > 0, and 4 + (4 − 3γ 2 )K 2 > 0.

   e) Using the profit functions derived above,

                                                             45
     π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (NI, I)
                                   =
  2(π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (N I, N I))
                        ¡      ¡     ¢ ¢¡             ¡          ¡            ¢ ¢¢
                   K1 −1 + −1 + γ 2 K1 4 + K2 8 − 4γ 2 + 4 − 5γ 2 + γ 4 K2 (α + α0 )
   2 (−2 + (−2 + γ 2 ) K1 ) K2 (−1 + (−1 + γ 2 ) K2 ) (−2 (α + α0 ) + K1 (α(−2 + γ(2 + γ)) + (−2 + γ 2 ) α0 ))

For γ = 0.5 and K2 = 1 this expression is equal to

                  π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, I)           3.94643 (1 + 0.75K1 ) K1 (α + α0 )
                                               =
                2(π 2 (NI, I) − π 2 (N I, N I)) (2 + 1.75K1 ) (K1 (0.75α + 1.75α0 ) + 2 (α + α0 ))
Now let us consider the limit
                                      π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, I)     1.6913(α + αi )
                                lim                                 =                 .
                              K1 →∞ 2(π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (N I, N I)) 0.75α + 1.75αi

                       π 1 (I,NI)−π 1 (NI,I)
It follows that lim                            > 1 iﬀ αi < 16.03α. Therefore as long as αi < 16.03α there exists
               K1 →∞ 2(π 2 (NI,I)−π 2 (NI,NI))
μ > 1 such that for K1 /K 2 > μ 2(ππ21(NI,I)−π
                                        (I,NI)−π 1 (NI,I)
                                                2 (NI,NI))
                                                           > 1, because clearly 2(ππ21(NI,I)−π
                                                                                       (I,NI)−π 1 (NI,I)
                                                                                               2 (NI,NI))
                                                                                                          is a continu-
ous function of K1 .
    f) If γ = 0.5 and K2 = 1 then

          2(π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, N I))   0.203175(4/3 + K1 )(21.0938α2i − 5.625ααi − 15.4688α2 )
                                           =
            π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (I, N I)                  (k1 + 8/9)(k1 + 1.6)(α2i − α2 )
                                                4.2856α2i −1.1429ααi −3.1419α2
The limit of this expression for K1 → ∞ is                   α2i −α2
                                                                                 > 1 for αi > α.

    g) Consider the quantity π 2 (N I, I) − 2π 2 (N I, N I) + π 2 (I, NI) =
    xκK 2 (1 + (1 − γ 2 )K 2 )[((α0 −α)((γ 2 −2)K 1 −2)2 +γK 2 )] > 0, where
                       £     ¡        ¢       ¡                                    ¢¤−2
                    κ = 4 − 2 −2 + γ 2 K2 + K1 γ 4 K2 + 4(1 + K2 ) − γ 2 (2 + 5K2 )     .


    ¥
    Proof of Proposition 2.

   1) Let V1,2 (A1 , A2 ) be the value of the big (small firm) as a function of its own actions and those of its
competitor. Then for x < x1

                         V1 (I, N I) = π 1 (I, N I)x − RD; V1 (N I, N I) = π 1 (N I, N I)x

It follows that for x < x1 V1 (I, N I) < V1 (N I, N I). It also follows from lemma 1 (c) that V2 (N I, I) <
V2 (N I, NI). Then (N I, N I) is the Nash equilibrium for x < x1 , while neither (I, N I) nor (N I, I) is
an equilibrium in this region. Furthermore, the value of the small firm if both firms invest V2 (I, I) =
0.5[(π 2 (I, N I) + π 2 (I, N I)]x − RD, while V2 (I, N I) = π 2 (I, N I)x, so for x < x3 (I, I) is not a Nash
equilibrium. Lemma 1 f) establishes that x1 < x3 , therefore, the only Nash equilibrium for x < x1 is
(N I, NI).
    2) If x1 < x < x3 then (I, N I) is a Nash equilibrium. Indeed V1 (N I, N I) < V1 (I, N I) for x1 < x, and
V2 (I, I) < V2 (I, N I) for x < x3 . It follows that neither (I, I) nor (N I, N I) is an equilibrium. (N I, I) is
not an equilibrium either as long as condition e) of Lemma 1 holds: it is straightforward to see that for

                                                          46
x > x4 V1 (N I, I) < V1 (I, I). Thus, (I, N I) is the only Nash equilibrium in this region.
    3) Finally for x > x3 it becomes optimal for the small firm to invest as well. In this region

                                   (π 2 (N I, I) + π 2 (I, N I)) x
                     V2 (I, I) =                                   − RD; V2 (I, N I) = π 2 (I, N I)x
                                                  2
so V2 (I, I) > V2 (I, N I). On the other hand, V1 (I, I) > V1 (N I, I) for x > x3 > x4 (Lemma 1 d) establishes
that x3 > x4 ). It is also straightforward to see that (N I, N I) is not an equilibrium for x > x1 and Lemma
1 f) ensures that x3 > x1 . Therefore, (I, I) is the only Nash equilibrium in this region.¥

    Proof of Proposition 3.

    Note that a merger always results in increased market power, so if Im = 0 a merger always occurs.
Also note that condition π 2 (N I, I) − π 2 (NI, N I) > π 2 (N I, N I) − π 2 (I, N I) implies that x2 < x3 . Then
for x < x1m

            V1 (I, N I) = (π m (I) − π 2 (I, N I))x − RD; V1 (N I, N I) = (π m (N I) − π 2 (NI, N I))x

Therefore V1 (I, N I) < V1 (NI, N I). On the other hand, π m (I) − π m (NI) > 0 and therefore

                  π m (I) − π m (NI) + π 2 (N I, N I) − π 2 (I, N I) > π 2 (N I, N I) − π 2 (I, N I)

It follows that x1m < x2 and for x < x1m V2 (N I, N I) > V2 (N I, I). It follows that (N I, N I) is a Nash
equilibrium while neither (I, N I) nor (N I, I) is an equilibrium. Furthermore, because π m (I) − π m (N I) >
π 1 (I, N I) − π 1 (N I, N I), it follows that x1m < x1 < x3 (Lemma 1 f), and V2 (I, N I) > V2 (I, I), so (I, I) is
not a Nash equilibrium.
    For x1m < x < x2 the only Nash equilibrium is (I, NI). Indeed, in this region V2 (N I, N I) >
V2 (N I, I) > V2 (I, I) and the small firm never invests in this region, while the big firm invests as V1 (I, N I) >
V1 (N I, NI).
    For x2 < x < x3 the following inequalities hold: V1 (I, N I) > V1 (N I, N I); V1 (I, I) < V1 (N I, I);
V2 (I, N I) > V2 (I, I); V2 (N I, I) > V2 (N I, N I).
    The first inequality has been proven above for x > x1m . The second results from comparing the values
of the big firm if it invests

                     V1 (I, I) = 0.5(π m (I) − π 2 (I, N I))x + 0.5(π m (I) − π 2 (N I, I))x − RD

and if it does not
                                         V1 (N I, I) = (π m (I) − π 2 (N I, I))x.
The third equation comes from comparing the values of the small firm if it invests:V2 (I, I) = (π2 (NI,I)−π
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                            2 (I,NI))x
                                                                                                                       −
RD and if it does not: V2 (I, N I) = π 2 (I, N I)x, the fourth equation has been proven above.
    Therefore, both (I, N I) and (N I, I) are Nash equilibria. In addition there is a mixed strategy equilib-
rium in which the big firm invests with probability φ1 and the small firm invests with probability φ2 . To
find these probabilities note that in this equilibrium both firms must be indiﬀerent between investing and
not. Therefore,

                     φ1 V2 (I, I) + (1 − φ1 )V2 (N I, I) = φ1 V2 (I, N I) + (1 − φ1 )V2 (NI, N I)

and
                     φ2 V1 (I, I) + (1 − φ2 )V1 (I, N I) = φ2 V1 (N I, I) + (1 − φ2 )V1 (NI, N I)


                                                            47
or
                                                 V2 (N I, N I) − V2 (N I, I)
                             φ1 =
                                    V2 (I, I) − V2 (N I, I) − V2 (I, N I) + V2 (N I, N I)
and
                                                 V1 (N I, N I) − V1 (I, N I)
                             φ2 =
                                    V1 (I, I) − V1 (N I, I) − V1 (I, N I) + V1 (N I, N I)
It is straightforward to see that 0 < φ1 < 1 and 0 < φ2 < 1 so the mixed-strategy equilibrium always
exists.
   Finally for x > x3 V1 (I, I) > V1 (N I, I) and V2 (I, N I) < V2 (I, I) and therefore (I, I) is the only Nash
Equilibrium.¥


     Proof of Proposition 5.

     First consider the case x1η < x2η . Consider the values of the big firm:

                 V1 (I, N I) = π 1 (I, N I)x + (1 − η)(π m (I) − π 1 (I, N I) − π 2 (I, N I))x − RD

and
               V1 (N I, N I) = π 1 (N I, N I)x + (1 − η)(π m (N I) − π 1 (N I, N I) − π 2 (N I, N I))x
It follows that if x < x1η then V1 (N I, N I) > V1 (I, N I). Similarly, the values of the small firm are

                    V2 (N I, I) = π 2 (N I, I)x + η(π m (I) − π 1 (N I, I) − π 2 (N I, I))x − RD

                  V2 (N I, N I) = π 2 (N I, NI)x + η(π m (N I) − π 1 (N I, N I) − π 2 (N I, N I))x
So for x < x1η < x2η V2 (NI, N I) > V2 (N I, I). Finally, because x1η < x2η < x3η , V2 (I, I) < V2 (I, N I) so
neither (N I, I) nor (I, N I) nor (I, I) is an equilibrium.
    If x1η < x < x2η it can be easily verified that V2 (I, N I) > V2 (I, I), V1 (I, N I) > V1 (N I, N I), and
V2 (N I, I) < V2 (N I, N I), so (I, N I) is the only equilibrium in this region. The proof of equilibrium
strategies for x > x2η follows exactly the proof of proposition 3.
    Now consider the case x1η > x2η . Clearly (N I, N I) is the only Nash equilibrium if x < x2η. If x2η <
x < x1η then it is easy to verify that V1 (N I, N I) > V1 (I, NI), V2 (N I, N I) < V2 (N I, I), and V2 (I, I) <
V2 (I, N I). It follows that the only equilibrium in this region is (N I, I). The rest of the proof follows closely
the proof of proposition 3.¥




                                                          48
                          Table 1: R&D and Acquisition summary statistics



Table 1 reports summary statistics for R&D scaled by sales and number of acquisitions by year for diﬀerent
size groups. After assigning firms to size groups by year, we average the rates by year and then average over all
the years in our data. Size is defined as the log of the market equity value.


                                             PANEL A - R&D/Sales
                              Variable                 Mean     Median      Std. Dev.     N
                     R&D/Sales, size < 10%             0.266     0.000        1.716      7348
                     R&D/Sales, 10 % < size < 25%      0.487     0.016        2.793      11018
                     R&D/Sales, 25 % < size < 50%      0.669     0.024        3.125      18381
                     R&D/Sales, 50 % < size < 75%      0.450     0.015        2.324      18381
                     R&D/Sales, 75 % < size < 90%      0.153     0.001        1.063      11019
                     R&D/Sales, 90% < size < 100%      0.056     0.004        0.271      7348




                                          PANEL B - Acquisition rate
                                  Variable                     Mean      Median   Std. Dev.      N
                 Annual acquisition rate, size < 10%           0.162      0.186     0.087        23
                 Annual acquisition rate, 10 % < size < 25%    0.099      0.098       0.026      23
                 Annual acquisition rate, 25 % < size < 50%    0.095      0.097       0.026      23
                 Annual acquisition rate, 50 % < size < 75%    0.086      0.080       0.025      23
                 Annual acquisition rate, 75 % < size < 90%    0.070      0.071       0.034      23
                 Annual acquisition rate, 90% < size < 100%    0.055      0.051       0.028      23




                                                        49
                                          Table 2: Summary statistics

    Table 2 reports summary statistics of the main variables. Vdshock is a de-trended demand shock variable
constructed from the input-output matrix. Vexpand is a discretized version of Vdshock. Industry M&A activity is
the lagged asset liquidity measure constructed based on Schlingemann, Stulz and Walkling (2002). Age is time in
100s of years since the founding year, incorporation year (if founding is missing), or the first year the firm appears
in CRSP tapes (if both founding and incorporation years are missing). Inside Industry M&A is the value of M&A
activity involving acquirers from the same industry. Outside Industry M&A is the value of M&A activity involving
acquirers operating outside the industry. Cum. Abn. announcement return is industry-level mean abnormal target
announcement returns to acquisitions in the previous year. C&I spread is the commercial and industrial loan
spread. Firm-level UV, PV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed from the Pastor and Veronesi (PV)
model. Firm-level UV, RKRV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed from the Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson,
and Viswanathan(RKRV) model. Industry-level UV, RKRV and Industry-level UV, PV are the industry-level
unexplained valuation variables. Inst. Ownership is the percentage of common equity owned by institutional
investors. Mﬄow is the unexpected mutual funds flow variable.


                        Variable               Mean     Median     Std. Dev.    Min.       Max.     N

                                           Demand and supply variables
           Vdshock                             0.050    0.047      0.069        -0.270     0.903    84472
           Vexpand                             0.823    1.000      0.382        0.000      1.000    84472
                                                Liquidity variables
           Industry M&A Activity               0.044    0.185      0.078        0.000      1.840    81060
           Inside industry M&A Activity        0.016    0.005      0.030        0.000      0.214    81060
           Outside industry M&A Activity       0.027    0.009      0.067        0.000      1.840    81060
           C&I spread                          1.597    1.632      0.252        1.160      2.120    81531
           Cum. Abn. announcement return       0.126    0.115      0.152        -0.887     3.715    84472

                                                Valuation variables
           Firm-level UV, RKRV                 0.070    0.063      0.853        -4.795     7.511    58788
           Firm-level UV, PV                   0.069    0.058      0.827        -6.157     13.241   57186
           Industry-level UV, RKRV             0.077    0.109      0.318        -1.652     1.783    77899
           Industry-level UV, PV               0.077    0.111      0.306        -2.102     1.601    77849

                                           Ownership and Instruments
           Inst. Ownership                     20.804   9.829      24.818       0.000      99.995   84472
           Mﬄow                                -1.032   -0.167     2.996        -319.331   0.000    41120




                                                         50
                       Table 3: R&D regressions with inside industry M&A Activity

    Table 3 reports estimates from R&D regressions. The dependent variable is R&D expense scaled by sales
in the previous year. Vdshock is a de-trended demand shock variable constructed from the input-output matrix.
Vexpand is a discretized version of Vdshock. Inside industry M&A Activity is the lagged value of M&A activity
involving acquirers from the same industry averaged over the past three years.          Compete is a measure of
industry concentration equaling one minus the Herfindahl index. Firm-level UV, PV is the firm-level unexplained
computed from the Pastor and Veronesi (PV) model. Industry-level UV, PV is the industry-level unexplained
valuation variable. C&I spread is the commercial and industrial loan spread. Control variables are tangible assets,
cash, and net working capital scaled by sales, price-to-earnings ratio, dividend payment dummy, and institutional
ownership. Standard errors are clustered by industry-year.




                                                      PANEL A


   Independent                                                    Dependent variable -
   Variable                                              R&D expenditures scaled by sales
   Vexpand                        0.350***   0.327***    0.656***      0.537***    0.508***    0.497***    0.454***
                                  (0.100)    (0.096)     (0.135)       (0.123)     (0.128)     (0.131)     (0.126)
   Log(net assets)                           -0.117***   -0.056***     -0.038***   -0.029***   -0.043***   -0.124***
                                             (0.017)     (0.011)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.025)
   Age                                       -0.249***   -0.249***     -0.220***   -0.218***   -0.159***   -0.194***
                                             (0.042)     (0.042)       (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.033)     (0.036)
   Vexpand*Log(net assets)                               -0.075***     -0.063***   -0.055***   -0.055***   -0.052***
                                                         (0.019)       (0.018)     (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.015)
   Inside industry M&A Activity                                        6.825**     6.305**     6.229**     5.065*
                                                                       (2.941)     (2.928)     (2.828)     (2.920)
   Ins M&A * Log(net assets)                                           -0.665**    -0.621**    -0.620**    -0.514**
                                                                       (0.279)     (0.285)     (0.261)     (0.252)
   Compete                                                                                     0.017**     0.113***
                                                                                               (0.007)     (0.027)
   Compete*Log(net assets)                                                                                 -0.016***
                                                                                                           (0.004)
   Firm-level UV, PV                                                               0.141***    0.141***    0.143***
                                                                                   (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.017)
   Industry-level UV, PV                                                           -0.139      -0.133      -0.130
                                                                                   (0.116)     (0.109)     (0.126)
   C&I spread                                                                                              0.423*
                                                                                                           (0.254)
   Observations                   84,471     84,459      84,459        81,047      56,934      51,001      49,233
   R-squared                      0.017      0.033       0.034         0.037       0.034       0.052       0.047
   Adj. R-squared                 0.0165     0.0326      0.0333        0.0369      0.0340      0.0517      0.0462
   Control variables              No         No          No            No          No          Yes         Yes
   Year dummies                   Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         No




                                                         51
                                                  PANEL B


Independent                                                   Dependent variable -
Variable                                              R&D expenditures scaled by sales
Vdshock                        0.561     0.247       1.078*       1.044**     0.708       0.705       0.682
                               (0.435)   (0.440)     (0.594)      (0.517)     (0.543)     (0.568)     (0.573)
Log(net assets)                          -0.118***   -0.109***    -0.079***   -0.066***   -0.080***   -0.163***
                                         (0.017)     (0.018)      (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.017)     (0.033)
Age                                      -0.252***   -0.256***    -0.227***   -0.227***   -0.162***   -0.197***
                                         (0.044)     (0.044)      (0.038)     (0.039)     (0.032)     (0.037)
Vdshock*Log(net assets)                              -0.195**     -0.222***   -0.149*     -0.146*     -0.130*
                                                     (0.099)      (0.083)     (0.079)     (0.080)     (0.075)
Inside industry M&A Activity                                      7.274**     6.709**     6.598**     5.461*
                                                                  (2.939)     (2.915)     (2.830)     (2.908)
Ins M&A * Log(net assets)                                         -0.696**    -0.649**    -0.655**    -0.546**
                                                                  (0.272)     (0.280)     (0.258)     (0.253)
Compete                                                                                   0.020***    0.117***
                                                                                          (0.007)     (0.028)
Compete*Log(net assets)                                                                               -0.016***
                                                                                                      (0.004)
Firm-level UV, PV                                                             0.141***    0.142***    0.144***
                                                                              (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.017)
Industry-level UV, PV                                                         -0.111      -0.104      -0.065
                                                                              (0.115)     (0.109)     (0.125)
C&I spread                                                                                            0.423*
                                                                                                      (0.256)
Observations                   84,471    84,459      84,459       81,047      56,934      51,001      49,233
R-squared                      0.014     0.031       0.031        0.035       0.032       0.050       0.045
Adj. R-squared                 0.0142    0.0305      0.0306       0.0345      0.0315      0.0494      0.0442
Control variables              No        No          No           No          No          Yes         Yes
Year dummies                   Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         No




                                                     52
                            Table 4: R&D and abnormal announcement returns


Table 4 reports estimates from R&D regressions. The dependent variable is R&D expense scaled by sales in the
previous year. Vdshock is a de-trended demand shock variable constructed from the input-output matrix. Vexpand
is a discretized version of Vdshock. Log(net assets) is the natural log of the asset value. Age is time in 100s years
since the founding year, incorporation year (if founding is missing), or the first year the firm appears in CRSP
tapes (if both founding and incorporation years are missing). Abn. AR is industry-level mean cumulative abnormal
announcement returns surrounding acquisition announcements to target firms in the previous year. Compete is a
measure of industry competitiveness equaling one minus the Herfindahl index. Standard errors are clustered by
industry-year. Control variables are tangible assets, cash, and net working capital scaled by sales, price-to-earnings
ratio, dividend payment dummy, and institutional ownership.


                      Independent                                 Dependent variable -
                      Variable                              R&D expenditures scaled by sales

                      Vexpand                      0.189***      0.112*
                                                   (0.065)       (0.061)
                      Log(net assets)              -0.010        -0.122***   -0.037***   -0.144***
                                                   (0.012)       (0.019)     (0.009)     (0.024)
                      Age                          -0.177***     -0.231***   -0.180***   -0.234***
                                                   (0.031)       (0.039)     (0.031)     (0.040)
                      Vexpand*Log(net assets)      -0.042***     -0.033***
                                                   (0.012)       (0.012)
                      Abn. announcement return     0.593**       0.520**     0.579**     0.511**
                                                   (0.271)       (0.225)     (0.267)     (0.226)
                      (Abn. AR)*Log(net assets)    -0.086**      -0.077**    -0.085**    -0.076**
                                                   (0.040)       (0.035)     (0.039)     (0.036)
                      Compete                                    0.142***                0.145***
                                                                 (0.019)                 (0.020)
                      Compete*Log(net assets)                    -0.016***               -0.017***
                                                                 (0.003)                 (0.003)
                      Vdshock                                                0.447       0.267
                                                                             (0.508)     (0.462)
                      Vdshock*Log(net assets)                                -0.152**    -0.129**
                                                                             (0.065)     (0.061)
                      Observations                 65,341        58,852      65,341      58,852
                      R-squared                    0.140         0.147       0.140       0.147
                      Adj. R-squared               0.138         0.145       0.138       0.145
                      Industry dummies             Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                      Control variables            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                            53
                                       Table 5: Target prediction regressions

    Table 5 presents results from our target prediction regression estimated with a linear probability model. The
dependent variable is the target dummy, equaling one if the firm was a target in an acquisition attempt in a given
year, and zero otherwise. Vdshock is a de-trended version of demand shock variable constructed from the input-
output matrix. Log(market value) is the natural log of the market value of equity. Cash/Sales is the ratio of cash to
sales. Net WC/ Sales is the ratio of net working capital to sales. Tangibility is the ratio of tangible assets. P-E ratio
is the price-to-earnings ratio. Divd dummy is a dummy variable equaling one for dividend paying firms and zero
otherwise. Inst. Ownership is the percentage of common equity owned by institutional investors. C&I spread is the
commercial and industrial loan spread. Firm-level UV, PV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed from
the Pastor and Veronesi (PV) model. Firm-level UV, RKRV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed
from the Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (RKRV) model. Industry-level UV, RKRV and Industry-level
UV, PV are the industry-level unexplained valuation variables. Standard errors are clustered by industry-year.


                   Independent                          Dependent variable -
                   Variable                               Target dummy
                   Vdshock                     0.018         0.080       0.023       0.087       0.157
                                               (0.071)       (0.070)     (0.071)     (0.070)     (0.136)
                   Log(equity value)           -0.002        -0.003      -0.005*     -0.005      -0.013**
                                               (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.005)
                   Age                         0.087***      0.086***    0.087***    0.086***    0.073***
                                               (0.010)       (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.012)
                   Vdshock*Log(equity value)   -0.010        -0.015      -0.011      -0.015      -0.022
                                               (0.015)       (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.025)
                   Firm-level UV, RKRV         -0.013***     -0.012***
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)
                   Industry-level UV, RKRV     0.026***      0.018**
                                               (0.009)       (0.009)
                   C&I spread                                -0.048***               -0.049***   -0.089***
                                                             (0.010)                 (0.010)     (0.013)
                   Compete                     0.033***      0.034***    0.035***    0.036***    0.055****
                                               (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.005)
                   Compete*Log(net assets)     -0.006***     -0.006***   -0.006***   -0.006***   -0.009***
                                               (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                   Cash/Sales                  -0.002        -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.009*
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)
                   Leverage                    0.055***      0.054***    0.055***    0.054***    0.075***
                                               (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.014)
                   Net WC/Sales                0.014         0.019       0.016       0.021       -0.111**
                                               (0.019)       (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.043)
                   Tangibility                 -0.201***     -0.184**    -0.196**    -0.180**    -1.959***
                                               (0.076)       (0.074)     (0.077)     (0.075)     (0.411)
                   P/E                         -0.084**      -0.069*     -0.083**    -0.068*     -0.092**
                                               (0.035)       (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.036)     (0.047)
                   Divd dummy                  0.001         0.001       0.001       0.001       -0.002
                                               (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)
                   InstOwn                     0.001***      0.001***    0.001***    0.001***    0.001***
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                   Firm-level UV, PV                                     -0.008**    -0.008**    -0.014***
                                                                         (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.005)
                   Industry-level UV, PV                                 0.021**     0.013       0.016
                                                                         (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.012)
                   Mﬄow                                                                          0.365***
                                                                                                 (0.129)
                   Observations                49,946        47,433      49,840      47,329      28,575
                   R-squared                   0.086         0.078       0.086       0.078       0.075
                   Year dummies                Yes           No          Yes         No          No




                                                              54
                   Table 6: R&D with instrumented target from mutual fund flows


Table 6 reports estimates from R&D regressions using instrumental variable approach and Mﬄow as an instrument
for the target indicator variable and all the control variables from the target prediction regression. The dependent
variable is R&D expense scaled by sales in the previous year. Log(net assets) is the log of the asset value. Age is
time in 100s years since the founding year, incorporation year (if founding is missing), or the first year the firm
appears in CRSP tapes (if both founding and incorporation years are missing). Compete is a measure of industry
competitiveness equaling one minus the Herfindahl index. C&I spread is the commercial and industrial loan spread.
Firm level UV, RKRV is the firm-level unexplained valuation computed from the Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and
Viswanathan (RKRV) model. Industry-level UV, RKRV is the industry-level unexplained valuation variable. C&I
spread is the commercial and industrial loan spread. Control variables include tangible assets, cash, and net
working capital scaled by sales, price-to-earnings ratio, dividend payment dummy, and institutional ownership.
Standard errors are clustered by industry-year.


                            Independent                      Dependent variable -
                            Variable                   R&D expenditures scaled by sales
                            Target dummy               3.528**     3.896***    3.764***
                                                       (1.451)     (1.462)     (1.394)
                            Vexpand                    0.767***    0.647***    0.666***
                                                       (0.241)     (0.206)     (0.209)
                            Log(net assets)            -0.316***   -0.305***   -0.291***
                                                       (0.078)     (0.080)     (0.075)
                            Age                        -0.345***   -0.371***   -0.364***
                                                       (0.129)     (0.128)     (0.124)
                            Vexpand*Log(net assets)    -0.108***   -0.093***   -0.095***
                                                       (0.035)     (0.031)     (0.031)
                            Compete                    0.083**     0.041       0.044
                                                       (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.038)
                            Compete*Log(net assets)    -0.010*     -0.004      -0.004
                                                       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
                            Firm-level UV, RKRV                    0.208***
                                                                   (0.045)
                            Industry-level UV, RKRV                -0.188*
                                                                   (0.105)
                            Firm-level UV, PV                                  0.181***
                                                                               (0.039)
                            Industry-level UV, PV                              -0.212**
                                                                               (0.100)
                            C&I spread                 0.908**     0.904***    0.872***
                                                       (0.360)     (0.341)     (0.332)
                            Observations               46,470      44,510      44,410
                            Control variables          Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                        55
Table 7: R&D with instrumented target from mutual fund flows and HP concentration measures

    Table 7 reports estimates from R&D regressions using instrumental variable approach and Mﬄow as an in-
strument for the target indicator variable. The dependent variable is R&D expense scaled by sales in the previous
year. Log(net assets) is the log of the asset value. Age is time in 100s years since the founding year, incorporation
year (if founding is missing), or the first year the firm appears in CRSP tapes (if both founding and incorporation
years are missing). HP fixed comp. measure is 1- Hoberg-Phillips Herfindahl based on fixed industry definitions.
HP variable comp. measure is 1-Hoberg-Phillips Herfindahl based on variable industry definitions. C&I spread
is the commercial and industrial loan spread. Firm-level UV, RKRV (PV) is the firm-level unexplained valua-
tion computed from the Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (RKRV) model. (Pastor and Veronesi model).
Industry-level UV, RKRV (PV) is the industry-level unexplained valuation variable. C&I spread is the commercial
and industrial loan spread. Control variables include tangible assets, cash, and net working capital scaled by sales,
price-to-earnings ratio, dividend payment dummy, and institutional ownership. Standard errors are clustered by
industry-year.

         Independent                                           Dependent variable -
         Variable                                        R&D expenditures scaled by sales
         Target dummy                  2.496**     5.008**     4.783**     2.269**     4.819**     4.597**
                                       (1.110)     (2.011)     (1.870)     (1.064)     (1.951)     (1.814)
         Vexpand                       0.897***    0.678***    0.699***    0.868***    0.659***    0.679***
                                       (0.239)     (0.236)     (0.235)     (0.233)     (0.231)     (0.230)
         Log(net assets)               0.276***    0.104       0.124       0.003       -0.246*     -0.221*
                                       (0.097)     (0.090)     (0.086)     (0.076)     (0.138)     (0.126)
         Age                           -0.225***   -0.422***   -0.413***   -0.235***   -0.436***   -0.427***
                                       (0.085)     (0.158)     (0.151)     (0.085)     (0.160)     (0.153)
         Vexpand*Log(net assets)       -0.116***   -0.101***   -0.103***   -0.112***   -0.097***   -0.099***
                                       (0.031)     (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.030)     (0.035)     (0.035)
         HP variable comp. measure     3.885***    3.799***    3.785***
                                       (1.003)     (1.096)     (1.078)
         HP variable*Log(net assets)   -0.534***   -0.573***   -0.570***
                                       (0.143)     (0.180)     (0.175)
         HP fixed comp. measure                                            1.574***    1.102***    1.128***
                                                                           (0.331)     (0.305)     (0.302)
         HP fixed*Log(net assets)                                          -0.223***   -0.175***   -0.179***
                                                                           (0.047)     (0.051)     (0.050)
         Firm-level UV, RKRV                       0.237***                            0.238***
                                                   (0.056)                             (0.056)
         Industry-level UV, RKRV                   -0.140                              -0.143
                                                   (0.118)                             (0.119)
         Firm-level UV, PV                                     0.206***                            0.207***
                                                               (0.048)                             (0.048)
         Industry-level UV, PV                                 -0.146                              -0.150
                                                               (0.107)                             (0.108)
         C&I spread                    0.747**     0.958***    0.924***    0.693**     0.914**     0.880**
                                       (0.299)     (0.368)     (0.356)     (0.290)     (0.358)     (0.347)
         Observations                  46,401      39,619      39,536      46,420      39,647      39,564
         Control variables             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                         56
