NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORECLOSURE EXTERNALITIES:
SOME NEW EVIDENCE
Kristopher Gerardi
Eric Rosenblatt
Paul S. Willen
Vincent Yao
Working Paper 18353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18353
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

Thanks to Chris Cunningham, Chris Foote, Scott Frame, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, Steve Ross, Joe
Tracy for helpful conversations and to Stefano Giglio, Susan Wachter and John Campbell for excellent
discussions at the 2012 Spring HULM, Mid-year AREUEA and NBER Summer Institute conferences
respectively. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not the official position
of Fannie Mae, nor of any part of the Federal Reserve System, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18353.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kristopher Gerardi, Eric Rosenblatt, Paul S. Willen, and Vincent Yao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreclosure externalities: Some new evidence
Kristopher Gerardi, Eric Rosenblatt, Paul S. Willen, and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 18353
September 2012
JEL No. G12,R20,R30
ABSTRACT
In a recent set of influential papers, researchers have argued that residential mortgage foreclosures
reduce the sale prices of nearby properties. We revisit this issue using a more robust identification
strategy combined with new data that contain information on the location of properties secured by
seriously delinquent mortgages and information on the condition of foreclosed properties. We find
that while properties in virtually all stages of distress have statistically significant, negative effects
on nearby home values, the magnitudes are economically small, peak before the distressed properties
complete the foreclosure process, and go to zero about a year after the bank sells the property to a
new homeowner. The estimates are very sensitive to the condition of the distressed property, with
a positive correlation existing between house price growth and foreclosed properties identified as being
in “above average” condition. We argue that the most plausible explanation for these results is an externality
resulting from reduced investment by owners of distressed property. Our analysis shows that policies
that slow the transition from delinquency to foreclosure likely exacerbate the negative effect of mortgage
distress on house prices.
Kristopher Gerardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
kristopher.gerardi@atl.frb.org
Eric Rosenblatt
Fannie Mae
16715 Keats Terrace
Derwood, MD 20855
eric_rosenblatt@fanniemae.com

Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210-2204
and NBER
willen968@gmail.com
Vincent Yao
Fannie Mae
3900 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016-2892
vincent_w_yao@fanniemae.com

1

Introduction

Researchers have argued that foreclosures reduce the sale prices of nearby
properties. We revisit this question using a new dataset that allows us to
identify and locate properties at various stages of distress, from minor delinquency all the way through the foreclosure process to lender ownership and
sale to a new homeowner. Additionally, a subset of our data includes information about the condition of the foreclosed properties.
In the existing literature, researchers have typically estimated some variant of the following spatial externality regression
log(Pit ) = α + βXit + γNFit + εit

(1)

where Pit is the sale price of property i in period t, Xit is a vector of controls,
and NFit is a measure of the number of properties that experience some
type of foreclosure event within a certain distance of property i in some
window around period t. There are substantial differences in the types of
foreclosure events, the distances, and the time windows that previous papers
have focused on, but in general, researchers have found negative estimates
for γ, which they interpret as evidence of the existence of negative foreclosure
externalities.
We estimate a spatial regression that is similar to equation (1), but with
several important differences. We argue that our specification improves the
identification of a true causal impact of foreclosures on prices and narrows
the possible interpretations of the externality. There are three main innovations in our approach. The first is that we use multiple measures of the
stock of distressed properties, whereas previous researchers have focused on
a single flow. Most papers in the literature have measured the flow of properties completing the foreclosure process.1 This implicitly assumes that the
1

For example, Immergluck and Smith (2006) measured the number of transitions of
property from serious delinquency into lender ownership.

1

foreclosure externality does not occur until the time of the foreclosure auction. In contrast, in our baseline specification, we include the number of
properties with seriously delinquent mortgages (SDQs), which we define as
properties owned by borrowers who have been delinquent 90 days or more
on their mortgages for at least one year, the number of lender-owned properties, known in the industry as Real Estate Owned (REOs), and the number
of properties recently sold by the lender. Furthermore, in variations of our
baseline specification we also include the number of properties with mortgages that have been seriously delinquent for less than a year and properties
with mortgages that are fewer than 90 days delinquent, which we refer to as
minor delinquencies. Thus, we allow for the possibility that the foreclosure
externality occurs well before the foreclosure is completed, when the borrower
first becomes distressed.
The main reason to focus on stocks and not flows is that for many of
the theories of why foreclosures might affect prices, it is the inventory that
matters and not the flow. For example, many have argued that borrowers
facing foreclosure have little reason to invest in their properties, which could
generate negative externalities in the neighborhood and depress nearby home
values. But the approaches used in the previous literature only roughly
approximate the number of nearby properties in distress at the time of the
sale.2
As we discuss below, our focus on the stock or inventory is important for
policy reasons. If one interprets equation (1) causally, then flow measures can
lead to erroneous inference. For example, suppose that all distressed properties exert downward pressure on prices due to investment externalities, but
that equation (1) is estimated using only transitions into foreclosure. Be2

For example, counting foreclosure process initiations over the last 18 months prior to
a sale (as in Schuetz, Been, and Ellen (2008)), works only if foreclosure timelines do not
differ substantially over time or across jurisdictions. If, for example, foreclosure timelines
before the crisis rarely exceeded 18 months and after the crisis almost always did, then the
measure in Schuetz, Been, and Ellen (2008) would systematically understate the growth
in the stock of distressed properties.

2

cause foreclosure transitions in a given area are highly correlated with the
number of outstanding distressed properties in the same area, one would find
a significant, negative correlation between the sale price of a non-distressed
property and the number of surrounding properties transitioning into foreclosure. Based on such results, one might conclude that implementing a foreclosure moratorium would increase house prices. However, such a conclusion
would be wrong. Delaying transitions into foreclosure does not reduce the total number of distressed properties, which is what exerts downward pressure
on prices according to the true model. Indeed, over time, delaying foreclosures without stopping transitions into delinquency would increase the total
number of distressed properties and thus serve to lower prices.
Consistent with such a theory, we find that properties in all stages of distress exert downward pressure on nearby home values. Estimating a variant
of equation (1), we find estimates of γ that are smallest in absolute value
for the number of nearby minor delinquencies and largest for the number
of properties with seriously delinquent mortgage borrowers that have not
yet completed foreclosure proceedings. Our estimate of γ is slightly lower
in absolute value when the lender owns the property, then falls further after the sale out of REO to an arms-length buyer, and finally reaches zero
approximately one year after the REO sale.
The second innovation, which is discussed in more detail in Section 2,
is the manner in which we attempt to control for unobserved heterogeneity
across properties. Unobserved heterogeneity is a serious issue in this context,
as it is well known that foreclosures are generated by falling house prices, so
any unobserved factor that causes a decrease in house prices and thus an increase in foreclosures will lead to simultaneity bias and erroneous inference.
To deal with this issue, we estimate a version of equation (1) that controls for
previous sales of the same property and contains a set of highly geographically disaggregated fixed effects (at the census block group level). Thus,
our estimates of γ in equation (1) reflect differences in price growth across

3

properties bought and sold in the same year within the same census block
group (CBG). We argue that this identification strategy is largely immune
to issues of reverse causality and simultaneity bias. In addition, we show
that the inclusion of highly disaggregated geographic fixed effects dramatically reduces the estimated impact of nearby distressed properties on home
values, suggesting that most of the previous papers in the literature, which
did not employ such fixed effects, significantly overstated the magnitude of
the true foreclosure externality. Our estimates of the negative impact of a
nearby distressed property on the sale price of a non-distressed property are
economically small in magnitude, ranging from just under 0.5 percent to just
over 1.0 percent depending on the exact regression specification, the sample
period, and the assumptions made about the effect of distance.
The final major innovation in the analysis is the fact that the dataset
includes information on whether a seriously delinquent property is vacant
and on the condition of lender-owned properties. We find that the estimate
of γ in equation (1) is more negative for both vacant properties and lenderowned properties in “below average” condition, while the estimate of γ for
lender-owned properties in “above average” condition is actually positive.
In Section 5 we provide an interpretation of these results. We evaluate
three possible explanations: 1.) unobserved relative demand shocks that
drive down prices and result in some foreclosures; 2.) foreclosures generating increased relative supply and driving down prices; 3.) an externality of
reduced investment by distressed borrowers in the delinquency phase and
financial institutions in the lender-ownership phase. Given the data and the
limited theory, it is very difficult to establish anything conclusively. However, we argue that the weight of the evidence points to the third explanation.
Both of the first two explanations require that there be distinct within-CBG
micro-markets not generated by the externality from the foreclosures themselves. Given the small size of CBGs, this seems unlikely. In addition, the
evidence from the regressions that incorporate information on the condition

4

of foreclosed properties is inconsistent with the supply explanation: a reasonable hypothesis is that foreclosed properties in above-average condition
should compete more for buyers than foreclosed properties in poor condition,
implying that foreclosed properties in above-average condition would have a
negative impact on price rather than a positive one.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 contains a discussion of the
empirical approach with an extensive discussion of both the empirical model
and the data. In Section 3, we report the regression results, and in Section 4
we discuss the existing literature and how this paper fits into it. We pay particular attention to a recent study by Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011),
which uses similar empirical methods, but adopts a different interpretation
of the data that leads to differences in the reported magnitudes of foreclosure
externalities. Section 5 discusses the potential interpretation of our empirical
results, while the conclusion contains a discussion of the policy implications
of our analysis.

2

Empirical Methodology and Data

We consider a sample of properties i ∈ I, located in geography g ∈ G, all
sold in year T and purchased at various years t in the past. The baseline
specification, shown below, is a regression of individual property price growth
between years t and T on the number of nearby distressed properties in a
given year T and a set of controls:
log(PigT /Pigt ) = αgt + βXiT +

X

d
γd NiT
+ ǫigT .

(2)

d∈D

In equation (2), PigT /Pigt is price growth from purchase to sale, αgt is a full
set of location×year-of-purchase fixed effects, and XiT is a vector of hedonic
controls measured in year T . The variables of interest are counts of distressed
property of type d ∈ D around property i in the year of sale. Note that d can
5

Table 1: Measures of Distressed Property
Measure
Distance
of Distress
< 0.1 miles 0.1-0.25 miles
SDQ
γSDQ,close
γSDQ,far
REO
γREO,close
γREO,far
REO Sales < 1 yr
γSALE<1,close
γSALE<1,f ar
REO Sales 1 − 2 yrs γSALE>1,close
γSALE>1,f ar

differ in both the type of distress, REO versus serious delinquency (SDQ) for
example, as well as in the distance from the sale of property i. An example of
d is the number of properties in REO inventory between 0.10 and 0.25 mile
from the sale of property i in year T . In our main specification, we consider
eight different measures of distress, displayed in Table 1.
We draw the reader’s attention to three important points about our specification. First, we use a repeat-sales approach to control for time-invariant
heterogeneity across properties. Much of the previous literature has estimated hedonic models in which the dependent variable is the logarithm of
the sale price in year T , and the set of control variables includes characteristics of property i in year T . The advantage of using the repeat-sales
approach is that while a hedonic model usually controls for only the characteristics of the property that are contained in the tax assessor’s data base, the
repeat-sales model in some sense controls for the previous sale price, which
in principle captures a lot of relevant information, including everything from
period detail to water views and southern exposures. It is important to stress
that the repeat-sales model addresses only time-invariant characteristics of
the property, and thus cannot help with reverse causality, as foreclosures are,
by nature, time-varying. That said, hedonic models as they are typically implemented also use only current information about the characteristics of the
property, and thus control only for time-invariant factors.3
3

For example, the dataset used by Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) contains only

6

Because we are looking at differences in prices, in our baseline specification, we follow Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009) and define the various
measures of nearby distressed properties as the difference in the number of
properties over the repeat-sale period (the interval between year t and year
T ). For example, if we consider a repeat sale of a property purchased on
d
July 21, 2004 and sold on April 3, 2009, one measure of NiT
would be the
difference in the REO inventory within 0.10 mile of the property on those
two dates. This is important because it is common for a single property to go
through foreclosure multiple times over the span of a few years and we would
underestimate the impact of nearby distressed properties on non-distressed
prices if we failed to take this into account.
Second, we include location×year-of-purchase fixed effects, αgt . Only a
few previous papers in the literature have included any type of geographic
controls, and none have included geographic fixed effects measured at the
level of disaggregation used in this analysis, the CBG. For example, Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) includes a set of census tract fixed effects.
Figure 1 provides an example of the breakdown of census tracts, census block
groups, and census blocks for the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts, a small
city of about 100,000 people that neighbors the city of Boston to the north.
Cambridge is made up of 32 census tracts, and each census tract typically includes two or three census block groups.4 Thus, a typical CBG is a very small
geographic area, is composed of a relatively homogeneous housing stock, and
has a relatively homogeneous population with respect to ethnic and economic
characteristics. As we argue below, a CBG is likely smaller in geographical
terms than what we typically think of as a local housing market. Note that
we constrain the sample to repeat-sale pairs where the second sale occurs
in the same year (2009 in our baseline specification), meaning that we need
information from the most recent assessor’s files.
4
There are over 200,000 CBGs in the United States, with each group generally containing between 600 and 3,000 people. They are subsets of census tracts, which contain
between 1,500 and 8,000 people.

7

not include year of sale fixed effects in addition to the year of purchase fixed
effects.
Third, in all of the regressions we adopt a parsimonious approach and
use the unweighted number of each type of distressed property within a
given radius of the non-distressed repeat sale. This assumption is common
in much of the previous literature.5
Finally, in our baseline specification, we divide the distressed properties
into two different distance bins. We consider an inner ring of distressed properties within 0.10 miles and an outer ring between 0.10 and 0.25 miles. The
reason for including two mutually exclusive geographic areas is that there is a
strong positive correlation among counts of distressed properties at different
distances from a given non-distressed sale, as will become apparent in our
discussion of the summary statistics below. As a result, if we are interested
in the effect of distressed properties on the sale price of a property very close
by, but omit the number of distressed properties farther away, our estimate
will be biased upwards if the distressed properties farther away also exert a
negative externality. We find that distressed properties as far away as 0.25
mile seem to exert a non-trivial negative effect on sale prices of non-distressed
properties, while distressed properties at distances beyond 0.25 mile exert either no effect or an effect that is extremely small in magnitude and thus can
be ignored. This finding (see our discussion of Table 7 below for more details)
guides our decision to include counts of distressed properties in the second
distance bin (between 0.10 and 0.25 mile) in our baseline specification.
5

One notable exception is Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011). See the discussion on
page 2125 for a detailed description of their weights. However, the authors show that their
results are largely unchanged by using an unweighted approach. Furthermore, since theory
does not provide much guidance on the appropriate weighting scheme to use and since our
distance measures are approximate, we are concerned that any inference drawn from a
complicated weighting scheme may be misleading, and therefore we choose to estimate
unweighted regressions.

8

2.1

Identification issues

As mentioned in the introduction, the key issue in estimating equation (2) is
the possibility of reverse causality, that is to say, the possibility that the prices
are driving the foreclosures and not the other way around. In a sense the use
of the phrase “reverse causality” to describe the effect of prices is somewhat
misleading. While the size and even existence of an effect of foreclosures
on prices remains an open question, both economic theory and the data
are unequivocal that prices have a strong effect on foreclosures. In this
paper, we deal with this identification problem with what we describe as
a “brute force” method. The combination of the repeat-sales model with
the CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects means that we are identifying γ in
equation (2) using variation in the price appreciation of properties in the
same CBG that were bought in the same year and sold in the same year. In
other words, to explain a significant coefficient estimate associated with the
presence of nearby distressed property, one must come up with a story about
why properties within the same CBG with a higher concentration of nearby
distressed property, appreciated differently from properties elsewhere in the
same CBG over the same time interval with a smaller concentration of nearby
distressed property. For example, the fact that properties on the main street
in a given CBG are in higher demand and thus more valuable than properties
off the main street with fewer nearby foreclosures in the same CBG would
not generate a significant negative estimate of γ. The difference in demand
stemming from this within-CBG location difference is present at both times
t and T , and thus is subsumed by expressing the dependent variable as the
difference in sale prices. Rather, one would need to tell a story about why
prices fell between times t and T in one area of a CBG relative to another
area in the same CBG.
Using within-CBG variation to identify the effect of nearby distressed
property on price appreciation also significantly alleviates concerns about reverse causality. Figure 2 provides an example of how using variation across
9

geographies could cause one to mistakenly conclude that there was a causal
effect of nearby foreclosures on prices when the true causal effect actually
went from prices to foreclosures. In the example, we assume that we have
data on foreclosures and prices in two separate geographic areas, tract A and
tract B, as shown in the top panel. We assume that price appreciation is
constant for all properties within the same geography, but that price appreciation is significantly lower in tract B than in tract A. Within each tract,
foreclosures are randomly located so there is, by construction, no causal effect of nearby foreclosures on prices. Thus, separate within-tract regressions
of sale prices on the number of foreclosures within some radius would correctly yield a γ of zero. In the bottom panel of Figure 2 we look at the same
data but ignore the geographic differences. A regression of sale prices on the
number of nearby foreclosures now incorrectly yields a negative relationship
between price growth and foreclosures. This simple example illustrates how
reverse causality can confound identification, and in the analysis below, we
show that the estimates of γ in equation (2) are indeed quite sensitive to the
inclusion of and the aggregation level of geographic fixed effects.

2.2

Data

Our sample of repeat sales includes all pairs of non-distressed transactions on
single-family residential properties in the 15 largest metropolitan statistical
areas (MSA), pulled from public records purchased from a national data
aggregator. The sample is restricted to include transactions in which the
first sale in the repeat-sale pair took place after 2001 and the second sale
took place between 2006 and 2010, allowing us to study both the pre-crisis
and post-crisis periods.6 We exclude addresses that cannot be geo-coded and
transactions for which recorded prices or dates are missing, zero, or located
6

The previous literature has, for the most part, used pre-crisis sample periods. The
exception is Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011), which uses data between 1987 and the
first quarter of 2009, and thus captures a good portion of the crisis period.

10

in a thin market, which we define as a CBG in which there were fewer than
five sales in a year. The final sample contains 958,513 repeat-sale pairs in 15
MSAs, and 16,932 CBGs, as reported in Panel (A) of Table 2.7 The bottom
panel of Table 2 reports the distribution of observations in the repeat sales
sample by the year of purchase and year of sale, respectively. There are
several notable patterns in the table. The sample of repeat sales gets smaller
over time as national sales volumes fall. In 2006 and 2007, the modal sale
occurred two years after purchase, increasing to three years in 2008, four
years in 2009, and five years in 2010. The MSAs with the most observations
are Phoenix, AZ, Washington, D.C., and Riverside, CA, which account for
16 percent, 13 percent, and 10 percent of the sample, respectively. Table 3
shows that the repeat-sales sample includes enormous variation in returns,
which is not surprising, given that the dataset includes properties purchased
in 2001 and sold in 2006 and also properties purchased in 2006 and sold in
2010. The public records data also contain information on basic property
characteristics over time, including house size, lot size, property age, and
number of bedrooms. These variables are summarized in Table 3.
Using the public records, we can identify the date of the foreclosure deed,8
when the lender records transfer of ownership from the borrower, and the
REO sale date, when an arms-length buyer takes ownership of the property.
Using these flows, we can compute foreclosure inventory in a location at any
point in time. The final sample contains 1.04 million foreclosure deeds, which
we refer to as the REO inventory throughout the paper, and 1.15 million REO
7

Another important difference with much of the previous literature is the national
representativeness of our data. Many previous studies focus on a single state or even a
single MSA. For example, Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) uses data from the state of
Massachusetts, Immergluck and Smith (2006) uses data from Chicago, and Schuetz, Been,
and Ellen (2008) uses data from New York City. Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2011),
which uses data from seven MSAs, is probably the most nationally representative study.
8
The foreclosure deed corresponds either to the transfer of the property to the lender at
auction, or if the auction is successful, to the transfer of the property directly to another
arms-length buyer. The latter event is significantly less likely to occur than the former,
but we are able to distinguish between the two events in the data.

11

sales.
To identify seriously delinquent properties, we use two methods. Our
main approach is to use proprietary data from a large national mortgage insurer (the proprietary data mentioned in the introduction), which contain all
of the information in the public records plus a detailed payment history. This
dataset allows us to identify the first month in which a delinquent borrower
enters serious delinquency (SDQ), which we define to be 90 days delinquent
(typically three missed payments). An SDQ corresponds to the entire period
in which the borrower is seriously delinquent before the foreclosure auction,
and thus it covers both the time before the foreclosure process is initiated
on a seriously delinquent borrower, and the time between the start of the
foreclosure process and the end of the process (the auction).
The data also allow us to identify the cumulative depth of delinquency
at any point in time. Our dataset contains 1.12 million SDQs. Because the
proprietary dataset does not cover the universe of all homes, we augment
it with data from a nationally representative loan-level dataset (the LPS
data). With the more representative dataset, we calculate, for each state,
the distribution of the number of months that it takes for a mortgage to
transition from serious delinquency to foreclosure completion (the foreclosure
auction). We then take the 25th percentile of these distributions and combine
them with the information from the public records database on the date of the
foreclosure auction to impute SDQ intervals. For example, the 25th percentile
for California is four months. Thus, for each of the REO properties located
in a California MSA in our sample, we assign an SDQ interval corresponding
to the four months before the foreclosure auction dates. To be conservative,
we use the 25th percentile as opposed to the median or average, as this means
that 75 percent of foreclosures in California had a serious delinquency spell
that lasted for more than four months. We call this variable “infilled” SDQs.
This provides 726,547 additional SDQs. We then combine our infilled SDQs
with the SDQs obtained from the proprietary mortgage database to produce

12

a more encompassing SDQ measure.
For our analysis, we divide SDQs into “long SDQs” and “short SDQs,”
depending on whether the borrower has been delinquent for more than one
year or not. For some regressions, we also look at “minor DQs,” which we
define to be delinquencies of 60 days or fewer. In addition, we have collected
property-level vacancy data from the U.S. Postal Service. Postmen classify
each property as “occupied” or “vacant” each month based on whether or
not mail is being accepted at each property. These data are currently being
used by mortgage servicers to identify loss mitigation opportunities. As we
mention above, we also have some information on the condition of lenderowned properties. These data come from REO appraisals ordered by lenders
immediately after a property completes the foreclosure process. The full
residential appraisal form provides a detailed description of the current condition of the property that typically includes a standard rating index with
values of “great,” “good,” “average,” “fair,” and “poor.” For the appraisals
that do not include the rating index, but do include detailed descriptions,
we text-mined all of the keywords in the description and sorted them into
the standard condition rating according to the Marshal and Swift Residential
Cost Handbook used by appraisers. We characterize“great” and “good” as
“above average,” and “fair” and “poor” as “below average.”
Panel A of Table 4 shows that two thirds of repeat sales had no distressed
properties nearby. Panel B considers differences in the number of nearby distressed properties between the second and first sale in the repeat-sale pair,
and shows that a nontrivial number of repeat sales had fewer distressed properties nearby at the time of the second sale, with roughly 5 percent of sales
occurring near properties with lower REO inventory and fewer sales of REO
in the year preceding the sale. Panel C of Table 4 shows that, not surprisingly, the incidence of sales with distressed properties nearby has increased
significantly over time. Most dramatically, the proportion of properties with
long SDQs nearby rose from less than 2 percent in 2006 to more than 30

13

percent in 2010, reflecting both the increased hazard that borrowers transition into serious delinquency and delays in the foreclosure process. By 2010,
more than half the sales in our sample occurred with at least one form of
distressed property nearby.
Finally, panel D of Table 4 displays correlations between our stock measures of distressed property and flow measures for both the close distance
(within 0.10 mile) and the far distance (between 0.10 and 0.25 mile). Comparing the stock and flow measures of close distressed properties (first four
rows and first four columns), it is apparent that they are all positively correlated. However, no two measures have a correlation higher than 0.50, a fact
that emphasizes the importance of distinguishing between stocks and flows.
We see similar patterns for the correlations among the different types of distressed properties at the far distance (last four rows and last four columns).
However, the positive correlations between the number of the same types
of distressed properties at different distances are very strong. For example,
the correlation between REO inventory at the close distance and REO inventory at the far distance is 0.65, while the corresponding correlation for
REO sales in the year before the repeat sale is 0.73. As we discuss above,
these correlations emphasize the need to control for distressed property at
longer distances in the estimation of equation (2), which we do in all of the
regressions reported below.

3

Results

Table 5 shows results from our baseline specification. The right-hand-side
variables of interest are nearby long SDQs from the proprietary data and
three measures from the public records: nearby REO inventory, the number
of nearby REOs sold one year prior to the non-distressed sale, and the number
of nearby REOs sold one to two years prior to the non-distressed sale. For
each variable, we measure the difference over the repeat sales in the number
14

within 0.10 mile (about 530 feet), which we label “close” and the number
between 0.10 and 0.25 mile, which we label “far.” Despite the fact that we
are using repeat sales, we control for the possibility that there is systematic
variation in price growth across different types of properties by including the
characteristics of the property from tax assessment data.9 In addition, to
control for the possibility that prices fell more in more dense areas within
a given CBG, we include the number of properties within 0.10 mile in our
baseline specification.
Column (1) of Panel A in Table 5 displays the results of our basic specification on 2009 data (repeat sales for which the second sale occurred in 2009).
The estimation results for the variables of interest at the close distance show
a basic pattern that is replicated in all of the subsequent regressions: the
coefficient estimates associated with the first three stages of the foreclosure
process, γSDQ,close, γREO,close, and γSALE<1,close, have roughly similar magnitudes, with nearby serious delinquencies having the largest magnitude (in
absolute value), and recent nearby REO sales having the smallest. The exception is nearby REO sales that occurred more than one year in the past,
which are not negatively correlated with price growth. Columns (2) and (3)
of Panel A show that the controls have only small effects. Another pattern
that emerges from the table is that the measures of close distressed property
have a slightly more negative effect on price growth than the measures of far
distressed property. For example, an additional long SDQ within 0.10 mile is
estimated to decrease price growth by 1.2 percent while the effect of an additional long SDQ between 0.10 and 0.25 mile is -0.8 percent. Most previous
9

If the logarithm of the price of a property is a linear function of time invariant characteristics then, as Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009) shows, taking the difference over
the repeat sales will cause the characteristics to cancel out of the equation; therefore one
does not need to control for them in the repeat-sales specification. In other words, this
implicitly assumes that price growth is not a function of the time-invariant characteristics
of a property. However, because of preference changes, it may be the case that properties
with different characteristics appreciate at different rates. For example, if homes with
multiple bathrooms or with granite countertops become more sought after over time, then
we would expect those properties to appreciate at a higher rate, all else being equal.

15

studies have also found that the effect of foreclosures on nearby home values
decreases with distance. We discuss this literature in more detail in Section
4 below. The corresponding magnitudes for the REO inventory and REO
sale measures are very similar, although the difference between the close and
far estimates for REO inventory is very close to zero.
Panel B in Table 5 shows how the coefficient estimates in the baseline
specification change over time. In the panel we estimate the baseline specification of equation (2) separately for repeat-sale pairs in which the second
sale took place in each year between 2006 and 2010. The coefficient estimates associated with long SDQs and REOs sold one to two years within
0.10 mile before the non-distressed sale, γSDQ,close and γSALE>1,close, are the
largest and smallest, respectively, in absolute value for all five years. The
estimated impact of long SDQs within 0.10 mile and between 0.10 and 0.25
mile is considerably larger in 2006 and 2007 than in later years, but this
pattern does not seem to hold for our other measures of distressed property.
The coefficient estimates associated with close REO inventory and REOs sold
in the year before the non-distressed sale are quite stable, with the former
variable having a slightly smaller impact than the long SDQ variable for the
2009 and 2010 samples, and a significantly smaller impact for the 2006, 2007,
and 2008 samples. The estimated coefficient associated with the close REO
sale variable grows over the sample but is consistently smaller in absolute
value than the estimated coefficients associated with both long SDQs and
REO inventory.10
10

There is some evidence from the literature that the effect of nearby foreclosures on
prices is non-linear, specifically that it is diminishing in the number of nearby foreclosures.
In unreported regressions, which are available from the authors upon request, we explored
this using a more flexible specification, in which we specified the number of nearby distressed properties as second and third order polynomials and included a series of indicator
variables for each specific value. Consistent with the findings from the previous literature, we did find evidence of nonlinearities, as the effect of nearby distressed properties
on prices is diminishing in the number of distressed properties. However, all of the results
discussed in this section are robust to this more flexible specification, and thus for space
considerations we chose to report the simpler linear specifications.

16

The inclusion of CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects in the baseline specification plays a significant role in the estimation results. Panel C in Table 5 shows that the coefficient estimates associated with nearby distressed
property become much stronger with more aggregated geographic×year-ofpurchase fixed effects, as the coefficient estimates associated with nearby long
SDQs, REO inventory, and REO sales in the previous year approximately
double in absolute value when we move from a specification that includes
CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects to a specification that completely excludes geographic×year effects. This confirms the intuition from the example that we discussed in Figure 2 in Section 2.1. The results in Panel C of
Table 5 show that it is across-census tract and across-MSA variation in foreclosure density that is driving much of the observed negative correlation of
nearby foreclosures and prices at the national level. The estimates for each
of the three variables of interest increase substantially in absolute value when
we substitute county×year effects for census tract×year effects and increase
again when we move from MSA×year effects to eliminating geographic×year
effects altogether. The last two columns in Panel C show that the results
are little changed when substituting CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects for
census tract×year effects, which suggests that the census tract is a sufficiently small geography to deal with reverse causality and simultaneity bias
in this context. With the exception of Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011),
who include census tract geographic controls, all previous attempts to estimate γ omit narrow geographic controls, and thus most likely significantly
overestimate the effect.
In Table 6, we exploit information about the vacancy status of distressed
property and the condition of REO property. As discussed in the previous
section, for a subset of SDQs, we have information about the vacancy status
of the properties, and for a subset of the REO properties we have information
about condition. Since the vacancy data, in particular, are only well populated beginning in 2010, we focus on that year. The results show that the

17

coefficient estimate associated with vacant SDQ property is approximately 50
percent larger in absolute value than the coefficient estimate associated with
occupied property (-0.011 versus -0.006). But, perhaps the more significant
results apply to the condition of the REO inventory. According to Table
6, the only significantly negative coefficient estimates are associated with
REO in below average condition and with REO for which we do not have
condition information. The fact that the estimate associated with the missing category is significantly negative likely reflects the fact that most REO
is in below average condition. It is also worth noting that the estimated
coefficient associated with above average REO is significantly positive, suggesting that nearby REO in good condition actually increases the sale price
of non-distressed properties.
In Table 7 we look at the impact of distressed properties even farther away
from the repeat-sale observations, by augmenting the baseline specification
for 2009 data with two additional rings of property: 0.25–0.50 mile away and
0.50–1.0 mile away. As previous researchers have found, the negative effect
of nearby distressed property drops off very quickly with distance, as the
coefficient estimates associated with distressed properties in the third and
fourth rings are very close to zero. As we discussed above, the results in
Table 7 motivate our decision to include only the 0.10–0.25-mile ring in our
baseline specification, as distressed properties farther than 0.25 miles do not
exert an economically meaningful effect on non-distressed home sales.
In Table 8 we allow for the possibility that properties with moderately
delinquent mortgages also exert a negative externality. The table reports
estimation results in which we distinguish between short and long SDQs.
The results in the first two columns of the table suggest that both short
and long SDQs have similar effects on nearby non-distressed sale prices. In
column (3) we distinguish between minor DQs, short SDQs, and long SDQs.
Minor DQs also have a negative estimated effect on nearby non-distressed
sales, which is similar in magnitude to the effect of short SDQs. When we

18

distinguish between minor DQs and SDQs, we see that a relatively large
difference emerges between the effect of long SDQs and short SDQS/minor
DQs, with long SDQs having a much larger negative impact on non-distressed
price appreciation.
In addition, we estimated a series of regressions to address specification
issues. At least two issues merit special attention. The first is a potential
omitted variable problem since our coverage of SDQs is only partial, because
the proprietary mortgage data do not cover the entire mortgage market.
Since non-proprietary SDQs are likely to be correlated with both proprietary
SDQs and all other measures of distress, including the large number of nonproprietary REOs from our public records database, the omitted variables
here could potentially affect all of the estimates of interest. To address this
problem, we used the infill method, which we discuss in detail above, to
construct a dataset of non-proprietary SDQs. Comparing columns (5) and
(6) of Table 8 illustrates that using this much broader measure of SDQs
makes little difference. Overall, the coefficient estimate associated with SDQ
decreases slightly in absolute value; the other coefficient estimates decrease
slightly as well.
The second specification issue is the choice of a repeat-sales specification
rather than a hedonic approach. In Table 8, we consider two alternative
approaches to estimating γ. In column (8), we show results from a standard
hedonic model; these results are similar to the results from the repeat-sales
specification. We find slightly larger coefficient estimates (in absolute value)
for all of the distressed property variables. As an alternative, we consider a
model, displayed in column (7) of Table 8, that lies part way between the two
specifications, in which we use the repeat-sales specification but include on
the right-hand-side the level of distressed property at the time of the second
sale instead of the difference between repeat sales. This hybrid model also
generates similar results, suggesting that specifying the distressed property
measures as first differences rather than as levels does not make a substantive

19

difference.

4

Comparison with earlier work

This paper builds on an extensive existing literature on externalities in housing markets. Narrowly, there is a series of papers that estimate equation (1),
starting with Immergluck and Smith (2006) and including: Schuetz, Been,
and Ellen (2008); Rogers and Winter (2009); Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao
(2009); Lin, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009); and Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak
(2011). All of these papers use flow measures of foreclosure-related distress
as the right-hand-side variables of interest. More broadly, a much older literature has estimated almost exactly the same hedonic regressions, but with
other events not related to foreclosure that might affect local house values.
We begin this section with a detailed discussion of the recent literature, as
it is more related to our current analysis, and then provide a brief discussion
of the older literature.
Although previous studies have used the repeat-sales specification and
controlled for geography at a relatively disaggregated level, no analysis has
done both at the same time. Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2011) is the
only paper to our knowledge to estimate equation (1) using a repeat-sales
specification. It estimates separate regressions by MSA but does not control
for geography within the MSA. This effectively means that it is comparing
price growth and nearby foreclosures for non-distressed repeat sales across
entire MSAs, and thus its estimates are prone to the same identification
issues that we discussed above in the context of Figure 2. There are strong
within-MSA patterns in price growth, with much sharper price declines in
poorer neighborhoods and locations further from the city center, and our
results below confirm that more disaggregated geographic controls generate
a major reduction in the estimate of γ. Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011)
(hereafter CGP), to our knowledge, is the only study in the literature that
20

includes a disaggregated set of geographic controls. CGP uses a hedonic
model and includes census-tract×year controls, which, as we saw from Figure
1, are slightly more aggregated than the CBG controls that we employ in this
paper. However, as we have shown, the difference in estimates of γ using
CBG versus census tract controls is small, which suggests that the census
tract is a sufficiently small geography to eliminate the influence of unobserved
heterogeneity in the estimation of equation (1). The other studies mentioned
above all use hedonic models with either no disaggregated geographic controls
or fairly broad ones.
While CGP does include relatively disaggregated fixed effects in its hedonic specification, the fixed effects are not the focus of its identification strategy. Instead, CGP focuses on a difference-in-differences approach. First, the
authors of CGP consider two γs: a γB associated with foreclosure completions that occur in the year prior to a nearby non-distressed sale and a γA
associated with foreclosure completions that occur in the year after a sale.
They argue that γA represents the causal effect of prices on foreclosures,
writing that, “To the extent that house prices drive foreclosures, low prices
should precede foreclosures rather than vice versa,” and that γB − γA therefore represents the causal effect of foreclosures on prices. In addition, CGP
takes another set of differences by subtracting γB − γA estimated for a ring
0.10–0.25 mile away from the sale from γB − γA estimated for foreclosure
within 0.10 mile.
Superficially, the approach in CGP appears to differ sharply from ours
but, in practice, the approaches are quite similar. Following CGP, we could
interpret γSDQ,close as the effect of prices on foreclosures and γREO,close as the
combined effect of prices on foreclosure and foreclosures on prices and then
report
γREO,close − γSDQ,close − (γREO,far − γSDQ,far) .
This is because foreclosure auctions that occur after the non-distressed sale
are most likely in a state of SDQ before the time of the sale. Thus, our
21

γSDQ,close roughly corresponds to the γA in CGP.
But in contrast to CGP we choose to report the individual coefficients
and to interpret them separately. To see why, suppose that the true mechanism for the foreclosure externality works through reduced investment. As
we discuss in Section 5.2 below, theory says we should expect that seriously
delinquent homeowners will underinvest, generating negative externalities for
neighboring properties. Using the CGP approach, we would mistakenly identify that underinvestment as the effect of prices on foreclosures and conclude
that there was no effect of foreclosures on house prices prior to the foreclosure
and a severely attenuated effect after. Therefore, we believe that the coefficient estimates themselves, γREO,close and γSDQ,close (or γB and γA ), rather
than the difference, is the relevant estimate of the externality.
Similarly, unlike CGP, we do not focus on the difference between the
close and far coefficient estimates. The reason for this is that it is unclear
whether or not distressed properties between 0.10 and 0.25 mile away exert
a true causal impact on prices. If they do not, then taking this difference as
CGP do would be correct, as any estimated effect of distressed properties on
prices within this distance would be capturing simultaneity bias. However, if
distressed properties within this distance do in fact have a causal impact on
prices, then taking the difference would yield an underestimate of the true
causal impact. Ideally, theory would provide some guidance on this issue,
but unfortunately it does not. To put it another way, there is no a priori
reason to think that a foreclosure 0.11 mile away has no effect on prices but
a foreclosure 0.09 mile away does. But, depending on the causal mechanism
in play, there may be good reasons to expect the effect of foreclosures on
prices to dissipate with distance. For example, if distressed properties impact
prices because of an investment externality, we would certainly expect the
magnitude of such an effect to decrease with distance. However, the distance
at which the effect goes to zero is not clear, and may not be 0.10 mile, which
is what CGP implicitly assumes by taking the difference. For this reason, we

22

include and report counts of distressed property at both distance bins, but
do not take the difference in the respective coefficient estimates.
We find that taking CGP’s difference-in-differences estimator seriously
with our data implies that a foreclosure has no economically meaningful effect
on prices, as the γs associated with SDQ and REO properties are roughly
the same. CGP’s authors do find a significant effect, but the difference
between our findings and their headline number results from the inclusion
of condominiums in their main sample. For the single-family residential
properties that we (and most previous papers in the literature) focus on, their
point estimate is close to zero and statistically insignificant.11 Taken literally,
the conclusion of the CGP analysis would be that foreclosures of single-family
properties have no effect on the prices of other single-family properties. But a
more plausible interpretation is that CGP’s authors are over-differencing and,
as a result, are underestimating the impact of foreclosures on nearby nondistressed home values. CGP does find and report significant γ coefficients
associated with foreclosures that occurred both before and after the nondistressed sale, so that a more plausible interpretation of its empirical results
is that γA measures foreclosure externalities that occur before the foreclosure
is completed and not the causal effect of prices on foreclosures.
Since the publication of CGP, other researchers have adopted the differencein-differences approach. Hartley (2011) looks at foreclosures in Chicago and
estimates different γs by structure type. He finds that while the γ associated
with a single-family foreclosure on a single-family sale is significantly negative, the γ associated with a multi-family foreclosure on a single-family sale
is not. Hartley interprets this as evidence that the supply of property rather
than investment externalities drives the discount. However, while multifamily γ is statistically insignificant, it is economically large and positive, raising
questions about the interpretation of the coefficient. Further, Hartley finds
effects only within 0.05 mile and no effect between 0.05 and 0.10 mile, contra11

See Table A-19 of the Internet Appendix to Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011).

23

dicting most previous research, including CGP. Anenberg and Kung (2012)
look at sales of single-family properties near San Francisco over the period
2007–2009 and augments CGP by including information about listings. Its
authors argue that there is no foreclosure externality effect because they find
that the γ of foreclosures that occur prior to a sale is zero. In this respect,
their results contradict CGP, our findings and all of the previous research
cited above.
As we noted above in the introduction, two important differences between
our specification and all previous work are the use of stock measures of distressed property rather than flows, and the focus on distressed properties
before rather than after the foreclosure completion. For example, Immergluck and Smith (2006) counts foreclosure deeds in the two years prior to
the sale of non-distressed property; Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009)
constructs a series of measures of foreclosure deeds in three month intervals
before and after the sale; and CGP counts all properties for which foreclosure proceedings have been completed. By focusing on properties that have
completed the foreclosure process, these papers implicitly assume that the
externality does not occur until the foreclosure auction takes place. As we
have seen, this is clearly not the case.12
To see this more clearly, consider a specification that includes the number
of foreclosure completions that take place one year before the non-distressed
sale of interest. Effectively, such a specification assumes that a property
that was foreclosed on more than one year in the past plays absolutely no
role whatsoever in the pricing of a nearby property. One might argue that
exactly the opposite is true: the properties that produce the most blight,
and that may be most likely to adversely impact surrounding values are the
properties that lenders cannot sell. To make matters worse, the potential
bias introduced by measuring flows instead of stocks is likely not constant
12

An exception is Schuetz, Been, and Ellen (2008), which counts the number of foreclosure initiations, known as lis pendens filings in New York, in the 18 months prior to a
non-distressed sale.

24

over time or across locations. Foreclosure timelines differ widely across states
and have slowed considerably through the recent boom/bust cycle, especially
in states that require judicial review.13
Until the mid-2000s, studies that estimated hedonic price regressions similar to equation (1) largely ignored foreclosures because, up to that point,
foreclosures were not a major issue. Two topics of focus in the early literature were the presence of sex offenders and subsidized housing programs.14
We focus on the latter because it is, in fact closely related to the topic of
this paper. Many early studies using aggregated data attempted to calculate
whether subsidized housing raised house prices. Galster, Tatian, and Smith
(1999) developed a methodology to use transactions-level data to measure
the impact of Section 8 housing15 on the sale prices of neighboring properties. Its authors compared the sale prices of properties within 500 feet of a
Section 8 site before and after the site transitioned to Section 8 and assumed
that the difference in sale prices measures the treatment effect. Many studies
in the literature subsequently used this methodology, which is very close to
the strategy used by CGP that we discussed above. The most relevant to
our analysis is Schwartz et al. (2006), which used both highly disaggregated
location variables, and, for one specification, used the repeat-sales method
rather than a hedonic specification to control for property characteristics.
All of the cited papers used similar methods, regressing log price or price
growth on some measure of distressed property within a given radius. The
only paper to deviate substantially is Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Owens III
(2010), which estimated a version of equation (1) to measure the effects of
a program in Richmond, VA to subsidize investment in properties in disadvantaged neighborhoods. Its authors diverged from the literature by using
13

See Gerardi, Lambie-Hanson, and Willen (2011) for a discussion of foreclosure timelines across states and over time.
14
Linden and Rockoff (2008) estimate a version of equation (1) using data on the registration of sex offenders at particular addresses.
15
Section 8 refers to the eighth section of the Housing Act of 1937, which authorized
payments of rental housing assistance to landlords on behalf of low-income households.

25

a semiparametric approach to estimate a pricing surface for all locations in
their subject area and then looked at how the investment affected the surface.
A key difference between the investment externality literature and the
foreclosure externality literature is the permanence of the effect. With some
possible exceptions, serious delinquency and REO status are temporary states,
whereas investment is longer lived. Thus, the distinction between stocks and
flows is likely less important for the investment externality question than for
the foreclosure externality question.

5

Interpretation

In Section 3, we established some empirical facts. Houses that sell very
close to all forms of distressed property appear to do so at slightly lower
prices than otherwise similar properties in the same CBG that sell without
the presence of nearby distressed properties. The effect appears when the
borrower becomes seriously delinquent on his mortgage and disappears one
year after the lender sells the foreclosed property to a new homeowner in an
arms-length transaction. What can explain these empirical observations? If
our identification strategy, which uses a repeat-sale specification with disaggregated geographic fixed effects, is truly successful in dealing with reverse
causality and simultaneity bias, then we argue that the likely explanation
for the empirical evidence in this paper is what we refer to as an “investment externality” effect. This refers to the tendency of financially distressed
borrowers and lenders that do not derive consumption services from foreclosed property to underinvest in property maintenance, leading to physical
deterioration of the property and, in turn, causing a reduction in the value
of nearby property to potential buyers. On the other hand, if our identification strategy fails to deal successfully with the severe econometric issues
that we discussed above, then two alternative explanations of the estimation
results are plausible: demand shocks and supply shocks. We begin by dis26

cussing these two alternative explanations, and then turn to a discussion of
investment externalities.

5.1

Supply and demand effects

The idea that a fall in demand leads to a fall in prices and an increase in
foreclosures has strong support in theory and in the data. Default makes
sense for a borrower only if he is in a position of negative equity, that is,
if his mortgage debt exceeds the value of his home, and it is difficult to
have negative equity without falling prices. More broadly, models in which
households face only limited opportunities to take out unsecured loans yield
a relationship between the extent of negative equity and the probability of
foreclosure.16 Studies using micro-level data confirm the theory, showing a
strong relationship between equity and foreclosure, and Gerardi, Shapiro,
and Willen (2009) shows that the estimated relationship is driven by withintown, within-time variation in equity and therefore is not attributable to
causality running from foreclosures to prices. How does this relate to the
current paper? All else being equal, a negative demand shock in location
A relative to location B would lead to a fall in prices in location A and a
concomitant increase in negative equity and foreclosures.
The fact that the demand theory could explain the observed facts does
not necessarily mean that it does explain them. One important fact does
provide some support for the demand story and that is the result in Table 8 in
which we found that γ is significantly negative even for minor delinquencies.
One could argue that it is unlikely for significant property depreciation to
occur in situations in which borrowers have only missed one or two mortgage
payments, and thus, this empirical finding suggests that the estimates of γ
may be explained by reverse causality. However, it could also be the case that
a borrower who has only missed a few payments may have been in financial
duress for quite some time, in which case the lack of investment in property
16

See Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007).

27

maintenance might be a plausible explanation for the negative coefficient
estimate associated with minor DQs.
But two additional empirical facts are inconsistent with the demand explanation. The first is the fact that the estimated γ is so much smaller for
nearby properties sold out of REO more than a year in the past. While it is
without doubt possible to construct a model in which demand recovers after
the foreclosure, it seems implausible. The second broader issue here is that
we are looking at variation within CBGs and any demand story (and any
supply story, as well, as we argue below) must operate at the market level.
For the demand theory to make sense, we would have to believe that there
are distinct submarkets within a census block group, a geographic area with
a “target size,” according to the Census, of around 1500 people.17 Recall
that since we are looking at repeat sales, some shock would have to happen
at a given time and impact one part of the CBG more than another. For
example, one end of a CBG may have ocean views, but to explain our results,
it would have to be the case that demand for ocean views rose or fell more
over the relevant time period than the demand for properties in the CBG
without ocean views.
A popular alternative to the demand theory is the supply theory, which
posits that a foreclosure increases the supply of property on the market and
drives down prices. Unlike the demand theory, the supply theory is not an
obvious consequence of standard economic theory. Normally, when we price
long-lived assets like houses, we define supply as all of the assets that exist,
not just the ones currently for sale. Foreclosures do not change the number
of houses or the quantity of land in a market, so standard models would
not predict any effect on prices. Market frictions obviously could change
this. When shopping for a home, buyers generally restrict their attention to
properties listed for sale, and an increase in the number of options gives the
buyer more bargaining power. One might then argue that we should focus our
17

http://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/bg_metadata.html.

28

attention on the listing of the foreclosed property to identify supply effects.
However, both buyers and especially sellers know about foreclosures before
they transition to REO and are listed by the lender, since foreclosures are, by
law, public information. Therefore, we cannot assume that the foreclosure
would not affect the listing behavior of other sellers who might, for example,
list prior to the foreclosure’s making the transition to REO, in order to exploit
the temporarily low supply. In a sense, with forward-looking households, the
question would be when the news that the property will go on the market
arrives. But, if buyers and sellers are that forward-looking, then the whole
short-run frictions story has less merit. To make matters more confusing, a
troubled borrower facing foreclosure cannot sell his or her home—that is the
reason he or she is facing foreclosure—so, according to the bargaining story
above, serious delinquency should drive down supply and increase prices.
Our view is that the supply theory is not a very good candidate to explain
the estimation results in this paper. The supply story could potentially
explain why prices rise after the REO sale: with the property now off the
market, prices recover to their pre-delinquency level. However, other facts
from the data work against it. The first problem is the evidence on condition.
If we thought foreclosed properties were driving down prices by competing
with non-distressed sales, then we would expect, at the very least, that the
properties in above average condition would have the same effect as properties
in below average condition and, indeed, we might even expect the aboveaverage properties to generate even more competition. The second problem
with the supply story is the same one that, in our opinion, dooms the demand
story: the fact that we are identifying γ using within-CBG variation. With
that said, it is important to stress that while we doubt that variation in
supply explains the estimation results, because of our empirical design, we
are unable to say much about the potential existence of supply effects from
distressed properties. This is because, in all likelihood, any supply effect that
operates at the level of a local housing market is washed away by construction

29

with the inclusion of highly disaggregated geographic fixed effects in the
regression specification.

5.2

Investment externalities

The third candidate explanation for the results in Section 3 is that foreclosures lead to an investment externality. According to this theory, neither
delinquent borrowers nor lenders have an incentive to maintain the property
properly, which leads to physical deterioration of the property that some
have labeled a “disamenity,” and this, in turn, reduces the value of nearby
property to potential buyers. The investment disincentive is arguably present
both during the SDQ period and when the property is REO. There are two
reasons why seriously delinquent borrowers are unlikely to maintain properties. The first is that many of them have suffered cash-flow-depleting life
events and discount future consumption heavily relative to current consumption. Effectively, this raises the hurdle rate on any investment in the property.
The second problem is that many seriously delinquent borrowers expect to
lose their homes and, therefore, the long-term benefits of any investment
would accrue to the ultimate owner of the property—the lender.
After the foreclosure, there are good reasons to expect underinvestment
as well. Narrowly, the lender does not obtain any consumption benefit from
investment. More broadly, the scale of residential lending leads to an information problem. The agent managing the property rarely has a large ownership
stake in the property. This is obviously true when the agent is acting on
behalf of a securitization trust, but it is even true when the agent works
for a bank that owns the property. The issue is that the amount of profitable investment in the property is a matter of discretion, and the owner
of the property cannot be sure whether the manager has other incentives.
As with all standard asymmetric information problems, the result would be
a failure to exploit profitable gains from trade, in this case, investment in
the property. Another way to put this is that the optimal mechanism for
30

investment in single-family residential real estate is to sell the property to a
small-scale investor who internalizes the costs and benefits.
Evidence from the existing literature supports the existence of an investment externality. First, there is ample evidence that foreclosed properties
suffer from underinvestment. We will focus our discussion on studies that
use data from the current crisis period, but there is an older literature that
emerged well before the most recent housing market boom and bust, which
we will not cover. Interested readers can find a summary of this older literature in Frame (2010).
Pennington-Cross (2006) uses a variant of the repeat-sales methodology
on nationally representative data from 1995 to 1999 and finds that the price
of a distressed property appreciates significantly less than the prevailing
metropolitan area price index in which the property is located. The average difference is 22 percent, but it is highly sensitive to both the length of
time that a property spends in the foreclosure process and the length of time
that it remains in REO, as well as to certain mortgage characteristics and
state-level foreclosure laws.
CGP finds a 27 percent foreclosure discount for single-family properties
in Massachusetts over a significantly longer period of time, 1987–2007. In
addition to looking at foreclosures, the authors identify properties in which
the owners have died or declared bankruptcy. For these properties, they
estimate a much lower discount: between 3 and 7 percent. CGP’s authors
find evidence that the death discount is due to lack of maintenance while the
bankruptcy discount is due to liquidity concerns. They find evidence that
the foreclosure discount is larger for houses in poorer neighborhoods with
less valuable characteristics and interpret this as evidence that the discount
is related to concerns about vandalism: Either the properties have been damaged while they are on the market or the cost of protection against potential
vandalism is so high that the mortgage lenders are willing to accept significant discounts to sell them quickly. This difference in the estimated forced

31

sales discounts between foreclosures and deaths/bankruptcies is consistent
with the investment externality effect that we discussed above. Since the
non-foreclosure-related forced sales do not suffer from a separation between
physical and legal ownership, they are less likely to experience the misaligned
incentives that could impede property maintenance. This could explain the
relatively small discount that CGP finds for non-foreclosure related forced
sales compared to foreclosures.18
Second, the literature on subsidized investment, discussed in Section 4,
shows that investment in property affects the value of nearby properties.
Both Schwartz et al. (2006) and Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Owens III (2010)
examine programs that encouraged investment in individual properties and
find important effects. Combining the findings of the foreclosure discount
literature and the investment externalities literature, it would almost be surprising if previous studies had not uncovered foreclosure externalities.
What specific evidence do we find in favor of the investment externalities
theory? First, there is the evidence on the condition of REO property. Again,
it is hard to reconcile the demand or supply stories with the fact that the
coefficient estimate associated with nearby below average REO comes in so
far below the coefficient estimate associated with nearby REO in average
and above average condition. Second, the investment externalities story can
explain why the estimate is negative even for minor delinquencies and why
it disappears after the new arms-length owner has had a chance to invest in
the property.
18

Clauretie and Daneshvary (2009) also finds a foreclosure discount of slightly less than
10 percent in the Las Vegas metropolitan area between 2004 and 2007. In contrast,
Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2011) finds little evidence of a meaningful foreclosure
discount, using both hedonic and repeat-sale methods.

32

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we document some new facts about foreclosure externalities.
We show that houses trade at slightly lower prices when there are homes
nearby with delinquent homeowners, when there are homes nearby owned
by lenders, and even when there are homes nearby recently sold by lenders
in arm’s length transactions. We show that nearby houses trade at lower
prices when the lender-owned property is in below-average condition and at
higher prices when it is in above average condition. We discuss three possible
explanations for the facts: supply effects, demand effects, and investment
externalities, and argue that the third is the most plausible. But to be sure,
the interactions of all three are so complex that no dataset and no model could
likely completely rule out an explanation or precisely allocate the observed
correlations to one of the three stories.
Perhaps the most important conclusion that one should take from this
analysis is that the effects of foreclosure and distressed property in general
on the prices of neighboring homes are fairly small. We estimate the effect of
a property in SDQ and a property in REO on the price of a home within 0.10
mile to be approximately -0.5 to -1.0 percent, an amount that would most
likely go unnoticed by the typical seller who does not have many distressed
homeowners living nearby. As Table 4 shows, the vast majority of properties
sell without any distressed property nearby, meaning that it is impossible to
attribute more than a token amount of the collapse in prices in the 2006–2010
period to foreclosures. Our estimates of the negative externality are smaller
than the estimates in much of the previous literature, and this likely has to
do with differences in empirical strategies. Our identification of the externality is based on using within-CBG variation in price growth and nearby
distressed properties, which we argue is more robust to reverse causality and
simultaneity concerns than most previous studies in the literature.
Finally, the policy implications of even a small investment externality
effect are important, especially in many of the areas that have been char33

acterized by large numbers of distressed properties throughout the recent
foreclosure crisis. Our results suggest that the key to minimizing the costs
of foreclosure is to minimize the time that properties spend in serious delinquency and in REO. On one hand, this implies putting pressure on lenders
to sell properties out of REO quickly. On the other hand, and perhaps much
less palatably, it implies minimizing the time a borrower spends in serious
delinquency, which means accelerating the foreclosure process.
Put another way, our results suggest that delaying the foreclosure process
exacts a cost on society as a whole that should be taken into account when
making policy. As an example, Massachusetts passed a “right-to-cure” law
in 2007, which forced lenders to give borrowers an additional 90 days to cure
their mortgage before foreclosure proceedings could start. Gerardi, LambieHanson, and Willen (2011) use a difference-in-differences approach to show
that the law did not benefit borrowers in the sense that borrowers subject
to the law were no more likely to cure or to renegotiate their loans than
borrowers who were not. One might say that the law only failed to produce
benefits, but our analysis suggests that it may also have imposed costs on
homeowners who lived near borrowers who were able to take advantage of
the law.

34

References
Anenberg, Eliot, and Edward Kung. 2012. “Estimates of the Size and
Source of Price Declines due to Nearby Foreclosures.” Working paper.
https://sites.google.com/site/elliotanenberg/research/Text AK.pdf.
Campbell, John Y, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Forced Sales
and House Prices.” American Economic Review 101(5): 2108 – 2131.
Clauretie, T.M., and N. Daneshvary. 2009. “Estimating the House Foreclosure Discount Corrected for Spatial Price Interdependence and Endogeneity of Marketing Time.” Real Estate Economics 37(1): 43–67.
Frame, W.S. 2010. “Estimating the Effect of Mortgage Foreclosures on
Nearby Property Values: A Critical Review of the Literature.” FRB Atlanta Economic Review.
Galster, G.C., P. Tatian, and R. Smith. 1999. “The Impact of Neighbors Who
Use Section 8 Certificates on Property Values.” Housing Policy Debate
10(4): 879–917.
Gerardi, K., A.H. Shapiro, and P.S. Willen. 2009. “Decomposing the Foreclosure Crisis: House Price Depreciation Versus Bad Underwriting.” Working
Paper.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen. 2011. “Do
Borrower Rights Improve Borrower Outcomes? Evidence from the Foreclosure Process.” Working Paper 17666. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen. 2007. “Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and
Foreclosures.” Working Paper 07-15. Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston.
Available at http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/wp/wp2007/wp0715.
pdf.
Harding, J.P., E. Rosenblatt, and V. Yao. 2011. “The Foreclosure Discount:
Myth or Reality?” Forthcoming Journal of Urban Economics.

Harding, J.P., E. Rosenblatt, and V.W. Yao. 2009. “The Contagion Effect
of Foreclosed Properties.” Journal of Urban Economics 66(3): 164–178.
Hartley, Daniel. 2011. “The Effect of Foreclosures on Nearby Housing Prices:
Supply or Disamenity?” Working Paper 10-11R. Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland.
Immergluck, D., and G. Smith. 2006. “The External Costs of Foreclosure:
The Impact of Single-family Mortgage Foreclosures on Property Values.”
Housing Policy Debate 17(1): 57–79.
Lin, Z., E. Rosenblatt, and V.W. Yao. 2009. “Spillover Effects of Foreclosures
on Neighborhood Property Values.” The Journal of Real Estate Finance
and Economics 38(4): 387–407.
Linden, L., and J.E. Rockoff. 2008. “Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk
on Property Values from Megan’s Laws.” The American Economic Review
98(3): 1103–1127.
Pennington-Cross, A. 2006. “The Value of Foreclosed Property.” Journal of
Real Estate Research 28(2): 193–214.
Rogers, W.H., and W. Winter. 2009. “The Impact of Foreclosures on Neighboring Housing Sales.” Journal of Real Estate Research 31(4): 455–479.
Rossi-Hansberg, E., P.D. Sarte, and R. Owens III. 2010. “Housing Externalities.” Journal of Political Economy 118(3).
Schuetz, J., V. Been, and I.G. Ellen. 2008. “Neighborhood Effects of Concentrated Mortgage Foreclosures.” Journal of Housing Economics 17(4):
306–319.
Schwartz, A.E., I.G. Ellen, I. Voicu, and M.H. Schill. 2006. “The External
Effects of Place-based Subsidized Housing.” Regional Science and Urban
Economics 36(6): 679–707.

Table 2: Distribution of Repeat-Sale Observations By MSA and Year
Panel A: By Metropolitan Statistical Area
# CBGs
Atlanta
Boston
Chicago
Detroit
LV
LA
Miami
New York
Orlando
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Riverside
Seattle
Tampa
DC

1,020
1,029
1,139
1,060
438
2,228
825
2,023
383
1,485
1,069
885
836
745
1,767

Total

16,932

2006

Share of repeat-sale Transactions
2007
2008
2009
2010

26.8%
19.5
24.2
18.3
25.6
24.3
33.1
21.5
29.3
24.7
26.1
27.8
28.5
30.0
26.2

23.0%
21.0
19.7
20.1
15.1
16.3
19.6
22.3
17.7
23.4
18.3
14.9
24.6
18.7
19.2

17.7%
18.1
16.9
20.9
17.2
16.1
12.8
19.7
13.2
18.0
17.1
16.2
16.1
14.5
16.7

14.9%
21.0
20.3
20.7
20.5
22.1
16.3
20.4
17.9
18.3
18.8
19.7
15.7
18.1
19.4

17.6%
20.4
19.0
20.0
21.6
21.2
18.1
16.2
22.0
15.8
19.7
21.4
15.1
18.6
18.5

Total
71,086
22,897
27,853
23,300
71,189
84,552
67,240
45,305
29,906
51,038
154,243
94,435
35,893
54,743
124,833

252,478 181,551 159,176 181,391 183,917 958,513
Panel B: By Year

Year of Purchase

Year of Sale
2008
2009

%

85,426
105,193
136,665
170,717
195,849
134,663
58,828
30,318
23,065
11,704

9.0%
11.0%
14.3%
17.9%
20.6%
14.1%
6.2%
3.2%
2.4%
1.2%

2007

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

30,714
37,600
49,441
58,144
56,544
19,966
.
.
.
.

19,135
23,699
30,042
37,750
34,501
24,237
12,112
.
.
.

Total
%

252,409 181,476 159,056 180,171 179,316 952,428 100.0%
26.5%
19.1%
16.7%
18.9%
18.8% 100.0%

12,243
14,942
19,476
25,166
34,412
28,386
14,690
9,741
.
.

11,846
14,673
19,220
25,203
36,221
32,574
14,996
13,069
12,369
.

2010

Total

2006

11,488
14,279
18,486
24,454
34,171
29,500
17,030
7,508
10,696
11,704

Notes: This table reports the distribution of repeat-sale pairs of non-distressed transactions
across the 15 largest metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in the United States. The data
are drawn from public records purchased from a national data aggregator. The data
include all repeat-sale pairs in which the first sale occurred between 2001 and 2010 and
the second sale between 2006 and 2010.

Table 3: Summary Statistics of Property Characteristics for Repeat-Sales
Observations

Mean
Price ($)
Prior ($)
Appreciation (%)
Holding Period (qtrs)

Std

Min

p25

p50

p75

Max

331,217 252,565 4,500 180,900 270,400 400,000 9,775,000
349,559 279,454 4,500 187,000 285,000 425,000 9,500,000
2.9
43.3
-204.0
-19.8
5.7
32.1
187.2
13.9
8.4
1
8
13
20
39

Property Characteristics
Size (square ft.)
1,973
Lot (square ft.)
12,424
Age (years)
23.8

849
23,014
21.9

500
500
0

1,372
5,200
7

1,770
7,405
16

2,371
10,890
36

32,222
435,600
150

Notes: This table displays summary statistics of the hedonic variables that are included
in the various empirical models discussed in the text. The mean, standard deviation, minimum, 25th percentile (p25), 50th percentile (p50), 75th percentile (p75), and maximum
of each variable are displayed.

Table 4: Summary Statistics of Nearby Distressed Properties for RepeatSales Observations

A: % of sales with # distressed property within 330 feet
0
1
# SDQs
Long SDQs
Short SDQs
Minor DQs
REO Inventory
REO Sales in last year
REO Sales 1-2 years ago
Total Distressed

65.6
87.6
70.7
30.2
81.3
80.4
86.5
66.7

19.6
8.4
19.3
18.8
11.9
10.3
8.2
14.9

2

3

4

≥5

7.7
2.4
6.4
13.9
3.9
3.9
2.5
6.5

3.5
0.9
2.2
10.4
1.6
2.0
1.2
3.7

1.7
0.4
0.8
7.6
0.7
1.2
0.6
2.3

2.0
0.4
0.6
19.0
0.7
2.1
1.0
6.0

B: % of sales with difference in # distressed property within 330 feet
<0
0
1
Long
REO
REO
REO

SDQs
Inventory
Sales in last year
Sales 1-2 years ago

2

3

4

≥5

1.5
4.8
5.2
0.2

84.5
77.8
83.0
89.3

9.1
9.3
7.2
7.1

2.9
3.5
2.2
2.0

1.1
1.8
1.0
0.8

0.5
1.0
0.6
0.3

0.4
1.8
0.9
0.3

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Total

22.9
1.7
22.0
68.6
7.4
3.8
6.1
11.7

22.8
2.1
21.7
68.6
10.2
4.1
3.8
14.5

29.9
6.5
26.3
68.8
23.9
18.1
4.5
35.9

45.0
23.7
33.7
70.8
27.1
38.4
17.5
54.3

55.5
31.2
44.9
72.2
29.7
39.5
37.1
58.8

34.5
12.4
29.3
69.8
18.7
19.6
13.5
33.4

REO
inventory
(< 0.1 miles)

REO sales
in last year
(< 0.1 miles)

REO
inventory
(0.1-0.25 miles)

REO sales
in last year
(0.1-0.25 miles)

C: % of Sales with > 0...
SDQs
Long SDQs
Short SDQs
Minor DQs
REO Inventory
REO Sales in last year
REO Sales 1-2 years ago
Total Distressed
D: Correlations
SDQ
inventory
(< 0.1 miles)
SDQ inventory
(< 0.1 miles)
REO inventory
(< 0.1 miles)
REO sales in last year
(< 0.1 miles)
REO sales 1-2 years ago
(< 0.1 miles)
SDQ inventory
(0.1 - 0.25 miles)
REO inventory
(0.1 - 0.25 miles)
REO sales in last year
(0.1 - 0.25 miles)
REO sales 1-2 years ago
(0.1 - 0.25 miles)

SDQ
REO sales
1-2 years ago
inventory
(< 0.1 miles) (0.1-0.25 miles)

REO sales
1-2 years ago
(0.1-0.25 miles)

1
0.31

1

0.44

0.47

1

0.33

0.29

0.45

1

0.61

0.30

0.45

0.35

1

0.31

0.65

0.49

0.31

0.40

1

0.44

0.46

0.73

0.45

0.55

0.59

1

0.34

0.29

0.45

0.67

0.43

0.39

0.56

Notes: This table displays summary statistics on the number of nearby distressed properties to the non-distressed repeat-sales observations in the sample. A “short” SDQ is
defined as a property in which the borrower has been in serious delinquency for less than
one year, a “long” SDQ is defined as a serious delinquency that has lasted for more than
one year, and a “minor delinquency” is defined as a property in which the borrower is only
one or two payments behind. Total Distressed refers to long SDQs, REO inventory, and
both REO sales variables.

1

Table 5: Baseline Specification. Dependent variable is price growth between purchase and sale.
Panel B: Different Years
2006
2007
∆ in Long SDQs (< 0.1 miles)

Panel A: Baseline Specification
∆ Long SDQ (< 0.1 miles)
∆ Foreclosure Inventory (< 0.1 miles)
∆ REO sold in last year (< 0.1 miles)
∆ REO sold 1-2 years ago (< 0.1 miles)
∆ Long SDQ (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ Foreclosure Inventory (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ REO sold in last year (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ REO sold 1-2 years ago (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
Property Age
2

Property Age
Log(Lot size)

Log(Living area)
# of properties <330 ft
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.012
(24.6)
-0.009
(21.5)
-0.006
(68.9)
0.001
(1.6)
-0.008
(43.9)
-0.007
(40.2)
-0.002
(23.3)
0.004
(28.7)
0.001
(23.0)
0.000
(18.0)
-0.004
(4.8)
0.068
(42.9)
0.837
(26.4)

-0.011
(22.3)
-0.008
(19.5)
-0.005
(66.6)
0.001
(2.2)
-0.008
(44.0)
-0.006
(39.8)
-0.002
(24.9)
0.004
(28.2)
0.001
(24.8)
0.000
(19.3)
-0.015
(23.2)
0.064
(40.5)
-

-0.012
(23.6)
-0.008
(19.8)
-0.005
(71.2)
0.001
(2.7)
-0.008
(44.8)
-0.007
(40.1)
-0.002
(26.1)
0.004
(29.0)
-

0.84

0.83

0.82

-

∆ in REO inventory (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in REO sold in past year (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in REO sold 1-2 year ago (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in Long SDQs (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ in REO inventory (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ in REO sold in past year (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ in REO sold 1-2 year ago (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
R2

∆ in Long SDQs (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in REO inventory (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in REO sold in past year (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in REO sold 1-2 year ago (< 0.1 miles)
∆ in Long SDQs (0.1 − 0.25 miles)

-

2009

2010

-0.032
(10.2)
-0.004
(5.1)
-0.003
(4.9)
-0.002
(3.3)
-0.025
(15.6)
0.002
(5.9)
0.000
(1.9)
-0.001
(4.8)

-0.018
(14.3)
-0.007
(14.8)
-0.006
(15.0)
0.000
(0.5)
-0.016
(28.5)
-0.003
(16.6)
-0.003
(18.1)
0.003
(14.6)

-0.012
(24.6)
-0.009
(21.5)
-0.006
(24.6)
0.001
(1.6)
-0.008
(43.9)
-0.007
(40.2)
-0.002
(23.3)
0.004
(28.7)

-0.015
(33.3)
-0.010
(22.3)
-0.006
(23.6)
-0.001
(3.1)
-0.008
(54.4)
-0.008
(45.9)
-0.002
(22.1)
0.002
(18.2)

0.39

0.44

0.69

0.84

0.80

Panel C: Different Geographic Controls
None
MSA County

-

2008

-0.052
(14.3)
-0.019
(18.3)
-0.001
(3.5)
-0.001
(1.9)
-0.045
(22.4)
-0.007
(17.4)
-0.001
(7.6)
0.000
(1.7)

∆ in REO inventory (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ in REO sold in past year (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
∆ in REO sold 1-2 year ago (0.1 − 0.25 miles)
R2

Tract

CBG

-0.023
(36.5)
-0.019
(35.7)
-0.011
(37.6)
-0.001
(1.4)
-0.010
(-46.5)
-0.013
(64.4)
-0.005
(40.0)
0.004
(21.9)

-0.016
(29.1)
-0.013
(27.1)
-0.009
(33.7)
0.000
(0.0)
-0.008
(43.6)
-0.008
(45.7)
-0.004
(36.0)
0.005
(28.5)

-0.017
(30.6)
-0.012
(25.5)
-0.007
(27.6)
0.002
(4.0)
-0.010
(51.6)
-0.009
(48.3)
-0.003
(32.4)
0.005
(33.1)

-0.012
(24.5)
-0.010
(22.2)
-0.006
(24.1)
0.001
(1.8)
-0.008
(43.9)
-0.007
(41.9)
-0.002
(23.2)
0.004
(29.0)

-0.012
(24.6)
-0.009
(21.5)
-0.006
(24.6)
0.001
(1.6)
-0.008
(43.9)
-0.007
(40.2)
-0.002
(23.3)
0.004
(28.7)

0.33

0.61

0.76

0.83

0.84

Notes: This table displays results from the estimation of equation (2). In all regressions reported, the independent variable
is price appreciation over the repeat-sale interval. Panel A includes a full set of CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects. Panel B
includes the hedonic controls listed in Panel A as well as CBG×year-of-purchase fixed effects. In panels A and C the second
sale year in the repeat-sale pair is 2009. The numbers in parentheses are t statistics.

Table 6: Effect of Property Condition and Vacancy Status based on 2010
Sample.
Diff. in SDQs by Vacancy Status
Occupied
-0.006
(7.4)
Vacant
-0.011
(13.9)
Missing Data
-0.008
(9.9)
Diff. in REO in Inv by Property Condition
Below average
-0.015
(5.0)
Average
-0.001
(0.8)
Above average
0.023
(6.00)
Missing Data
-0.005
(10.2)
Diff. in REO sold in past year
Diff. in REO sold 1-2 year ago
R2

-0.016
(38.3)
-0.007
(25.4)
0.77

Note: All regressions include the specification in column (1) of Panel A in Table 5, including controls for the number of distressed properties between 0.10 and 0.25 mile (not
shown), and a full set of CBG×year-of-purchase dummies. The top panel in the table
displays results for close (within 0.10 mile) SDQ inventory by vacancy status, while the
bottom panel displays results for close REO inventory in different states of upkeep. Numbers in parentheses are t statistics.

Table 7: Effect of REO/SDQs by Distance based on 2009 Sample.

Difference in number of:
Long SDQs REO inventory
REO sold in:
0.0 - 0.10 miles
0.10 - 0.25 miles
0.25 - 0.50 miles
0.50 - 1.0 miles
R2

-0.007
(14.3)
-0.003
(9.5)
-0.001
(21.9)
-0.001
(30.4)

-0.007
(17.4)
-0.002
(15.6)
-0.002
(12.3)
-0.001
(15.3)

Last year

1-2 years ago

-0.006
(24.6)
-0.001
(9.2)
-0.000
(7.0)
0.000
(4.1)

-0.001
(2.4)
0.002
(13.8)
0.001
(13.2)
0.001
(16.2)

0.87

Note: The regression is specified as in column (1) of Panel A in Table 5 and a full set of
CBG×year-of-purchase dummies. Numbers in the parenthesis are t statistics.

Table 8: Alternative Specifications.

(1)
Minor DQs
Short SDQs
Long SDQs

(2)

Baseline
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.005
(19.0)
-0.011 -0.007
(18.6) (12.3)
-0.013 -0.011 -0.012
(25.9) (22.7) (24.4)

All SDQs

RHS in levels
(7)

Hedonic
(8)

-0.009
(18.4)

-0.013
(20.9)

-0.005
(12.4)
-0.006
(24.0)
-0.003
(5.0)

-0.008
(15.7)
-0.008
(25.3)
-0.004
(6.8)

0.71

0.84

-0.011
(31.1)

All SDQs with infill

-0.009
(31.3)
REO inventory
-0.009 -0.009 -0.010 -0.009 -0.009 -0.007
(22.1) (21.6) (23.1) (22.1) (21.6) (17.9)
REO sold in past year -0.006 -0.006 -0.007 -0.007 -0.006 -0.005
(25.4) (24.6) (27.1) (28.8) (24.6) (22.2)
REO sold 1-2 year ago 0.000 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.000
(1.2)
(1.9)
(1.4)
(1.0)
(1.8)
(1.0)
R2

0.73

0.73

0.73

0.72

0.73

0.73

Note: All regressions include the specification in column (1) of Panel A in Table 5, including controls for the number of distressed properties between 0.10 and 0.25 mile (not
shown) and a full set of CBG×year-of-purchase dummies. All reported coefficients are
significant at the 1% significance level. Numbers in parentheses are t statistics.

Figure 1: Census Tracts and Blocks in Cambridge, MA. 2010 Census.

Figure 2: Importance of Geographic Controls
Map of Foreclosures and Sales
Sale 1

Tract A

Sale 2

Sale 5

Tract B

Sale 6

Sale 3
Sale 4

Map of Foreclosures and Sales without Census Tract Controls
Sale 1

Sale 2

Sale 5
Sale 6
Sale 3
Sale 4

