NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A LONG-RUN RISKS EXPLANATION OF PREDICTABILITY PUZZLES IN BOND
AND CURRENCY MARKETS
Ravi Bansal
Ivan Shaliastovich
Working Paper 18357
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18357

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We would like to thank the participants of the SED 2012 meeting, Financial Research Association
meeting, UBC Winter Conference, Duke University, University of Zurich and Wharton School, Geert
Bekaert, Tim Bollerslev, Mikhail Chernov, Riccardo Colacito, Max Croce, Gregory Duffee, Bjorn
Eraker, David Hsieh, Monika Piazzesi, Nikolai Roussanov, Ken Singleton, George Tauchen, Andrea
Vedolin, Adrien Verdelhan, Pietro Veronesi, and Amir Yaron. Ravi Bansal (email: ravi.bansal@duke.edu,
tel: 919-660-7758) is affiliated with the Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, and NBER. Send
correspondence to Ivan Shaliastovich (email: ishal@wharton.upenn.edu, tel: 215-746-0005), Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ravi Bansal and Ivan Shaliastovich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets
Ravi Bansal and Ivan Shaliastovich
NBER Working Paper No. 18357
September 2012
JEL No. E0,F0,F3,F31,G0,G1
ABSTRACT
We show that bond risk-premia rise with uncertainty about expected inflation and fall with uncertainty
about expected growth; the magnitude of return predictability using these two uncertainty measures
is similar to that by multiple yields. Motivated by this evidence, we develop and estimate a long-run
risks model with time-varying volatilities of expected growth and inflation. The model simultaneously
accounts for bond return predictability and violations of uncovered interest parity in currency markets.
We find that preference for early resolution of uncertainty, time-varying volatilities, and non-neutral
effects of inflation on growth are important to account for these aspects of asset markets.

Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Ivan Shaliastovich
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2423 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ishal@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction
Several aspects of bond and currency markets are puzzling from the perspective of
equilibrium asset-pricing models. Bond and foreign currency excess returns are predictable; Campbell and Shiller (1991), Dai and Singleton (2002) and Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) provide evidence for bond return predictability using bond yields as
predictors, while Fama (1984), Bansal (1997) and Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001)
document predictability of currency returns and the concomitant violations of uncovered interest rate parity. Accounting for this predictability and identifying the exact
economic sources of this variation in expected excess returns is challenging from the
perspective of economic models. In this paper, we provide direct empirical evidence
which tightly connects the fluctuations in bond premia to uncertainties in long-run
expectations of real growth and inflation. We find that high expected growth uncertainty lowers nominal bond premia, while high uncertainty about expected inflation
raises the premia; as a consequence, the bond risk premia can vary from being positive
to negative. The magnitude of bond return predictability based on the uncertainty
variables is similar to that found using yield-based factors to predict excess bond returns. Motivated by this evidence, we develop an inflation-augmented long-run risks
model where the risk premia are driven by the volatilities of expected growth and
expected inflation. We estimate this model and show that it quantitatively captures
the documented bond predictability features in the data, and simultaneously accounts
for the violations of uncovered interest rate parity in foreign currency markets.
Specifically, our model uses a long-run risks setup of Bansal and Yaron (2004).
The key ingredients of the model include preference for early resolution of uncertainty,
time-variation in expected consumption growth and expected inflation, fluctuations
in the volatility of expected real growth and expected inflation, and inflation nonneutrality. In the model, expected consumption and expected inflation are driven by
persistent shocks whose conditional volatilities are time-varying and capture fluctuations in long-run real and inflation uncertainties, respectively. We allow for expected
inflation shocks to negatively affect expected consumption dynamics, which reflects
inflation non-neutrality: high expected inflation is bad news for future consumption.
With preference for early resolution of uncertainty, expected consumption and expected inflation shocks are priced in equilibrium and determine the risk premium on
bonds. In particular, due to the non-neutrality of inflation, the risk compensation
for expected inflation shocks plays an important role to generate an upward slope of
the nominal term structure and a significant variation in the bond risk premium over
time. The time-variation in bond risk premia is driven by the conditional volatilities of expected consumption and expected inflation, so that future bond returns are
predictable by the real and inflation volatilities. We show that in equilibrium, an
increase in inflation uncertainty raises nominal bond risk premia, while an increase
in real uncertainty actually lowers the bond risk premia. The predictability of bond

3

returns and the difference in the responses of bond risk premia to real and inflation
volatility capture an important dimension of the data.
In addition to predictability of domestic bond returns, we evaluate our model
implications for the predictability of foreign currency returns and the violations of
uncovered interest rate parity condition in currency markets. To explore the implications for exchange rates, we extend our model to a two-country symmetric set-up
similar to the long-run risks framework discussed in Colacito and Croce (2011). In our
model, high volatility periods are associated with low short-term interest rates and
high risk premium on foreign bonds, so due to the volatility channel, exchange rates
are predictable by the interest rate differential between the countries. In particular,
in the model high interest-rate bearing currencies are expected to appreciate, which
allows us to capture the violations of uncovered interest rate parity in the data. Consequently, our model can simultaneously capture the risk premia fluctuations both in
domestic and foreign bond markets.
In terms of the empirical evidence, we document a robust link between bond
premia and the volatilities of expected growth and expected inflation in the data. We
use average forecasts of one-year ahead real GDP growth and inflation from the Survey
of Professional Forecasts from 1969 to 2010, which contain significant information
about future real growth and inflation. For example, real growth forecast predicts one
year ahead real consumption growth with an R2 of almost 40%, and inflation forecast
predicts next year inflation rate with an R2 of 60%. We also construct measures of
conditional volatilities of real growth and inflation forecasts which we use to capture
the fluctuations in expected real growth and expected inflation uncertainty in the
data. There are significant differences in real and inflation volatilities across time.
For example, inflation uncertainty is much larger than real uncertainty from 1980 to
1985, which stands in a sharp contrast to 2005-2010 where real growth uncertainty
dominates inflation uncertainty. This has important implications for the bond premia
in those periods, both in the data and in the model, as we discuss below.
We find that our inflation and real growth uncertainty measures contain significant information about bond returns in the data. First, the two uncertainty variables
predict about 18% of future excess bond returns, comparable to the amount of predictability based on multiple yield variables, such as the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
bond risk premium factor, which is between 15% to 20% in our sample. The slope
coefficients in bond return regressions are negative on real uncertainty and positive
on inflation uncertainty, consistent with the equilibrium implication of the model.
Consistent with this evidence on bond return predictability, we find that the realized
term premium decreases with a rise in real uncertainty and increases when inflation
uncertainty is high, and the amount of predictability of future realized term premium
by the two uncertainty variables reaches 50% at 5-year horizon. We find similar
evidence of bond return predictability using UK bond market data. As in the US,
4

the R2 s in the regressions using two volatility factors match those based on using
multiple bond yield as predictors. Further, bond risk premia increase when inflation
uncertainty is high and decrease when real uncertainty is high, and the magnitudes
of bond return loadings on the volatility factors are comparable to the US.
To assess the empirical validity of the various economic channels highlighted in the
model, we formally estimate the model using the latent-factor Maximum Likelihood
Estimation approach. Specifically, we use observations of nominal yields of one to five
years to maturity and expected inflation from the survey data, and treat expected
real growth and real and inflation uncertainties as latent factors. Our quarterly data
based estimate for a risk aversion coefficient is 20.90 and that for an inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution is 1.81. The expected consumption and expected inflation,
which follow a bivariate VAR process, are quite persistent in our estimation, and their
estimated autocorrelation coefficients are 0.81 and 0.99, respectively. The estimated
amount of persistence in the two factors matches very well the estimates in the survey
data. Estimation evidence suggests that inflation is non-neutral, as expected inflation
significantly and negatively affects future consumption growth. The real and inflation
volatilities are quite persistent in the estimation. Remarkably, the key parameters of
the latent real and inflation uncertainties are very close to their estimates based on
the survey forecast data.
Using the estimated parameters, we show that the model can reproduce several
important features of the nominal term structure data. The unconditional modelimplied yields, which are 6.10% and 6.97% at 1-year and 5-year horizons, match their
values in the data of 6.09% and 6.79%, respectively. We show that the model generates
sizeable variation in the bond premia and can match the bond return predictability
evidence in the data. In particular, the model reproduces a negative response of
nominal bond premia to real uncertainty and a positive response to nominal uncertainty. The R2 s in the bond return predictability regressions are about 15-20% in
the model and in the data. The correlation of model-implied and data bond risk
premia based on the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor is 60%, and it is in excess
of 80% for the estimates of the term premia. Both in the model and in the data,
the premia are substantially high in 1980-1985 when inflation uncertainty is high and
become negative towards the end of the sample, which is consistent with an increase
in real uncertainty starting from approximately 2005. Further, we use the model to
capture the key aspects of predictability of foreign currency returns. At the one year
horizon, the model-implied slope coefficient in foreign currency return regressions is
-2.06 relative to -1.73 in the data, and it increases to 0.25 relative to 0.36 in the data
at the five year horizon. Hence, the model matches the evidence on the violation of
uncovered interest parity rate condition at the short end and a gradual reduction in
the violations at the long end documented in the literature (see Alexius (2001), and
Chinn and Meredith (2004)).

5

Earlier structural work by Wachter (2006) and Verdelhan (2010) explores the
implications of the habits model for bonds and foreign currency, respectively. In
the context of the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habits model, Verdelhan (2010)
shows that pro-cyclical interest rates are required to account for the violations of
the uncovered interest parity in currency markets, while Wachter (2006) relies on
counter-cyclical real interest rates to explain domestic bond return predictability.
Notably, our model is able to explain the predictability of domestic bond and foreign
currency returns simultaneously. Piazzesi and Schneider (2006) consider a recursiveutility framework with homoscedastic consumption and inflation shocks and focus on
the implications of learning about the consumption and inflation dynamics for bond
yields in this setup. Distinct from this, we explicitly account for the time-varying
volatility of expected inflation and growth and evaluate the model implications for
yields and variation in risk premia for bond and foreign currency returns. Using the
rare disasters framework of Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006), Farhi and Gabaix (2008)
explore the implications of time-variation in disaster risk for return predictability
in currency markets. Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (2001) use a peso-problem
argument to evaluate the violations of the expectation hypothesis. Alvarez, Atkeson,
and Kehoe (2009) argue that a model of limited and changing participation of agents
in financial markets could account for the forward premium anomaly at short and
long horizons. Earlier equilibrium models to explain some of the puzzles in currency
markets include Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993), Bansal, Gallant, Hussey, and
Tauchen (1995) and Bekaert (1996).1
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we document the
bond return predictability puzzles and discuss the link of bond premia to long-run real
and inflation uncertainties in the data. In Section 2 we present the economic model.
We present the solution to the model and discuss its theoretical implications for the
asset markets in Section 3. In Section 4 we describe model estimation and discuss
quantitative implications for the bond and foreign currency markets. Conclusion and
Appendix follow.
1

Recent works in no-arbitrage and statistical literature include affine models of Dai and Singleton
(2002) and Duffee (2002), regime-switching models of Bansal and Zhou (2002), and macro-finance
specifications of the term structure by Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Rudebusch and Wu (2008), Ang,
Dong, and Piazzesi (2005) and Bikbov and Chernov (2010).

6

1

Bond Return Predictability Evidence

1.1

Evidence Based on Yields as Predictors

Denote yt,n the yield on the real discount bond and ft,n the real forward rate with n
periods to maturity. We will use a dollar superscript to refer to nominal quantities,
$
denotes nominal yield on a one-period bond. To avoid clustering of supere.g., yt,1
scripts, we lay out a subsequent discussion in this Section using the notation for real
variables.
Denote rxt→t+m,n the excess log return on buying an n period bond at time t and
selling it at time t + m as an n − m period bond:
rxt→t+m,n = nyt,n − (n − m)yt+m,n−m − myt,m .

(1)

Using multiple yield variables, Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) provide strong evidence for the predictability of future bond returns and the time-variation in bond risk
premia. Following their approach, we regress the average of 1-year nominal excess
bond returns of 2 to 5 years to maturity on 1 to 5 year forward rates:
5y
1 X
rxt→t+1y,n = γ0 + γ1 ft,1y + γ2 ft,2y + γ3 ft,3y + γ4 ft,4y + γ3 ft,5y + error.
4 n=2y

(2)

We extract a single bond factor rc
xt from this regression which we use to forecast
excess bond returns at each maturity n from 2 to 5 years:
rxt→t+1y,n = const + bn rc
xt + error.

(3)

Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) show that the estimates bn are positive and increasing
with the horizon, and a single factor projection captures a significant portion of the
variation in bond returns. We document these results in Table 1 using quarterly
observations of US bond yields from 1969 to 2010, sampled every second month of
the quarter. The slope coefficients increase from 0.44 for 2-year to 1.43 for 5-year
bonds, and the R2 s are in the 15-17% range. Table 2 reports similar evidence using
bond yields in the UK. Over 1970-2010 period, our estimates of the R2 in single
bond factor regressions in the UK range between 5% and 6%, which are smaller
than the magnitudes found in the US bond markets.2 Overall, the levels of the slope
2

Our findings are consistent with Dahlquist and Hasseltoft (2011) and Sekkel (2011) who show
the evidence on bond return predictability across multiple countries. It is worth noting that the
magnitudes of the R2 s are sensitive to the chosen sample. In our empirical work we have chosen the
longest sample available.

7

coefficients and the amount of predictability in these regressions for the United States
and other countries provide evidence in support of a substantial time-variation in the
risk premium in bond markets. This evidence complements earlier findings on bond
return predictability, as in Campbell and Shiller (1991), which focus on the violations
of the expectations hypothesis in the data. The expectations hypothesis regressions
use only the term spread to forecast future bond returns, and therefore lead to a lower
R2 relative to the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor.
In addition to the predictability of bond returns in domestic markets, Fama (1984),
Hodrick (1987) and others show that the returns on foreign currencies are also predictable by the interest rate variables. Let st stand for a real spot exchange rate, in
logs, per unit of foreign currency (e.g. dollars spot price of one pound). Superscript
∗
∗
will denote the corresponding variable in foreign country, e.g. yt,1
stands for the
foreign risk-free rate. Define a one-period excess dollar return on foreign currency:
X
∗
rxFt+1
= st+1 − st + yt,1
− yt,1 .

(4)

This corresponds to an excess return on buying foreign currency today, investing the
money into the foreign risk-free asset and converting the proceeds back using the spot
rate next period.
Under the expectations hypothesis in currency markets, the expected excess returns on foreign currency are constant. Therefore, the slope coefficient in the projection
X
∗
rxFt+1
= const + β F X (yt,1 − yt,1
) + error
(5)
should be equal to zero. In the data, however, the regression coefficient is significantly
negative at short maturities and increases to zero at long horizons: for the UK data,
β F X is equal to -1.73 (1.17) at 1 year horizon, and it is 0.36 (0.50) at 5 years. Thus, at
short horizons, high interest-rate bearing currencies are expected to appreciate, which
violates the predictions of the uncovered interest rate parity condition and implies
that risk premia in foreign currency markets are time-varying. These violations have
been documented in multiple papers discussed above for a large number of countries.
The evidence that these violations are less pronounced at long horizons is consistent
with the findings in Chinn and Meredith (2004) and Alexius (2001).
All the empirical evidence above suggests that the excess returns on bonds and foreign currencies are significantly predictable by the yield variables. The predictability
of future bond returns implies significant time-variation in bond risk premia; indeed,
their typical estimates in the data are quite volatile and can be of positive and negative sign. In the next section, we show that a significant amount of the risk premium
variation can be attributed to the fluctuations in the volatilities of expected real
growth and expected inflation in the data.

8

1.2

Evidence Based on Real and Inflation Uncertainty

In terms of the empirical evidence, an important goal for the paper is to establish
a link between bond yields and the uncertainty about expected future real growth
and inflation. To obtain direct measures of the expectations of future macroeconomic
variables, we collect quarterly data on consensus forecasts of one-year ahead real
GDP growth and inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasts from 1969 to
2010; these forecasts are plotted on the top panel on Figure 1.3 The real growth and
inflation forecasts contain significant information about future real consumption and
inflation in the data. The real forecast predicts next-quarter consumption growth
with an R2 of 24%, and the inflation forecast predicts next-quarter inflation with an
R2 of 43%. As shown in Table 3, at the 1-year horizon, the amount of predictability
increases to 40% and 60%, respectively. Adding additional predictors, such as yields
and equity prices, does not significantly improve the R2 . This empirical evidence
motivates our use of the forecasts as empirical proxies for the expectations of future
real growth and inflation.
Denote x̂ct the real growth forecast and x̂πt the inflation forecast. To analyze the
dynamics of the forecasts in the data, we estimate a bivariate VAR(1) specification:
x̂c,t+1 = 0.86 x̂ct − 0.01 x̂πt + uc,t+1,
(0.03)

(0.03)

x̂π,t+1 = 0.06 x̂ct + 0.99 x̂πt + uπ,t+1 .
(0.04)

(6)

(0.02)

As evident from the above, both forecasts are very persistent, and much more so
than the underlying realized consumption and inflation series. Indeed, autoregressive
coefficient for expected real growth is 0.87 and it is 0.99 for expected inflation, relative
to 0.29 and 0.56 for consumption growth and inflation, respectively. Notably, expected
inflation has a non-neutral effect on the real economy, by which we mean that expected
inflation predicts future expected real growth. As shown in the equation above, in
the data expected inflation has a negative effect on future expected growth, which is
consistent with the findings in Piazzesi and Schneider (2006). This evidence on the
persistence of the forecasts and inflation non-neutrality motivates the specification of
our economic model.
To construct measures of uncertainty about expected growth and expected inflation, we take the forecast residuals uc,t+1 and uπ,t+1 from the specification (6) and
3

We use forecasts of real GDP to proxy for expected real consumption as the forecasts of nondurable plus services consumption are not directly available. The forecasts are demeaned and rescaled to predict future consumption growth with a loading of one. As the forecasts are released by
the middle of the quarter, we align the forecast data with the financial variables as of the second
month of the quarter; all our results are robust with respect to the forecast date alignment.

9

regress their annual sum of squares on the current short-, medium- and long-term
yields and the market price dividend ratio:
1X 2
u
= const + bc1 yt,1q + bc2 yt,3y + bc3 yt,5y + bc4 pdt + error,
h j=1 c,t+j
h

1X 2
u
= const + bπ1 yt,1q + bπ2 yt,3y + bπ3 yt,5y + bπ4 pdt + error,
h j=1 π,t+j
h

(7)

where h is equal to 4 quarters at an annual horizon. The predictive values from these
2
2
regressions, σ̂ct
and σ̂πt
, provide the estimates of the conditional variances of expected
real growth and expected inflation; this approach of measuring conditional volatilities
using financial market data is similar to Kandel and Stambaugh (1991)4 . Indeed, under the null of the model, the four financial variables span all the information about
the economy, so regressing future squared residuals identifies the volatilities of expected real growth and expected inflation. In the data, the R2 in these regressions
is 40% for the volatility of expected growth and 50% for the volatility of expected
inflation, as shown in Table 3. The two volatility measures are plotted on the bottom
panel in Figure 1. The volatilities are quite persistent in the data with an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.87. They are quite volatile and tend to increase substantially in
recessions. Figure 2 plots the difference between the variances of expected inflation
and expected growth. As evident from the Figure, in the period from 1980 to 1985
the inflation volatility is sizeably larger than the real volatility, while from 2005 to
2010 the real uncertainty is measurably larger than the inflation uncertainty.
The movements in real and nominal uncertainty have significant implications for
bond risk premia, which we document in Table 1 for the US bond market. Notably, in
regressions of future excess bond returns on the two volatilities, the slope coefficients
are negative for the real volatility and positive for the inflation volatility. That is, in
the data, bond premia are high when the uncertainty about expected inflation is high
and are low and even negative when the uncertainty about expected real growth is
high. The R2 s in these regressions are 17-18%, which are similar to the ones obtained
using multiple yields as predictive variables. Our results show that the restricted
bond return regressions based only on the two uncertainties generate predictability
similar to the unrestricted regressions that use all the available yields. In addition,
the magnitudes and signs of the slopes in the regressions on the two uncertainty
measures have an economic interpretation.
4

To ensure that variance measures always remain positive, we regress the square root of the sum
of squared residuals on the financial variables, and then square the fitted value. We rescale the
variance measures to match the unconditional variance of the forecast shocks. This has immaterial
effect on the results.

10

We also consider the regressions of the realized term premia (long-term yield
minus the average of the realized future short-term rates over the corresponding
horizon) on the two uncertainty measures. Similar to the bond return regressions,
the slope coefficients in term premia regressions are negative for the real uncertainty
and positive for the inflation uncertainty, and the R2 s reach 50% at a 5-year horizon.
The above findings can be used to economically interpret the fluctuations in bond
premia and term premia over time (see Figure 3). In 1970s, risk premia are low
and even negative, which is consistent with an observation that there is a high level
of real uncertainty and relatively low inflation uncertainty. Risk premia increase
substantially in 1980s which reflects a significant increase in inflation uncertainty
relative to the real one. Finally, the decline in premia towards the end of the sample is
consistent with a relatively low level of inflation uncertainty and a sharp increase in the
real uncertainty post 2005. These findings regarding the role of inflation uncertainty
for the bond risk premia, while using a very different approach, are consistent with
the evidence documented in Wright (2011).
For robustness, we also consider measures of expected growth and expected inflation which do not rely on the forecast data. Specifically, we project future multiperiod realized consumption, ∆ct+1 , and inflation, πt+1 , on the same set of predictors
as before:
1X
∆ct+j = const + ac1 yt,1q + ac2 yt,3y + ac3 yt,5y + ac4 pdt + error,
h j=1
h

1X
πt+j = const + aπ1 yt,1q + aπ2 yt,3y + aπ3 yt,5y + aπ4 pdt + error,
h j=1
h

(8)

and we take the fitted values from these regressions as the alternative measures of
expected consumption, x̂ct , and expected inflation, x̂π,t . Using these measures, we then
proceed in the same as way as before to extract the innovations in expected growth
and expected inflation (Equation (6)), and compute the volatilities of expected real
growth and expected inflation (Equation (7)). Table 3 summarizes the R2 s in the
extractions of expected growth and volatility variables at the 1 year horizon. Our
results are very similar at shorter horizons like h =1 quarter, or longer horizons such
as h = 2 years to extract the economic states.
Table 1 documents bond return predictability results using the predictive approach
to measure volatilities in the US markets, while Table 2 shows the corresponding
evidence for bonds in the UK. Our empirical evidence using the alternative volatility
measures is very similar to the one based on the survey data. Both in the US and UK,
bond risk premia and term premia decrease with positive shocks to real volatility and
increase with positive shocks to inflation volatility. In the US bond markets, the R2 s
in bond return regressions are about 20-25% using these volatility measures, similar
11

to the evidence found in the survey data. The R2 s for realized term premia regressions
increase from 20% for 2-year bond to about 30% for 5-year bond. As shown in Table
2, the magnitudes of the slope coefficients in bond return regressions in the UK are
comparable to the US estimates, and the amount of bond return predictability based
on volatility factors is similar to that based on multiple yield factors. As we discussed
before, in our sample the UK bond returns are less predictable relative to the US.
Our third approach to extracting the volatility measures is based on the latent
variable estimation where we measure the two volatilities in US data using the MLE
approach, imposing the structural restrictions of the economic model. We later show
that with this approach the bond return predicability evidence is similar to that
based on the survey data and the predictive approach. The bond return predictability
evidence by the real and inflation uncertainties provides an important motivation for
our paper, alongside with the earlier findings on bond return predictability by the
yield factors.

2
2.1

Model Specification
Preferences

We consider a version of a discrete-time real endowment economy developed in Bansal
and Yaron (2004). The investor’s preferences over consumption Ct are described by
the Kreps-Porteus, Epstein-Zin recursive utility function (see Epstein and Zin 1989,
Kreps and Porteus 1978):
h
i θ
1−γ
1−γ 1θ 1−γ
)
Ut = (1 − δ)Ct θ + δ(Et Ut+1
,

(9)

where δ is the time discount factor, γ ≥ 0 is the risk aversion parameter, and ψ ≥ 0
is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). For ease of notations, parameter
1−γ
θ is defined θ ≡ 1−
1 . Note that when θ = 1, that is, γ = 1/ψ, the above recursive
ψ

preferences collapse to the standard case of expected utility.
As shown in Epstein and Zin (1989), the logarithm of the real stochastic discount
factor implied by these preferences is given by
mt+1 = θ log δ −

θ
∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ,
ψ

(10)

where ∆ct+1 = log(Ct+1 /Ct ) is the log growth rate of aggregate consumption and rc,t+1
is the log return on the asset which delivers aggregate consumption as its dividends
each time period (wealth portfolio). This return is not observable in the data. It
12

is different from the observed return on the market portfolio as the levels of market
dividends and consumption are not equal: aggregate consumption is much larger than
aggregate dividends. Therefore, we assume an exogenous process for consumption
growth and use a standard asset-pricing restriction
Et [exp(mt+1 + rt+1 )] = 1

(11)

which holds for any continuous return rt+1 = log(Rt+1 ) including the one on the wealth
portfolio, to solve for the unobserved wealth-to-consumption ratio in the model. This
allows us to express the stochastic discount factor in (10) in terms of the fundamental
state variables and shocks in the economy, and solve for the equilibrium real prices
of any assets.
To derive implications for nominal assets, such as nominal bonds, we specify an
exogenous inflation process πt+1 . Our approach to directly model inflation is similar
to that pursued by Wachter (2006) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2006). The nominal
discount factor which can be used to price nominal payoffs through the nominal
version of the Euler equation in (11) is equal to the real one minus the inflation rate:
m$t+1 = mt+1 − πt+1 .

2.2

(12)

Economy Dynamics

To solve for the equilibrium asset prices we exogenously specify the joint dynamics
of consumption growth and inflation. Our goal is to specify the most parsimonious
yet flexible dynamics which feature persistent fluctuations in expectations and uncertainties about expected real growth and expected inflation, and a non-neutral effect
of expected inflation on future growth.
Denote xct and xπt the expected consumption growth and expected inflation. We
write down the consumption and inflation dynamics in the following way:
∆ct+1 = µc + xct + σc ηc,t+1 ,
πt+1 = µπ + xπt + σπ ηπ,t+1 ,

(13)

where ηc,t+1 and ηπ,t+1 are standard Normal shocks, and σc and σπ are the conditional volatilities of consumption and inflation. For parsimony, we assume that these
conditional volatilities are constant.


We model
the dynamics of the expected growth and expected inflation factors xt ≡
′
xct xπt as a bivariate VAR(1) process with time-varying conditional volatilities:
xt+1 = Πxt + Σt et+1 ,
13

(14)

where Π is the persistence matrix and et+1 are Normal shocks. To capture the interaction between the real and nominal economy in the most parsimonious way, in the
empirical implementation we zero out the correlation of expected consumption and
expected inflation shocks, and allow expected inflation to directly feed in to expected
consumption growth. We define


ρc ρcπ
Π=
,
(15)
0 ρπ
so that parameters ρc and ρπ capture the persistence of expected real growth and
expected inflation, and ρcπ reflects the non-neutral effect of expected inflation on
future expected growth. As in the data expected inflation forecasts negatively future
real growth, the inflation non-neutrality parameter ρcπ is negative.
In the specification (14), Σt captures the time-variation in the uncertainty about
expected growth and expected inflation. In the benchmark specification of the model
Σt is diagonal:


σct 0
,
(16)
Σt =
0 σπt
so that σct and σπt reflect the fluctuations in expected growth and expected inflation
volatility, respectively. Notably, relative to a standard single volatility specification
of the model (see e.g. Bansal and Yaron 2004), in our model we disentangle the
volatilities of real and nominal factors, because both in the model and in the data the
two have very different implications for the bond yields and bond risk premia. We
specify the volatility dynamics in the following way:
 2
 2 
σc,t+1
σ
(17)
= (I − Φ)Σ0 + Φ 2ct + Σw wt+1 ,
2
σπt
σπ,t+1
where Σ0 denotes the unconditional level of volatility, and Φ and Σw capture persistence and scale of the volatility shocks. In the empirical implementation, the volatility
shocks wt+1 are assumed to be Normal and the matrices Φ and Σw are diagonal:




σwc 0
νc 0
.
(18)
, Σw =
Φ=
0 σwπ
0 νπ
In the Appendix we present a general solution of the model where volatility shocks
can follow a non-Normal distribution which guarantees the positivity of volatility
processes.5
5

As volatility shocks are homoscedastic, their distribution has no impact on the equilibrium bond
price loadings on economic states and only affects bond price intercepts. We find that for reasonable
parameters this impact is quite small.

14

3
3.1

Asset Markets
Discount Factor

We present the key model equations below, and show all the model solution details
in the Appendix.
In equilibrium, the price-consumption ratio on the wealth portfolio is linear in
expected growth and variance states:
2
2
pct = A0 + Axc xct + Axπ xπt + Asc σct
+ Asπ σπt
,

(19)

where the equilibrium loadings are given by,
Axc =
Asc
Asπ

1−

1
ψ

1−

Axπ = κ1 ρcπ
,
(1 − κ1 ρc )(1 − κ1 ρπ )

2
κ1
(1 − γ)(1 − 1/ψ)
,
=
2(1 − κ1 νc )
1 − κ1 ρc

2
(1 − γ)(1 − 1/ψ)
κ21 ρcπ
=
,
2(1 − κ1 νπ )
(1 − κ1 ρc )(1 − κ1 ρπ )
1 − κ1 ρc

,

1
ψ

(20)
(21)
(22)

and κ1 ∈ (0, 1) is a linearization parameter.
As in the standard long-run risks model (see Bansal and Yaron 2004), when the
inter-temporal elasticity of substitution parameter ψ is greater than one, the intertemporal substitution effect dominates the wealth effect. In response to higher expected
growth, agents invest more and consequently, the wealth to consumption ratio rises.
Hence, the price-consumption loading on the expected consumption growth is positive, Axc > 0, and it is negative on the expected inflation, Axπ < 0, if inflation
is bad for consumption (ρcπ < 0). When the IES and risk aversion are all larger
than one, the responses of price-consumption ratio to real and inflation volatility are
negative, Asc , Asπ < 0, so that equity prices drop at times of high real or nominal
uncertainty. The persistence of volatility and expected growth shocks magnifies the
effects of volatility on valuation ratios as changes in macroeconomic volatility are
perceived by investors as being long lasting.
Using the solution for the price-consumption ratio, we provide an analytical expression for the equilibrium stochastic discount factor in terms of the fundamental
state variables and shocks in the economy. The conditional mean of the log stochastic
discount factor is linear in economic states and is provided in the Appendix, and the

15

innovation in the stochastic discount factor which determines the sources and the
compensations for risk in the economy is given by:
mt+1 − Et mt+1 = −λc σc ηc,t+1 − λπ σπ ηπ,t+1 − λxc σc,t ec,t+1 − λxπ σπ,t eπ,t+1
− λsc wxc,t+1 − λsπ wxπ,t+1 .

(23)

The equilibrium market prices of short-run consumption and inflation risks and expected consumption and expected inflation risks are equal to:
λc = γ,


κ1
1
,
λxc = γ −
ψ 1 − κ1 ρc

λπ = 0


κ21 ρcπ
1
λxπ = γ −
,
ψ (1 − κ1 ρc )(1 − κ1 ρπ )

(24)

and the market prices of volatility risks are provided in the Appendix. The price of
short-run consumption risks λc is equal to the risk-aversion coefficient γ, and as the
immediate inflation innovations are assumed to be independent from the real economy,
their price of risk λπ is zero. When agents have preference for early resolution of
uncertainty (γ > 1/ψ), the market price of expected consumption risk λxc is positive,
and the market price of expected inflation risk λxπ is negative if expected inflation
is bad news for future consumption (ρcπ < 0). With preference for early resolution
of uncertainty, the market prices of real and inflation volatility risks λsc and λsπ are
both negative.
In our economy, the equilibrium solution to the nominal discount factor in (12)
satisfies
m$t+1 − Et m$t+1 = −λc σc ηc,t+1 − λ$π σπ ηπ,t+1 − λxc σc,t ec,t+1 − λxπ σπ,t eπ,t+1
− λsc wxc,t+1 − λsπ wxπ,t+1 .

(25)

The nominal market price of the inflation risk λ$π is equal to one, and in our specification, the nominal market prices of expected growth, expected inflation and volatility
risks are equal to their real counterparts.

3.2

Asset Prices

Using the expressions for the real and nominal discount factors in Equations (23)
and (25), we can solve for the equilibrium yields in the economy. As shown in the
Appendix, the real and nominal yields are linear in the economic state variables:

1
2
2
B0,n + Bxc,n xct + Bxπ,n xπt + Bsc,n σct
+ Bsπ,n σπt
, ,
n

1
$
$
$
$
2
$
2
B0,n
+ Bxc,n
xct + Bxπ,n
xπt + Bsc,n
σct
+ Bsπ,n
σπt
.
=
n

yt,n =

(26)

$
yt,n

(27)

16

The bond coefficients, which measure the sensitivity (beta) of bond prices to the
aggregate risks, are pinned down by the preference and model parameters – their
analytical expressions are presented in the Appendix.
In our model, real yields hedge risks to expected consumption. That is, real
bond prices rise and real yields fall following a negative shock to expected growth
(Bxc,n > 0), or a positive shock to expected inflation (Bxπ,n < 0) if expected inflation
is bad news for future consumption (i.e., when ρcπ < 0). Real yields also fall with
an increase in real or inflation volatility, Bsc,n < 0 and Bsπ,n < 0, which represents
a ”flight to quality” effect. An increase in real or inflation volatility increases the
uncertainty about future growth, so the demand for risk-free assets increases and in
equilibrium, real yields fall.
To analyze equilibrium implications for nominal yields, consider a Fisher-type
equation for nominal bonds:
$
yt,n
= yt,n +

11
1
1
Et πt→t+n −
V art πt→t+n + Covt (mt→t+n , πt→t+n ),
n
2n
n

(28)

where πt→t+n and mt→t+n denote the t to t+n multi-period inflation rate and stochastic discount factor, respectively. As shown above, solutions to nominal bond yields
take into account expected inflation and the inflation premium in the economy. Similar to real bonds, nominal bond yields increase when expected consumption is high,
$
Bxc,n
> 0. As inflation expectations directly impact the valuations of nominal bonds,
unlike real yields, nominal yields respond positively to expected inflation shocks,
$
Bxπ,n
> 0. Further, when expected inflation negatively impacts future growth, the
inflation premium given by the covariance of future inflation and future discount factor is positive and increases with the volatility of expected inflation. This can make
longer-term nominal yields respond positively to expected inflation volatility shocks:
$
Bsπ,n
> 0, for high n.
The empirical evidence shown in a previous Section highlighted the importance
of the uncertainties about expected growth and expected inflation in capturing the
variations in bond risk premia. In the model, one-period expected excess return on
nominal bonds can be written in the following form:
1
Et (rx$t→t+1,n ) + V art (rx$t+1,n ) = −Covt (m$t+1 , rx$t+1,n )
2
$
2
$
2
= const − Bxc,n−1
λxc σct
− Bxπ,n−1
λxπ σπt
.

(29)

The variation in bond risk premium reflects the time-variation in risk compensations
for expected consumption and expected inflation shocks, which are driven by the real
and inflation volatilities, respectively. Recall that the equilibrium market price of
expected consumption risk λxc is positive and that of expected inflation risk λxπ is
negative, and the nominal bond betas to expected consumption and expected inflation
17

$
$
risks are positive (Bxc,n
> 0, Bxπ,n
> 0). This implies that the nominal bond risk
premium increases with inflation uncertainty, while it decreases at times of high real
uncertainty. This model implication is consistent with the predictability evidence of
future bond returns by the volatilities of expected real growth and expected inflation
in the data.

Our model can also account for the bond return predictability by the yield variables as predictors. Indeed, in the model yields are affected by the volatilities of
expected real growth and expected inflation (see equations (26)-(27)). If volatility
shocks move a long-short bond yield spread and bond risk premia in the same direction, then the spread forecasts future bond returns with a positive sign. This positive
correlation of the term spread and bond risk premia is required to explain the violations of the expectations hypothesis in the data. The actual magnitudes of the slope
coefficients in bond regressions, as well as the amount of predictability of future bond
returns, depend on the persistence and variation in the bond risk premium generated
by the model.
To show the implications for foreign bond returns, note that, as discussed in
Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001), with frictionless markets the exchange rate is
equal to the difference between the logarithms of the stochastic discount factors of
the two countries:
(30)
st+1 − st = m∗t+1 − mt+1 .
We assume that the consumption growth and inflation rate follow the same dynamics
in the two countries, as in equations (13)-(17), and that the model parameters are
identical across countries. The consumption, inflation and volatility innovations are
correlated across countries. This is similar to the two-country long-run risks model
discussed in Colacito and Croce (2011).6 Given the equilibrium solution to the model,
the nominal short-term interest rate differential is driven by the difference in expected
consumption, expected inflation, and the real and nominal volatilities at home and
abroad:
∗
yt,1 − yt,1
= Bxc,n (xct − x∗ct ) + Bxπ,n (xπt − x∗πt )
2
∗2
2
∗2
+ Bsc,n (σct
− σct
) + Bsπ,n (σπt
− σπt
),

(31)

while the equilibrium expected excess return on foreign bonds just depends on the
difference between the conditional volatilities across countries:

6

 1
1
X
∗
Et rxFt+1
= Et st+1 − st + yt,1
− yt,1 = V art mt+1 − V art m∗t+1
2
2

1 2 2
∗2
2
∗2
λ (σ − σct
) + λ2xπ (σπt
− σπt
) .
=
2 xc ct

(32)

An extensive treatment of international finance puzzles and models which feature trade, multiple
consumption goods, financial integration, such as those in Colacito and Croce (2010) and Colacito
(2009), are left for future work.

18

$
$
< 0), an
< 0, Bsπ,1
As short-term nominal yields fall in times of high volatility (Bsc,1
increase in domestic volatility, real or nominal, leads to a decline in the interest rate
∗
at home relative to abroad, so that the interest rate differential yt,1 − yt,1
falls. At the
same time, equation (32) shows that the risk premium on foreign bond returns goes up.
Hence, the foreign exchange risk premium and interest rate differential are negatively
correlated in the model, which is a necessary condition to explain the direction of
the violations of uncovered interest rate parity condition in the data. Notably, our
model is able to produce the violations of the uncovered interest rate parity condition
in foreign currencies, and at the same time it can account for the key features of
the nominal term structure in domestic markets. In contrast, habits models require
different specifications to explain domestic and foreign bonds; Verdelhan (2010) uses
habits specification with pro-cyclical interest rates to account for foreign currency
risk premia, however, in Wachter (2006) interest rates are counter-cyclical to explain
bond premia in domestic markets.7

4

Model Estimation and Output

4.1

Model Estimation

We use quarterly observations of nominal yields of 1 to 5 years to maturity and the
SPF survey forecasts from 1969 to 2010.8 In our benchmark estimation, the consensus
inflation forecast from the survey data x̂πt is assumed to measure inflation expectations without an error, which is consistent with the evidence in Ang, Bekaert, and
Wei (2007) that survey-based expected inflation measures provide the most accurate
forecasts of future inflation. We do not directly observe expected non-durable plus
services real consumption growth. Therefore, we estimate our model using a latent
factor approach to extract these states from nominal yields similar to Chen and Scott
(1993) and Duffie and Singleton (1997)
Specifically, let the vector of observed data Ft consist of the variables which are
assumed to be observed without an error, such as a vector of 3 yields of 1, 3 and
5-years to maturity Yto and the survey expected inflation x̂πt , and the variables which
contain measurement error, such as the remaining yields Yte , real expected growth
7

The habits model evidence suggests that it is a challenge to account simultaneously for these
puzzles, which we show can be accomplished in the non-neutral inflation-augmented model of this
paper. In a largely real economy, Bansal and Shaliastovich (2007) and Colacito (2009) show that
one can account for the foreign exchange puzzles in currency markets.
8
We do not use realized consumption and realized inflation data, and instead use forecast-based
measures of expected inflation and expected real growth to estimate the model. We set the mean
and volatilities of consumption growth and inflation rate in the model to match the unconditional
mean and variance of consumption and inflation in the data.

19

and the real and nominal uncertainties from the forecast data. Given the equilibrium
solution to the model, the yields are an affine function of the state variables (see
equation (27)), so that we can solve for the expected real growth, expected inflation
and the two conditional variances in terms of the variables observed without an error:
 

 o 
xt
Y
−1
2 
t
 σct
− K0 ,
(33)
= K1
x̂πt
2
σπt
where K0 and K1 depend on the model and preference parameters. In practice,
we do the inversion under the constraint that the implied volatilities are positive.
Given our model specification, we can then compute log-likelihood of the economic
2
2
states f (xt , σct
, σπt
|Ft−1 ) which is conditionally Normal. The remaining yields and the
economic states are assumed to contain measurement errors which are uncorrelated
with the fundamental shocks in the economy and with each other. In this case, the
log-likelihood of the observed data satisfies,
2
2
f (Ft |Ft−1 ) = f (Yto , x̂π,t |Ft−1 ) + f (Yte |xt , Σt ) + f (σ̂ct
, σ̂πt
, x̂ct |xt , Σt ).

(34)

The conditional likelihood of the yields observed without an error and expected inflation can be calculated from the likelihood of the economic states, f (Yto , x̂π,t |Ft−1 ) =
2
2
f (xt , σct
, σπt
|Ft−1 )−log |det(K1 )|, while the last two log-likelihoods capture the Normallydistributed measurement errors in the remaining variables.
To compute standard errors, we perform a parametric bootstrap where we use the
estimated parameters to simulate the time-series of model-implied yields and state
variables of the length equal to the data sample, and apply the same MLE method
as in the data to re-estimate the parameters in each simulation. The standard errors
are then computed as standard deviations of the estimated parameters across the
simulations.

4.2

Estimated Parameters and States

For parsimony, in our empirical implementation we assume that the real and inflation
volatilities are independent from each other, so that the persistence and volatility
matrices are diagonal as specified in (18), and the volatility shocks follow a Normal
distribution. To further aid identification of the system and decrease the number
of estimated parameters, we fix the mean and volatility of consumption growth and
inflation to match the mean and variance of consumption and inflation in the data.
For identification purposes, we fix the subjective discount factor at 0.994.9
9

This is related to the discussion of identification issues in Kocherlakota (1990) and similar to
the approach in Marshall (1992).

20

The parameter estimates are reported in Table 4. The risk aversion is estimated
at 20.90, and the IES at 1.81. The estimated parameters for the expectations and
volatilities of real growth and inflation, reported in Table 4, are consistent with the
dynamics of these variables in the survey data. The estimated persistence of expected
growth of 0.81 and expected inflation of 0.99 match very well the observed persistence
of real GDP and inflation forecasts of 0.87 and 0.99, respectively (see Section 1.2).
The expected consumption growth factor loads negatively on the lag of expected inflation, which is also consistent with the data: the model parameter is estimated at
-0.05, while it is -0.01 with a standard error of 0.03 based on the survey evidence.
The unconditional level of expected consumption and expected inflation uncertainty
is about 1e-03×200 = 0.2%, annualized, and it matches nearly exactly the observed
means of the real growth and inflation uncertainty in the forecast data. The estimation also matches very well the overall volatility of the real and inflation volatility.
The persistence of the volatility measures is estimated at about 0.99, relative to about
0.9 in the survey data.
In Table 5 we document that the model can match the key features of consumption
and inflation data in the US. By construction, we match the unconditional mean and
volatility of consumption growth and inflation rate in the data. The autocorrelation
of quarterly consumption growth is 0.29 in the data relative to 0.22 in the model. For
the inflation series, its persistence is about 0.6 in the model and in the data. The
correlation of quarterly consumption growth and inflation rate is -0.11 in the data
relative to -0.25 in the model.
The two extracted volatility factors behave similar to the ones based on the survey
data. The correlation of the extracted real volatility with the one based on the survey
data is 45%, while the correlation of the difference between the volatilities of expected
consumption and expected inflation in the MLE estimation and the survey data is
65%.

4.3

Bond Market Implications

Table 6 reports the US data and model-implied population values for nominal yields.
The model matches very well the levels of the yields: the model-implied yields at
1-year and 5-year horizons are 6.10% and 6.97%, relative to 6.09% and 6.79% in the
data, and the model fit to 2, 3 and 4 year yields is almost exact. The model can
also match the decrease in bond volatilities across maturities, though, the level of
volatilities in the model is somewhat smaller than in the data: it is 2.37% at 1 year
and 2.17% at 5 year maturity, relative to 3.09% and 2.70% in the data.
Figure 4 shows the equilibrium nominal bond yield loadings on expected growth,
expected inflation, and the real and inflation uncertainties. Consistent with our dis21

cussion in a previous section, nominal bond yields respond positively to expected
consumption and expected inflation shocks. Bond yields respond negatively to real
uncertainty, because of the flight to quality effect discussed earlier. The response to
inflation uncertainty for nominal bonds is negative at short horizons and becomes
positive at longer (above 2 year) maturities. High inflation volatility increases the
inflation premium, which dominates the flight to quality effect for long-term nominal
bonds.
In the estimated model, the risk aversion is bigger than the inverse of the IES,
which implies preference for early resolution of uncertainty. These estimates ensure
that the market price of expected consumption risk is positive and that of expected
inflation risk is negative. As nominal bond yields respond positively to expected
consumption and expected inflation shocks, in equilibrium, high expected inflation
uncertainty increases risk compensation on nominal bonds while high expected growth
uncertainty is associated with low risk premium on nominal bonds. These model
implications are consistent with our empirical findings in the data (see Table 1).
The R2 in the regressions of future bond returns on the two volatility measures is
about 17%, similar to the data. Further, as documented in Table 6, the model can
match the bond predictability evidence of Campbell and Shiller (1991) and Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005). Specifically, in the model the slope coefficients in expectation
hypothesis projections are negative and decreasing with maturity, as in the data. The
slope coefficient for the return on a 2-year bond is -0.45 in the model versus -0.41 in the
data, and it decreases to -0.61 in the model and -1.15 in the data, respectively, for the
return on a 5-year bond. The model-implied coefficients are well within one standard
deviation of the estimates in the data. To further evaluate the predictability of bond
returns using yields, we run regressions using the same approach as in Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) on the model-simulated data. In the data, the slope coefficients on a
single bond factor are 0.44 for the return on a 2-year bond, 0.85 for 3-year and 1.43
for the return on a 5-year bond. In the model, these slope coefficients are equal to
0.44, 0.83 and 1.53, respectively. The R2 s in the bond return regressions in the data
are about 15-20%, and they are about 17% in the model. In sum, the model matches
very well the bond return predictability evidence from the expectations hypothesis
regressions, as well as that using the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) bond premium
factor.
In Figure 3 we plot the 5 year nominal bond premia and term premia in the
model, alongside the bond risk premia estimates in the data. To extract the bond
risk premium we use the single-factor projections of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
The model and data premia co-move very closely with each other: the correlation
of model-implied and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)-based bond risk premia is 60%.
Notably, both in the model and in the data, premia fluctuate significantly over time
and can switch sign. In the model, as in the data, premia drop substantially and
can even be negative prior to 1980, which are the times of significant rise in real
22

uncertainty. Bond risk premia are very high in 1980-1985, as this corresponds to a
decrease in real uncertainty and increase in the nominal one. Finally, premia decline
substantially and become negative in the 2000s. In this period, real uncertainty is high
and nominal uncertainty is relatively small though rising at the end of the sample.

4.4

Foreign Exchange Market Implications

To assess the implications of the model for the foreign currency returns, we impose
symmetry in model and preference parameters across the two countries. We assume
the same dynamics of consumption growth and inflation as in equations (13)-(17)
in the US and UK and assume that the parameters of consumption growth and
inflation rate dynamics and preference parameters are identical across countries. The
innovations ηc , ηπ , e and w are assumed to be correlated across countries, and we
denote
τc = Corr(ηc , ηc∗ ), τπ = Corr(ηπ , ηπ∗ ),
τxc = Corr(ec , e∗c ), τxπ = Corr(eπ , e∗π ),
τσc = Corr(wc , wc∗), τσπ = Corr(wπ , wπ∗ ).

(35)

These cross-country innovation correlations impact the unconditional long and
short horizon correlations in consumption and inflation across countries, and the
exchange rate dynamics. The top panel of Table 7 lists 10 data moments we use to pin
down these 6 parameters.10 The measured cross-country innovation correlations are
τc = 0.29, τxc = 0.82, τπ = 0.06, τxπ = 0.99, τσc = 0.94 and τσπ = 0.96. As documented
in the top panel of Table 7, the model implications for consumption and inflation
correlations match closely the evidence in the data. A high degree of correlation
between expected growth factors in the US and UK is similar to the findings in
Colacito and Croce (2011). High correlation and the persistence in expected growth
rates capture the intuition that the long-run prospects across the two countries are
very similar, however, there are short-run differences between the countries which are
captured by the short-run consumption and inflation shocks. As documented earlier
in Section 1.1, the predictability of bond returns in US is about 15% while in the UK
it is about 5%, and there are large standard errors on these R2 s. Given the symmetry
that we impose across countries, we target an intermediate number between 5% and
15% and therefore choose a risk aversion coefficient of γ = 12 which is smaller than
the one used for only US bond return predictability. Lowering the risk aversion lowers
the bond return predictability.
10

We accomplish it by minimizing the distance between the data moments and their counterparts
in the model.

23

As shown in Table 7, the model captures the violations of uncovered interest rate
parity condition in the data: the slope coefficient in the foreign exchange regressions
at 1 year horizon is -2.06 in the model versus -1.73 in the data. As the slope coefficient is below negative one, it implies that high interest rate periods at home are
associated with an expected appreciation of domestic currency. In the model, due to
the inflation premium, the nominal bond beta to inflation volatility becomes positive
at longer maturities (see Figure 4). Hence, we expect that these violations become
less prominent at longer maturities. Indeed, at a 5-year horizon the slope coefficients
in foreign exchange regressions reach 0.25 in the model and 0.36 in the data. As in the
data, the model R2 s in the foreign exchange regressions are quite small. The model
implications for the domestic bond return predictability are in the middle of the range
based on the US and the UK data. Indeed, as shown in Table 7, the model-implied
R2 s for the bond return regressions are 7%, relative to 5-6% in the UK and 15-17%
in the US. The model-implied slopes in the expectations hypothesis projections start
at 0 for 2-year yields, relative to -0.41 in US and 0.59 in the UK, and are equal to
-0.19 for 5-year yields relative to -1.15 and 0.83 in the US and the UK, respectively.
Thus, our model is consistent with the key predictability dimensions of bond returns
and exchange rates in the US and the UK markets.
As shown in Table 7, our model can capture very well the correlation of consumption growth and inflation rate in the US and the UK at short and long frequencies.
The US-UK correlations of consumption growth rates are 0.34 and 0.72 at 1 quarter
and 1 year horizon, respectively, relative to 0.45 and 0.61 in the model. The correlations of inflation rates are 0.62 and 0.91 in the data, relative to 0.63 and 0.86 in
the model. The correlations of nominal yields in the data are about 0.9, while the
model-implied correlations are close to one. The model-implied volatility of exchange
rate is 16%, relative to 11% in the data. Notably, our model is specified at quarterly
frequency which leads to time-aggregation issues and an upward bias in risk aversion
measurements (see Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009)), which would manifest in a higher
volatility of the exchange rates. Our results suggest that extending the model by incorporating local growth and inflation factors and accounting for time-aggregation
may allow us to better match these data features. We leave these extensions for
future research.

4.5

Importance of Model Ingredients

The key ingredients of the model which are critical for quantitative and qualitative
explanation of the predictability of bond returns in the data include preference for
early resolution of uncertainty, time-variation in expectations of consumption growth
and inflation, fluctuations in the volatilities of expected growth and expected inflation,
and non-neutrality of expected inflation for future real growth.

24

Indeed, as can be seen from the expressions for bond premia in Equation (29) and
foreign exchange premia in Equation (32), the time-variation in risk premia reflects the
time-varying compensations for expected consumption and expected inflation risks,
driven by the conditional volatilities of expected consumption and expected inflation.
Thus, if the two conditional volatilities are constant, the expected excess returns in
bond and currency markets are constant as well. In this case, as we show in Table 8,
the expectations hypothesis holds, and bond returns are unpredictable.
Recursive preferences structure which allows for a separation of a risk aversion
from an inter-temporal elasticity of substitution plays an important role in determining the signs and magnitudes of the market prices of risks, bond loadings on risk
factors, and ultimately the level and sensitivity of bond premia to volatility fluctuations. Indeed, as can be seen from the expressions for the market prices of risk in
Equation (24), with power utility, the expected consumption and expected inflation
risks are not priced, λxc and λxπ are all zero. Hence, inflation premium is zero, and
up to Jensen’s adjustment term the bond risk premia are constant. Indeed, as we
show in Table 8, with power utility, the nominal term structure is downward sloping,
and there is very little predictability in bond markets in the model. Early preference
of resolution (ψ > 1/γ) is important to ensure that the market price of expected
consumption risk is positive, and that of the expected inflation is negative. With
preference for late resolution of uncertainty, these risk prices switch sign, which implies that nominal bond premia increase at times of high real uncertainty and fall at
times of high nominal uncertainty, which contradicts the data.
Finally, the non-neutrality of inflation, which is captured by a negative response of
future expected consumption to expected inflation shock, plays an important role to
generate positive and large inflation premium and match the key features of the term
structure in the data. With inflation neutrality, the feedback effect from expected
inflation to expected consumption is zero, ρcπ = 0. In this case, the market price of
expected inflation risk λxπ is zero, so the inflation premium equal to the covariation of
real discount factor with inflation is zero at all horizons. Thus, nominal bond yields
essentially reflect the real yields plus the expected inflation, as shown in Equation
(28). Shutting down the inflation premium channel significantly depresses the amount
of bond return predictability and the bond premium variation in the model: the slope
coefficients in the expectations hypothesis projections are near 1, and the R2 s are close
to zero.
Hence, preference for early resolution of uncertainty, time-variation in expectations
of consumption growth and inflation, fluctuations in the volatilities of expected growth
and expected inflation, and non-neutrality of expected inflation for future real growth
play an important role to jointly account for the key features of domestic bond and
foreign exchange markets.

25

5

Conclusion

In the data, we document a link between bond risk premia and the uncertainties about
expected real economic growth and expected inflation. Specifically, nominal bond risk
premia and term premia are high in times of high inflation volatility, and low in times
of high real volatility. The amount of predictability of future bond returns by the two
uncertainty variables matches that based on using multiple yields as predictors.
We use an equilibrium long-run risks type model to account for the key features
of the nominal term structure and the return predictability in bond and currency
markets. The key ingredients of the model include preference for early resolution of
uncertainty, time-variation in expected consumption growth and expected inflation,
fluctuations in expected growth and expected inflation uncertainty, and inflation nonneutrality. When investors prefer early resolution of uncertainty and high expected
inflation is bad for future consumption, bond premia increase with a positive shock to
inflation uncertainty and decrease when real uncertainty goes up. Hence, the model
can explain the relationship between the bond risk premia and the expected growth
and expected inflation uncertainties in the data. In addition to predictability of bond
returns, the model can further account for predictability of foreign currency returns
and the violations of uncovered interest rate parity condition.
To empirically evaluate the model, we formally estimate it using the MLE method.
We find that the model matches well the observed consumption, inflation, forecast
and yield data. The model delivers sizeable variations in the risk premia and predictability of bond returns, comparable to the data. In the model, as in the data,
inflation uncertainty increases bond premia while real uncertainty decreases bond
risk premia. Further, the model can quantitatively account for the predictability of
foreign currency returns both at short and long horizons.

26

A

Analytical Model Solution

For brevity of exposition, let us consider a general matrix representation of the economy.

′
Denote zt = ∆ct πt a vector of consumption growth and inflation rate. Their joint
dynamics satisfies,
zt+1 = µ + xt + Sz ηt+1 ,

(A.1)

xt+1 = Πxt + Sx Σt et+1 ,

where Sz and Sx are volatility scale matrices, and Σt is a diagonal matrix with real and
nominal volatility factors on the diagonal.
To model volatility process, denote Vt = diag(Σt Σ′t ), and write down:
Vt+1 = V0 + Φ(Vt − V0 ) + Σw wt+1 ,

(A.2)

where each component in the vector of volatility innovations wt is independent. We denote
by Ψi the log moment-generating function of volatility shocks. In case when volatility shocks
follow a Gamma distribution:
wt,i ∼ G(ki , θi ),

(A.3)

the log moment-generating function of volatility shocks satisfies
Ψi (u) ≡ log Eeuwt,i = −ki log(1 − θi u),

for u <

1
.
θi

(A.4)

For normal innovations, wt,i ∼ N (0, 1), so that Ψi (u) = 12 u2 .
The key ideas of the model rely on solutions which are derived using a standard loglinearization of returns. In particular, the log-linearized return on consumption claim is
given by
rc,t+1 ≈ κ0 + κ1 pct+1 − pct + ∆ct+1 ,
(A.5)
where pct is the log price-to-consumption ratio, and κ0 and κ1 are approximating constants
based on the endogenous level of price-consumption ratio in the economy. We follow Bansal,
Kiku, and Yaron (2007) to solve for these coefficients endogenously inside the model.
In equilibrium, the price-consumption ratio is linear in the expected growth and volatility factors:
pct = A0 + A′x xt + A′v Vt ,

(A.6)

where
Ax =



1
1−
ψ



(I − κ1 Π′ )−1 ic ,

.2

1
Av = θκ21 (I − κ1 Φ′ )−1 Sx′ Ax ,
2

27

(A.7)

where the last square component is taken element-by-element, and the log-linearization
coefficient κ1 satisfies


1 ′
log κ1 = log δ + 1 −
i µ + A′v ((I − κ1 Φ)V0 + (1 − κ1 )(I − Φ)−1 Σw Ew)
ψ c


(A.8)
1 2 ′
1X
1
Ψi (θκ1 {A′v Σw }i ),
ic Sz Sz′ ic +
+ θ 1−
2
ψ
θ
i


′
for ic = 1 0 and Ew is the unconditional mean of wt .
The real and nominal discount factor satisfy:

mt+1 = m0 + m′x xt + m′v Vt − λ′z Sz ηt+1 − λ′x Sx Σt et+1 − λ′v Σw wt+1 ,
′

′

m$t+1 = m$0 + m$x xt + m′v Vt − λ$z Sz Σt ηt+1 − λ′x Sx Σt et+1 − λ′v Σw wt+1 .

(A.9)

The discount factor parameters and market prices of risks equal to:
m0 = θ log δ + (1 − θ) log κ1 − γi′c µ + (θ − 1)A′v ((I − κ1 Φ)V0 + (1 − κ1 )(I − Φ)−1 Σw Ew),
1
mx = − ic , mv = (θ − 1)(κ1 Φ′ − I)Av ,
ψ
λz = γic , λx = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax , λv = (1 − θ)κ1 Av ,
(A.10)
and the nominal ones are:
m$0 = m0 − i′π µ, m$x = mx − iπ λ$z = λz + iπ ,

(A.11)


′
for iπ = 0 1 .

The log prices of real and nominal bonds are linear in expected growth and variance
factors. E.g., for a real bond,
′
′
pt,n = −B0,n − Bx,n
xt − Bv,n
Vt .

(A.12)

The bond coefficients are given by
X
1
′
B0,n = B0,n−1 − m0 + Bv,n−1
(I − Φ)V0 − λ′z Sz Sz′ λz −
Ψi (−{(Bv,n−1 + λv )′ Σw }i ),
2
i

′

Bx,n = Π Bx,n−1 − mx ,
1
Bv,n = Φ′ Bv,n−1 − mv − [Sx′ (λx + Bx,n−1 )].2 .
2

(A.13)

Similar equations are obtained for the nominal bond coefficients using the nominal discount
factor parameters.

28

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Bond Return Predictability: US Data
n
2y
3y
5y
′
Excess Bond Returns: rxt→t+1y,n = const + b factorst + error
Single Bond Factor:
CP Factor:
R2

0.44
0.15

(0.11)
(0.10)

0.85
0.17

(0.23)
(0.10)

1.43
0.17

(0.42)
(0.12)

Vol Factors, Survey Data:
Real vol
-1.38
Inflation vol
0.80
R2
0.17

(0.52)
(0.56)
(0.12)

-2.39
1.20
0.18

(0.93)
(0.97)
(0.12)

-3.68
1.48
0.18

(1.55)
(1.67)
(0.12)

Vol Factors, Predictive Approach:
Real vol
-2.18 (0.55)
Inflation vol
1.88 (0.56)
R2
0.23 (0.13)

-4.02
3.20
0.25

(1.03)
(1.05)
(0.13)

-6.50
4.84
0.24

(1.84)
(1.89)
(0.12)

Term Premia: yt,n −

1
n

Pn

Vol Factors, Survey Data:
Real vol
-1.50
Inflation vol
1.24
R2
0.20

j=1 yt+j,1

= const + b′ factorst + error

(0.42)
(0.47)
(0.16)

-2.37
1.96
0.32

(0.54)
(0.50)
(0.20)

-3.43
2.92
0.53

(0.64)
(0.64)
(0.26)

Vol Factors, Predictive Approach:
Real vol
-1.57 (0.44)
Inflation vol
1.53 (0.44)
R2
0.21 (0.15)

-2.10
2.05
0.23

(0.44)
(0.35)
(0.13)

-2.54
2.58
0.28

(0.47)
(0.39)
(0.13)

Slopes and R2 s in the regressions of excess nominal bond returns and realized term premia
on yield and volatility factors in the US. Single bond factor corresponds to Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) bond risk premium factor constructed from the cross-section of forward
rates. Real and inflation volatility factors capture one-year ahead uncertainty about future
real growth and inflation, respectively, and are constructed in the data using survey data
and predictive regressions approach. Quarterly US data from 1968Q4 to 2010Q3 (second
month of the quarter) for the survey data and single factor regressions, and from 1959Q4
to 2010Q3 for predictive regression approach. Volatility measures are standardized to have
mean zero and variance one. Standard errors are Newey-West adjusted.

29

Table 2: Bond Return Predictability: UK Data
n
2y
3y
5y
′
Excess Bond Returns: rxt→t+1y,n = const + b factorst + error
Single Bond Factor:
CP Factor:
R2

0.40
0.05

(0.22)
(0.19)

0.86
0.06

(0.41)
(0.17)

1.50
0.06

(0.76)
(0.18)

Vol Factors:
Real vol
Inflation vol
R2

-0.45
0.69
0.05

(0.28)
(0.31)
(0.15)

-0.77
1.22
0.05

(0.48)
(0.53)
(0.15)

-1.70
2.62
0.07

(0.86)
(0.91)
(0.15)

Term Premia: yt,n −
Vol Factors:
Real vol
Inflation vol
R2

1
n

Pn

-0.36
0.21
0.02

j=1 yt+j,1

(0.32)
(0.36)
(0.27)

= const + b′ factorst + error

-0.38
0.45
0.02

(0.32)
(0.37)
(0.24)

-0.13
0.53
0.05

(0.39)
(0.40)
(0.18)

Slopes and R2 s in the regressions of excess nominal bond returns and realized term premia
on yield and volatility factors in the UK. Single bond factor corresponds to Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) bond risk premium factor constructed from the cross-section of forward
rates. Real and inflation volatility factors capture one-year ahead uncertainty about future
real growth and inflation, respectively, and are constructed in the data using predictive
regressions approach. Quarterly UK data from 1970Q1 to 2010Q3. Volatility measures
are standardized to have mean zero and variance one. Standard errors are Newey-West
adjusted.

30

Table 3: Predictability of Real Growth, Inflation and Uncertainty
Expectation

Volatility

Survey Data:
Consumption
Inflation

0.38
0.62

0.40
0.48

Predictive Approach:
Consumption
Inflation

0.15
0.46

0.11
0.25

The Expectation
column reports the R2 in P
the regressions of one-year future consumption
P
4
1
1
growth 4 j=1 ∆ct+j and inflation rate 4 4j=1 πt+j on their measured expectations x̂ct
and x̂πt , respectively. The Volatility column reports P
the R2 in the regressions of one-year
sum of squared residuals in expected consumption 41 4j=1 u2c,t+j and in expected inflation
1 P4
2
2
2
j=1 uπ,t+j on their measured ex-ante variances σ̂ct and σ̂πt . In Survey Data approach,
4
expected consumption and expected inflation correspond to real GDP and inflation consensus forecasts. In Predictive Approach, expected consumption and expected inflation are
measured through the projection of future one-year consumption growth and inflation rate
on the predictive variables. Quarterly US data from 1968Q4 to 2010Q3 (second month
of the quarter) for the survey data and from 1959Q4 to 2010Q3 for predictive regression
approach.

31

Table 4: Estimated Model Parameters: US Economy

Preferences

Consumption

Inflation

Volatility

δ

γ

ψ

0.994∗
µc

20.90
(0.51)
σc

1.81
(0.05)
ρc

ρcπ

σxc

4.9e-03∗

4.6e-03∗
σπ

-0.047
(0.001)
σxπ

1.09e-03
(0.02e-03)

µπ

0.810
(0.006)
ρπ

9.0e-03∗

5.5e-03∗

νc

νπ

0.988
(0.002)
σwc

1.11e-03
(0.02e-03)
σwπ

0.994
(0.001)

0.979
(0.002)

1.85e-07
1.81e-07
(0.04e-07) (0.04e-07)

Estimated model parameter values based on the Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the
model using US data at a quarterly frequency. Parameters with stars ”*” are calibrated.
Mean and volatility of consumption growth and inflation rate are set to match the sample
evidence.

Table 5: Consumption Growth and Inflation Rate: US Data and Model
Data

Model

Consumption:
Mean
1.94
Std.Dev.
1.03
AR(1)
0.29

(0.20)
(0.08)
(0.12)

1.94
1.03
0.22

Inflation:
Mean
3.61
Std.Dev.
1.76
AR(1)
0.56
Corr(π, ∆c) -0.11

(0.50)
(0.21)
(0.11)
(0.10)

3.61
1.76
0.62
-0.25

Properties of consumption growth and inflation rate in the data and the estimated model.
Data are quarterly observations of consumption and inflation in US from 1947 to 2010;
population values for the model. Standard errors are Newey-West adjusted.

32

Table 6: Bond Markets: US Data and Model
1y

Yield Level
Std. Dev.
EH Slope:

6.09
3.09

CP Slope:
CP R2

2y
Data:

3y

4y

5y

6.33
6.52
6.68
6.79
2.97
2.87
2.78
2.70
-0.41 -0.78 -1.14 -1.15
(0.44) (0.56) (0.63) (0.67)
0.44
0.85
1.28
1.43
(0.11) (0.23) (0.33) (0.42)
0.15
0.17
0.20
0.17
(0.10) (0.10) (0.11) (0.12)
Model:

Yield Level:
Std. Dev.
EH Slope:
CP Slope
CP R2

6.10
2.37

6.29
2.29
-0.45
0.44
0.16

6.50
2.24
-0.51
0.83
0.17

6.73
2.20
-0.57
1.19
0.17

6.97
2.17
-0.61
1.53
0.16

Nominal term structure, slopes in the expectations hypothesis regressions, and slopes and
R2 s in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) single-factor bond premium regressions. Data are
second-month-of-the-quarter observations of quarterly yields from 1969 to 2010; population
values for the model.

33

Table 7: Cross-Country Evidence: Data and Model

Corr(∆ct , ∆c∗t )
Corr(∆ct→t+3 , ∆c∗t→t+3 )
Corr(πt , πt∗ )
∗
Corr(πt→t+3 , πt→t+3
)

Data
0.34 (0.11)
0.72 (0.08)
0.62 (0.11)
0.91 (0.05)

$
∗$
Corr(yt,1y
, yt,1y
)
$
∗$
Corr(yt,5y , yt,5y )

0.88
0.93

(0.04)
(0.02)

0.98
0.99

Std(∆s$t )

10.88

(1.07)

16.08

βF$ X,1y
βF$ X,3y
βF$ X,5y

-1.73
-0.82
0.36

(1.17)
(0.62)
(0.50)

-2.06
-0.68
0.25

US

Model

0.15
0.17
0.17

0.07
0.07
0.07

−0.41
−0.78
−1.15

0.00
-0.08
-0.19

UK
Bond Return Predictability:
2y R2
0.05
3y R2
0.06
5y R2
0.06
EH Violations:
2y Slope
3y Slope
5y Slope

0.59
0.68
0.83

Model
0.45
0.61
0.63
0.86

Top panel reports the data and model implications for the US-UK correlations of 1-quarter
and 1-year consumption growth and inflation rates, correlations of 1 year and 5 year nominal
yields, the volatility of foreign exchange rate and the slope coefficients in foreign currency
return regressions. Bottom panel reports the R2 in single-factor bond premium regressions
and the slope coefficients in expectations hypothesis projections in US and UK as well as the
population values in the model. In the model, cross-country shock correlations are pinned
down by minimizing the distance between the data and model moments reported in the top
panel, and the risk aversion coefficient is set at 12.

34

Table 8: Bond Markets: Importance of Model Ingredients

Yield Level:
EH Slope:
CP R2

Yield Level:
EH Slope:
CP R2

Yield Level:
EH Slope:
CP R2

1y
2y
3y
Constant Volatility:
6.44 6.64 6.85
1.00 1.00
0.00 0.00

4y

5y

7.04
1.00
0.00

7.23
1.00
0.00

Power Utility:
43.97 43.47 43.05 42.70 42.41
0.93 0.91 0.91 0.91
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
Inflation Neutrality:
6.64 6.61 6.58 6.56
0.78 0.83 0.87
0.01 0.00 0.00

6.54
0.89
0.00

Level of nominal term structure, slope in expectations hypothesis regressions, and R2 in
single-factor bond premium regressions in the model restricted to constant volatility (Σw =
0); power utility (ψ = 1/γ); and to inflation neutrality (ρcπ = 0).

35

Figure 1: Expected Consumption, Inflation and Volatility Measures
Expected Real Growth

Expected Inflation
6

2.5
2

4
1.5
1

2

0.5
0

0

−0.5
−2

−1
−1.5

−4
−2
−2.5

−6
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1970

1975

1980

Real Uncertainty

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2000

2005

2010

Inflation Uncertainty

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Measures of expected real growth and expected inflation, demeaned, (top panel) and the
variances of expected real growth and expected inflation (bottom panel), based on the
survey data. Data are quarterly observations from 1968Q4 to 2010Q3, annualized. Shaded
areas represent the NBER recession dates.

36

Figure 2: Difference between Inflation and Real Growth Volatility
0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Difference between the variances of expected inflation and expected real growth, based on
the survey data. Data are quarterly observations from from 1968Q4 to 2010Q3, annualized.
Shaded areas represent the NBER recession dates.

37

Figure 3: 5-Year Bond Risk Premia and Term Premia: Data and Model
5y Risk Premium
Model RP
Data RP

10

5

0

−5
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2000

2005

2010

5y Term Premium
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Top panel shows the risk premium on a 5-year nominal bond based on the model estimation,
alongside with the estimate based on the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor in the data.
Bottom panel shows the model-implied term premium on a 5-year bond. Shaded areas
represent the NBER recession dates.

38

Figure 4: Equilibrium Nominal Bond Yield Loadings
1

3000
Exp. Real. Growth
Exp. Inflation

0.9

Real Unc
Inflation Unc

2500

0.8
2000
0.7
1500

0.6
0.5

1000

0.4

500

0.3
0
0.2
−500

0.1
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

−1000

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Model-implied nominal bond yield loadings on expected growth and expected inflation (left
panel) and real and nominal uncertainty (right panel). Maturity on the horizontal axis is
in quarters.

39

References
Alexius, A. 2001. Uncovered Interest Parity Revisited. Journal of International Economics 9: 505–517.
Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe. 2009. Time-Varying Risk, Interest Rates,
and Exchange Rates in General Equilibrium. Review of Economic Studies 76: 851–
78.
Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei. 2007. Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets or Surveys
Forecast Inflation Better? Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 1163–1212.
Ang, A., S. Dong, and M. Piazzesi. 2005. No-Arbitrage Taylor Rules. Working paper,
Columbia University and Univesity of Chicago.
Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi. 2003. A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables. Journal of Monetary
Economics 50: 745–787.
Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, and C. I. Telmer. 2001. Affine Term Structure Models and
the Forward Premium Anomaly. The Journal of Finance 56: 279–304.
Backus, D. K., A. Gregory, and C. I. Telmer. 1993. Accounting for Forward Rates in
Markets for Foreign Currency. The Journal of Finance 48: 1887–1908.
Bansal, R. 1997. An Exploration of the Forward Premium Puzzle in Currency Markets. The Review of Financial Studies 10: 369–403.
Bansal, R., A. R. Gallant, R. Hussey, and G. Tauchen. 1995. Nonparametric Estimation of Stuctural Models for High-Frequency Currency Market Data. Journal of
Econometrics 66: 251 – 287.
40

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron. 2007. Risks for the Long Run: Estimation and
Inference. Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
. 2009. An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run Risks Model for Asset Prices.
Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Bansal, R., and I. Shaliastovich. 2007. Risk and return in bond, currency, and equity
markets. Working paper, Duke University.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron. 2004. Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles. Journal of Finance 59: 1481–1509.
Bansal, R., and H. Zhou. 2002. Term Structure of Interest Rates with Regime Shifts.
The Journal of Finance 57: 1997–2043.
Barro, R. 2006. Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121: 823–866.
Bekaert, G. 1996. The Time Variation of Risk and Return in Foreign Exchange Markets: A General Equilibrium Perspective. Review of Financial Studies 9: 427–470.
Bekaert, G., R. Hodrick, and D. Marshall. 2001. Peso Problem Explanations for Term
Structure Anomalies. Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 241–70.
Bikbov, R., and M. Chernov. 2010. No-Arbitrage Macroeconomic Determinants of
the Yield Curve. Journal of Econometrics 159: 166–182.
Campbell, J., and J. Cochrane. 1999. By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior. Journal of Political Economy
107: 205–251.

41

Campbell, J., and R. Shiller. 1991. Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: a
Bird’s Eye View. Review of Economic Studies 58: 495–514.
Chen, R.R., and L. Scott. 1993. Maximum Likelihood Estimation for a Multifactor
Equilibrium Model of the Term structure of Interest Rates. Journal of Fixed Income
3: 14–31.
Chinn, M. D., and G. Meredith. 2004. Monetary Policy and Long Horizon Uncovered
Interest Parity. IMF Staff Papers 51: 409 – 430.
Cochrane, J., and M. Piazzesi. 2005. Bond Risk Premia. American Economic Review
95: 138–160.
Colacito, R. 2009. Six Anomalies Looking for a Model. A Consumption Based Explanation of International Finance Puzzle. Working paper, University of North
Carolina.
Colacito, R., and M. Croce. 2010. The Short and Long Run Benefits of Financial
Integration. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 100: 523–31.
Colacito, R., and M. M. Croce. 2011. Long Run and the Real Exchange Rate. Journal
of Political Economy 119: 153–181.
Dahlquist, M., and H. Hasseltoft. 2011. International Bond Risk Premia. Working
paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Dai, Q., and K. Singleton. 2002. Expectation Puzzles, Time-Varying Risk Premia, and
Affine Models of the Term Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 63: 415–442.
Duffee, G. 2002. Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Affine Models. Journal
of Finance 57: 405–43.
42

Duffie, D., and K. Singleton. 1997. An Econometric Model of the Term Structure of
Interest-Rate Swap Yields. Journal of Finance 52: 1287–1321.
Epstein, L. G., and S. Zin. 1989. Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework. Econometrica
57: 937–969.
Fama, E. F. 1984. Forward and Spot Exchange Rates. Journal of Monetary Economics
14: 319–338.
Farhi, E., and X. Gabaix. 2008. Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates. Working paper,
Harvard University.
Hodrick, R. 1987. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures
Foreign Exchange Markets. New York: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh. 1991. Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences.
Journal of Monetary Economics 27: 39–71.
Kocherlakota, N. 1990. Disentangling the Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion from
the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: An Irrelevance Result. The Journal
of Finance, 45: 175–91.
Kreps, D. M., and E. L. Porteus. 1978. Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and
Dynamic Choice Theory. Econometrica 46: 185–200.
Marshall, D. 1992. Inflation and Asset Returns in a Monetary Economy. Journal of
Finance 47: 1315–42.
Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider. 2006. Equilibrium Yield Curves. NBER Macroeconomics Annual vol. 21, pp. 389–472.
43

Rietz, T. 1988. The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution. Journal of Monetary Economics 22: 117–131.
Rudebusch, G. D., and T. Wu. 2008. A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,
Monetary Policy, and the Economy. Economic Journal 118: 906–926.
Sekkel, R. 2011. International Evidence on Bond Risk Premia. Journal of Banking
and Finance 35: 174–181.
Verdelhan, A. 2010. A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium.
Journal of Finance 65: 123–145.
Wachter, J. 2006. A Consumption-based Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates. Journal of Financial Economics 79: 365–399.
Wright, J. 2011. Term Premia and Inflation Uncertainty: Empirical Evidence from
an International Panel Dataset. American Economic Review 101: 1514–34.

44

