                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SYNDICATED LOAN SPREADS AND THE COMPOSITION OF THE SYNDICATE

                                            Jongha Lim
                                        Bernadette A. Minton
                                         Michael Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 18356
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18356


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




We would like to thank Zhenyi Huang and Jongsik Park for excellent research assistance, and participants
in a seminar at University of Missouri, Ohio State University, and Penn State University, as well as
Zahi Ben-David, Isil Erel, John Howe, Wei Jiang, Kai Li, Robert Prilmeier, Shastri Sandy, Berk Sensoy,
Pei Shao, René Stulz, and Jun Yang for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jongha Lim, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Syndicated Loan Spreads and the Composition of the Syndicate
Jongha Lim, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18356
September 2012
JEL No. G21,G23,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

The past decade has seen significant changes in the structure of the corporate lending market, with
non-bank institutional investors playing larger roles than they historically have played. These non-bank
institutional lenders typically have higher required rates of return than banks, but invest in the same
loan facilities. We hypothesize that non-bank institutional lenders invest in loan facilities that would
not otherwise be filled by banks, so that the arranger has to offer a higher spread to attract the non-bank
institution. In a sample of 20,031 leveraged loan facilities originated between 1997 and 2007, we find
that, loan facilities including a non-bank institution in their syndicates have higher spreads than otherwise
identical bank-only facilities. Contrary to risk-based explanations of this finding, non-bank facilities
are priced with premiums relative to bank-only facilities of the same loan package. These premiums
for non-bank facilities are substantially larger when a hedge or private equity fund is one of the syndicate
members. Consistent with the notion that firms are willing to pay spread premiums when loan facilities
are particularly important to the firm, we find that firms spend the capital raised by loan facilities priced
at a premium faster than other loan facilities, especially when the premium is associated with a non-bank
institutional investor.


Jongha Lim                                            Michael Weisbach
Department of Finance                                 Department of Finance
Trulaske College of Business School                   Fisher College of Business
University of Missouri                                Ohio State University
Columbia, MO 65211                                    2100 Neil Ave.
limjong@missouri.edu                                  Columbus, OH 43210
                                                      and NBER
Bernadette A. Minton                                  weisbach.2@osu.edu
Finance Department
Fisher College of Business
700 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
minton_15@fisher.osu.edu
1. Introduction

        Various types of institutional investors participate in syndicated loans. These investors have

substantially different costs of providing debt capital: Banks must receive the risk free rate plus a

premium for the default risk. In contrast, hedge fund managers have relatively high required returns on

top of the considerable fees they charge. Consequently, to justify it making an investment, a hedge fund’s

pre-fee expected returns must be substantially higher than those for a bank. Given these different expected

returns, it is somewhat puzzling that both hedge funds and banks (as well as other institutions) all invest

in the same syndicated loan facilities.

        One possible explanation for the observation that investors with differing expected returns invest

in the same syndicated loan facilities is that facilities differ on dimensions other than risk, and that these

differences are associated with both spread differences and also the identity of investors who provide the

financing. Some loan facilities are made when the supply of capital is high, so that the loan facility can be

filled by banks at a relatively low spread. Others are made at times when it is difficult to acquire the

necessary capital from banks, so that the loan arrangers have to raise the spreads to attract other non-bank

institutional investors such as hedge funds. Alternatively, if the loan facility is not crucial to the firm's

health and it cannot be filled at low cost by banks, the firm could choose not to borrow at all.

Consequently, when non-bank financial institutions take positions in loan facilities, there should be a

higher spread than in loan facilities in which they do not take positions. In addition, we expect that

borrowing firms should spend the money they raise in non-bank facilities relatively quickly.

        To evaluate the way in which different kinds of non-bank institutional investors are involved in

the syndicated lending process, we consider a sample of 20,031 facilities of “leveraged” loans from the

DealScan database, each of which was originated between 1997 and 2007.1 We focus on the leveraged



1
  The technical definition of leveraged loans varies by organization. For example, DealScan defines as leveraged
any loan with a credit rating of BB+ or lower and any unrated loan. Bloomberg defines leveraged loans as those
with spreads over LIBOR of 250 basis points (bp) or more. Standard & Poor’s deems loans with spreads over
LIBOR of 125 bp or more as leveraged loans. Thompson Financial denotes as leveraged loans, all those with an
initial spread of 150 bp or more before June 30, 2002, or 175 bp or more after July 2, 2002. We follow DealScan’s

                                                       1
loan segment of the market because non-bank institutional investors’ participation in the corporate

lending market has been concentrated in this lower quality, non-investment grade segment of the market,

and also because restricting the sample to leveraged loans allows us the sample to be relatively

homogenous.2 Of the 20,031 leveraged loan facilities, 13,752 are associated with a syndicate containing

only commercial or investment banks (bank-only facilities), while the remaining 6,279 have syndicates

containing at least one non-bank institutional investor (non-bank facilities). These institutional investors

are most often finance companies (contributing to the syndicates of 4,603 loan facilities), private equity or

hedge funds (2,754 loan facilities) and mutual funds (1,010 loan facilities).

         We estimate the difference in spreads between loan facilities as a function of the identities of the

investors in a particular facility. In doing so, we control for other factors that affect the loan facility’s

spread, such as the firm’s risk measured by either firm-level accounting variables, or the rating of the

issuer, as well as the loan facility’s type (Term Loan A, Term Loan B, or Revolver) and other facility-

specific characteristics. Our estimates suggest that the presence of a non-bank institutional syndicate

member is associated with a significantly higher spread than an otherwise similar bank-only loan facility.

When we control for risk using firm-level accounting variables, our estimates imply a spread premium of

approximately 56 basis points. If we instead group loans by rating category, the estimated spread

premiums are smaller, around 24 basis points, but are still statistically significant and large enough to be

economically important.

         In computing these estimates of the non-bank premiums, we control for publicly observable

variables that could affect spreads. However, it is possible that non-bank premiums could reflect

unobservable differences between firms that are correlated with both the likelihood of there being a non-



classification of leveraged loans in this paper. By “non-bank” we mean an institutional investor that is neither
commercial bank nor investment bank.
2
  The proportion of leveraged loans among loans classified as “institutional” loans by DealScan is about 90% during
the sample period. Similarly, Nandy and Shao (2010) find that 86.1% of “institutional” loans are leveraged loans
with the proportion increasing over the years during the period from 1995 to 2006. The definition of “institutional”
facilities in this paper is different from the one used by DealScan or Nandy and Shao (2010). We focus on the actual
participation as opposed to the label put on the facility and consider a loan facility to be ‘institutional’ if at least one
non-bank (neither commercial bank nor investment bank) institutional investor is involved in the lending syndicate.

                                                             2
bank institutional syndicate member and the spreads on the loan facilities in which they invest. For

example, suppose that at times when the firm is having financial problems that prevent it from receiving a

loan facility from other lenders, it is more likely to have a non-bank institution in the loan facility’s

syndicate. In this case, it would be possible that the borrower’s true risk would not be reflected in

observable variables, so that the positive estimated premiums could reflect compensation for risk that is

unobservable to an outsider.

        To evaluate the possibility that the premiums to non-bank institutional investors reflect

incremental risk differences between non-bank loans facilities and bank-only loan facilities, we estimate

the effect of non-bank syndicate members on the pricing of different facilities within the same loan.

Different facilities within the same loan package typically have the same seniority and hence have the

same default risk. Yet, facilities usually have different maturities, sizes, and syndicate structures, so we

control econometrically for differences in facility-specific attributes when estimating within-loan

differences. Using this approach, the existence of a non-bank syndicate member effect on the relative

spreads on different facilities of the same loan cannot reflect a correlation between non-bank institutions’

existence and a factor related to firm-level risk.

        The within-loan estimates indicate that when a non-bank institution participates in a Term Loan B

facility’s syndicate, the facility has a larger spread premium relative to Term Loan A facilities or

revolvers of the same loan relative to bank-only Term Loan B facilities, although only the premium

difference for revolvers is statistically significantly different from zero. We also consider the cases in

which the non-bank institution invests in a particular type of facility and there also is another facility of

the same type in the same loan. In each of these cases, the facility with the non-bank institutional investor

trades at a statistically significantly higher spread. These findings confirm that facilities in which non-

bank institutional investors participate have higher spreads than otherwise similar bank-only facilities,

even holding borrower characteristics constant.

        We also examine whether the type of non-bank syndicate member is related to the spread

premium. We estimate this spread premium when we control for risk econometrically using firm-specific

                                                     3
financial data, and also when we compare across different facilities in the same loan. Consistent with the

notion that different types of institutional investors have different required rates of return, we find that

when hedge or private equity funds participate in a facility’s syndicate, the spread premium is

substantially higher, about 29 basis points than when other types of non-bank institutional investors

participate in the facility’s syndicate.

        We also examine whether these spread premiums vary when the non-bank syndicate members

also have equity positions at the time of the loan facility origination. When a hedge fund has an equity

stake in the borrowing firm greater than 0.1 percent, the spread premium approximately doubles, to about

58 basis points. Finally the spread premiums vary positively with the fraction of the loan that is purchased

by the non-bank institutional investor. These findings are consistent with the view that arrangers rely on

non-bank institutional investors, especially hedge and private equity funds, as lenders of last resort, when

it is difficult to raise capital for the loan facility through banks.

           Finally, we consider the idea that if non-bank institutional lenders are paid premiums to invest

in the particular facilities in which they participate, then these facilities should be for loan facilities in

which capital is particularly important for the borrowing firms. A testable implication of this idea is that

the borrowing firms should save a smaller fraction of the capital they raise as cash than when a non-bank

institution does not participate in the syndicate. To evaluate this hypothesis, we estimate equations similar

to those in Kim and Weisbach (2008) that predict the fraction of an incremental dollar raised that goes to

alternative uses. Our estimates indicate that when there is a positive spread premium, the estimated

fraction of capital raised that the borrowing firm saves as cash declines with the abnormal spread on the

loan facility. This finding is consistent with the notion that borrowers are willing to pay a premium on

their loan facilities in situations in which raising capital quickly is particularly important to the firm.

           Our findings parallel those of Brophy, Ouimet, and Sialm (2009), who find that hedge funds’

equity investments are typically to firms that otherwise would have trouble raising capital. When making

equity investments, hedge funds typically negotiate discounts relative to the public stock price paid by

other investors, and earn abnormal returns because their purchases are at a discount. Thus, hedge funds

                                                         4
abnormal returns on private placements of equity can be thought of as the return to providing liquidity.

Our findings can be viewed similarly: we find that hedge and private equity funds contribute to loan

facilities in firms with spreads that are relatively high. Since spreads are determined through an auction

process, high spreads that cannot be explained by risk and other firm and loan facility attributes mean that

the facility would have relatively few investors or would have difficulties in fully subscribing absent the

hedge or private equity fund. Therefore, we view the spread premiums as compensation that non-bank

institutional investors receive in exchange for providing liquidity to their firms in the facility that is in less

demand from other investors.

           Nandy and Shao (2010) compare spreads on “institutional” and “bank” facilities, and document

that the Term Loan B facilities or what they label institutional facilities, have higher spreads than

facilities they label bank facilities, Revolvers or Term Loan A facilities. We extend their work in a

number of ways; in particular, we focus on the actual participation by types of bank and non-bank

institutional syndicate members as opposed to the label put on the facility, and the way that non-bank

institutions participation in the syndicate affects facilities’ spreads and the way in which the capital is

used.

          The paper also is related to the literature on potential conflicts of interest that arise when

institutional investors engage in syndicated lending. Ivashina and Sun (2011b) and Massoud, Nandy,

Saunders, and Song (2011) focus on the trading of institutions that participate in syndicated lending, and

the associated potential conflicts of interest. Both papers find evidence that institutional investors in the

syndicated loan market exploit their access to private information when trading and earn abnormal returns

when they trade in the firm’s equities.

          The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data sources and

sample. Section 3 estimates the differences in spreads between bank-only loan facilities and comparable

non-bank loan facilities. Section 4 examines factors that affect the magnitude of spread differences

between bank-only and non-bank facilities. Section 5 considers the way in which the fraction of the

capital raised varies with the loan’s pricing and composition of the syndicate, while Section 6 concludes.

                                                        5
2. Data sources and sample construction

2.1. Sample of leveraged loan facilities

        We obtain our sample of leveraged loans from the Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation’s (LPC)

DealScan database for the 1997-2007 period. We consider a loan to be a “Leveraged loan” if it has a

credit rating of BB+ or lower, or is unrated (see footnote 1). Leveraged loans in our sample are either

stand-alone facilities (41.4%) or made up of term loans facilities packaged together with revolver

facilities. A term loan facility is a loan facility for a specified amount, fixed repayment schedule and

maturity, and is usually fully funded at origination. In contrast, revolvers typically have shorter maturities

than term loan facilities and are drawn down at the option of the borrower. Term Loan facilities are

normally designated by letter, where the Term Loan A facility is usually amortizing, and is typically held

by the lead arranger, and the remaining facilities (Term Loan B, C, D, E, …) are more often “bullet”,

meaning that they have one payoff at maturity, and are usually sold to third parties.3

           We focus on leveraged loans because participation of non-bank institutional investors in this

segment of the loan market has increased over time. In addition, according to previous studies (e.g. Nandy

and Shao (2010)) the overwhelming majority of “institutional” loans are leveraged loans with the

proportion increasing over time. Moreover, given that the pricing function of leveraged loans is likely to

be different from that of investment grade loans, restricting the sample to leveraged loans finesses

econometric difficulties that could potentially arise if we were to pool leveraged and investment grade

loans. We begin our sample in 1997 because major developments in the market that fueled institutional

involvement in the corporate loan market occurred in 1995 and 1996.4




3
  Appendix C contains statistics on the payoff structure of each type of facility in our sample.
4
  The Loan Syndications and Trading Association (LSTA) was founded in 1995 and S&P first started rating bank
loans in 1995. In 1996, LSTA first started providing mark-to-market pricing (for dealers only). In addition, the
secondary market for syndicated loans became well established by mid-1990s: by the early 1990s specialized loan
trading desks were operating in a number of institutions led by Bankers Trust, Alex Brown, Bear Stearns, Citibank,
Continental Bank and Goldman Sachs. By 1997, about 25 institutions had active trading desks and there were two
inter-dealer brokers. These innovations spurred the fast growth of the syndicated loan market, which in turn fueled
institutional participation in the primary lending market. Moreover, there are very few leveraged loans before 1997.

                                                         6
           To construct the sample, we begin with all leveraged loan facilities listed in DealScan made to

non-financial U.S. public firms and completed between 1997 and 2007, a total of 37,552 loan facilities.

We require that the data on deal value and the date of origination not be missing, and that interest rate is

set at a spread over LIBOR. We additionally restrict the sample to the most common type of facilities,

where the type of instrument is either a line of credit (such as Revolver/Line, 364-Day Facility, Limited

Line) or a term loan.5 We further restrict the sample to the borrowing companies for which we could

match to the Compustat database.6 Finally we exclude loans whose primary purpose is LBO financing.

This screening process results in a sample of 20,031 facilities, associated with 13,122 loans made to 5,627

borrowing firms.

           We consider a loan facility to have a non-bank institutional investor if at least one institutional

investor that is not either a commercial or investment bank is involved in the lending syndicate. Non-bank

institutions include hedge funds, private equity funds, mutual funds, pension funds and endowments,

insurance companies, and finance companies.

           To identify commercial bank lenders, we start from lenders whose type in DealScan is “US

Bank”, “African Bank”, “Asian-Pacific Bank”, “Foreign Bank”, “Eastern Europe/Russian Bank”,

“Middle Eastern Bank”, “Western European Bank”, or “Thrift/S&L”. We manually exclude the some

observations that are classified as a bank by DealScan but actually are not, such as GMAC Commercial

Finance. Then we manually check lenders whose primary SIC code fall in 6011-6082, 6712, or 6719 and

add them to the list of commercial banks if appropriate. When identifying commercial banks, we also

consider finance companies affiliated with commercial banks (e.g. Foothill Capital) to be commercial

banks. We do take into consideration the changes in the institutional type, so that, for example, JP

Morgan is classified as an investment bank before its merger with the Chase Manhattan Corp in 2000, and

JP Morgan Chase is coded as a commercial bank afterward.


5
  This restriction excludes bankers’ acceptance, leases, standby letters of credit, step payment leases, guidance lines,
traded letters of credit, multi-option facilities, and undisclosed loans.
6
  We are grateful to Michael Roberts for providing the Dealscan-Compustat link file. In addition to using this link
file, we also manually confirmed the matching between DealScan and Compustat.

                                                           7
          To identify investment banks, we start from lenders that are classified by DealScan as

“Investment Bank”. By manually checking each lender, we drop ones that are labeled as IB by DealScan

but are better characterized as other types, allowing us, for example, to classify Blackstone Group as a

private equity firm rather than as an investment bank. We also manually check lenders whose primary

SIC code is 6211 to capture additional IB lenders such as RBC Capital Market. Insurance companies are

identified following similar process, focusing on the lenders labeled as “Insurance Company” by

DealScan and the ones having primary SIC code of 6311-6361, 6399, or 6411.

          Identifying other types of lenders is more challenging, since there are not SIC codes clearly

indicating finance companies, mutual funds, or hedge funds and private equity funds. Therefore, to

identify finance companies, we rely on DealScan’s classification (“Finance companies”). A lender is

classified as a mutual fund if its type in DealScan is either “Mutual funds” or “Institutional investor-

prime funds”. When a lender’s type in DealScan is ambiguous (e.g. “Institutional Investor – Other”, or

“Other”), we further check Capital IQ to see whether it is a mutual fund. Finally, to identify hedge funds

and private equity funds, we start from the lenders that are labeled as “Institutional investor – Hedge fund”

or “Vulture fund” in DealScan. A lender is further added to the category of HF/PE if its name appears in

the TASS or Preqin databases, or if the descriptions of the lender in Capital IQ tells that it is privately

owned hedge fund sponsor, manages private equity funds, or manages assets for high-net worth

individuals.

          Because our sample only includes loan facilities with floating-rate interest payments, we use

the all-in-drawn spread as our measure of loan pricing. The all-in-drawn spread is the sum of the spread

of the facility over LIBOR and any annual fees paid to the lender group. DealScan also provides data on

the facility’s size and maturity, the number of investors participating in the lending syndicate, as well as

information on whether the facility is senior, secured, second-lien, syndicated, and the type of facility

(revolver or term loan). We also consider the firm’s lending relationship with the facility’s syndicate

members by examining whether the firm borrowed from the same lender previously.



                                                     8
             We match the borrower’s and/or borrower’s parent name to the Compustat firm by a

combination of algorithmic matching and manual checking following Chava and Roberts (2008). Using

this matching procedure, we are able to obtain other firm-level variables from Compustat, CRSP, I/B/E/S,

13F, and SDC Platinum. The total number of leveraged loan facilities that have a full set of data for the

most recent prior fiscal year-end is 12,346, of which 3,460 have participation of an institutional investor

that is neither an investment bank nor a commercial bank.



2.2. Overview of sample

           Table I provides statistics on the annual distribution of leveraged loan facilities. This table

emphasizes the increasing trend of non-bank institutional participation in the leveraged loan market. The

value of loan facilities with non-bank syndicate members, as well as the fraction of all leveraged loan

facilities made up by loan facilities with non-bank participation increased substantially over our sample

period, from $57 billion (19% of all leveraged loans) in 1997 to $110 billion (32%) in 2007.

           Table II presents summary statistics for the all loan facilities in our sample (20,031 facilities)

(Panel A) and lender participation (Panels B, C, and D). As reported in Panel A, the average facility

amount is $158 million, the average number of investors involved in a lending syndicate is about six, and

the average maturity is about 47 months. Approximately 70% of facilities are secured, 1.4% are second-

lien, and about 87.6% are syndicated loan facilities.7 Almost all loan facilities are senior debt.

           Panel B of Table II presents the frequency of bank and non-bank institutions participation, while

Panels C and D report loan share information in a sample of loan facilities for which we have data on loan

shares (5,624 facilities, about 25% of the sample). For this sub-sample, non-bank institutions participate

in about 23% of the loan facilities (1,282 of 5,624). When they participate in the loan facility, non-bank

syndicate members together own 44% of the facility, with finance companies and hedge/private equity

funds each owning about a third of the loan facilities in which they invest. In addition, when non-bank

institutional investors participate in a loan facility, they are the largest investor 46% of the time (Panel D).

7
    All results are similar when we exclude sole-lender loans from the sample.

                                                           9
         The Term Loan A facility often is referred to as the bank facility and Term Loan B facility as the

institutional facility (see for example Nandy and Shao (2010)). However, our data indicate this

description can be somewhat misleading since non-bank institutions do invest in Term Loan A and

revolver facilities as well, and sometimes Term Loan B facilities are held entirely by banks. As Panels B

through D show, contrary to the common terminology, non-bank institutions invest in Term Loan A

facilities and banks invest in Term Loan B facilities. Conditional on investing in Term Loan A facilities

non-bank institutions together own 25% of the facility and when bank invest in Term Loan B facilities,

they together own 86% of the loan facility.



3. Differences between bank-only and non-bank loan facilities

3.1. Univariate differences

         Table III summarizes the univariate differences between the 6,279 non-bank and 13,752 bank-

only loan facilities in our sample. Non-bank facilities are less likely to be revolvers than bank-only

facilities loans (49.3% vs. 67.8%), and this difference is statistically significant at the one percent level.

The remainder of the loan facilities in the sample are Term Loans, so non-bank facilities are more likely

to be Term Loan facilties than are bank-only facilities. Facilities designated “Term Loan A” are usually

amortizing, while those “Term Loan B” more often have one final “bullet” payment.8

         Within the sample of leveraged loan facilities, the non-bank facilities tend to be more risky than

bank-only facilities. Of the borrowers that do have ratings, non-bank facilities tend to have borrowers

with lower ratings.9 For example, of the non-bank loan facilities with issuer ratings, 56% have a B rating


8
  We treat facilities with B or higher designations (e.g. C, D, etc.) as Term Loan B. Moreover, about 49% of the term
loans in our sample has no letter designation but is just called ‘Term Loan’. In all reported tables, we treat these
undesignated term loans as Term Loan B. We do so because the facility attributes, such as the spread and payment
schedule, of the unlabeled Term Loans in our sample appear to be more like the Term Loan B’s than the Term Loan
A’s. Detailed comparisons of attributes across different facility types are provided in Appendix C. In addition, when
a facility is first launched and appears in the ‘Calendar’, which is the weekly record of outstanding loans published
by Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation (LPC), often its type is originally described as “Term Loan”, but ultimately is
classified in DealScan as “Term Loan B”, or vice versa. We have re-estimated all equations reported in the paper
treating unclassified term loans separately and all results are similar to those reported below.
9
  We use issuer rating as of the fiscal year-end prior to the loan origination, not ratings for individual loans, because
information on ratings for individual loans is more often missing. Therefore the sample includes 1,100 loan facilities

                                                          10
or lower, compared to 36% of the bank-only loan facilities. In addition borrowers of non-bank facilities

have higher leverage, a lower Z-score, are more likely to have negative net worth, and lower ROA than

bank-only facilities.10



3.2. Differences in spreads

        The goal of this paper is to understand why we observe investors with different required returns

investing in the same syndicated loan facilities. Within a particular facility, all investors receive the same

return; however, facilities differ cross-sectionally, both in terms of the syndicate composition and the

spreads that they offer investors. To attract investors with a higher required rate of return, facilities must

offer higher spreads. Therefore, we expect to observe higher spreads for loan facilities with non-bank

syndicate member than for loan facilities with bank-only participants.

        To evaluate this hypothesis empirically, we estimate equations predicting the interest rate on a

particular loan facility. Because the loans in our sample are floating rate with LIBOR as their index, we

estimate equations predicting the “All-in-Drawn Spread”, which is the spread of the loan facility over

LIBOR plus any annual fees that the borrower must pay the lenders. Our goal is to estimate the

incremental effect of a non-bank institutional investor on the spread, holding other factors that could

affect the spread constant. Therefore, we estimate the following equation:

                 All  in  drawn spread  α  β  Non  bank syndicate member    X                       (1)

where X is a vector of covariates that include facility- and firm-specific control variables. The control

variables include the facility amount, the number of participating lenders and the lenders’ past

relationships with the firm, the maturity of the facility, whether the facility is secured or second-lien,

whether the loan has covenants, as well as the borrowing firm’s size, ratio of fixed to total assets, Z-score,



(out of the total 20,031) made to investment grade borrowers, despite the fact that all of our loan facilities are
classified as “leveraged”.
10
   “Z-score” is intended to be a negative function of bankruptcy probabilities. It is taken from Altman (1968) and
defined by: Z = 1.2 Working Capital / Total Assets + 1.4 Retained Earnings / Total Assets + 3.3 EBIT / Total Assets
+ 0.6 Market Value of Equity / Book Value of Total Liabilities T 4 + 0.999 Sales/ Total Assets.

                                                        11
leverage, industry-adjusted ROA, log of the number of analyst following, and total institutional holdings.

We also control for the high-yield spread in the month of facility origination to take into account time-

series variations in market-wide risk premia. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A.

        The loan facilities are generally either revolvers or term loans. The term loan facilties are of two

types, Term Loan A facilities, which are often syndicated to banks, or Term Loan B facilities (sometimes

labeled just “Term Loan” in the Dealscan database), which are typically structured for non-bank

institutional investors. Nandy and Shao (2010) document that Term Loan B facilities generally have

higher spreads than Term Loan A facilities, which is consistent with the amortizing nature of Term Loan

A facilities leading to a substantially shorter effective maturity than Term Loan B facilities. For this

reason, it is important to control for differences in type of facility when estimating Equation (1).

        A key factor in determining the spread on a loan facility is its default risk. It is possible that

differences in spreads between non-bank and bank-only facilities could reflect the fact that non-bank

facilities tend to be for riskier borrowers (See Table III). To measure the incremental impact of a non-

bank institutional investor on spreads, it is important to control as well as possible for the default risk of

the loan.

        About 40% of the firms in our sample has issuer credit ratings at the end of fiscal year prior to the

loan origination. The credit ratings presumably reflect the risk of the issuer as assessed by professionals

around the time the loan is issued. However, relying solely on credit ratings to measure risk necessitates

dropping loan facilities made to firms that do not have ratings. Therefore, we estimate specifications

using issuer credit ratings as a measure of risk for the loan facilities for which credit ratings are available,

as well as equations using the Z-Score and leverage to control for default risk for the larger sample that

includes loan facilities without credit ratings.

        We present the OLS coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and the corresponding p-values on the

full sample in Panel A of Table IV, and on the sub-sample with firm credit ratings in Panel B of Table IV.

Each equation includes facility-purpose fixed effects, and year fixed effects, and the reported standard



                                                      12
errors are clustered by borrower. When we consider the sample of all facility types, we include facility-

type fixed effects in the equation as well.

         Column (1) of Panel A of Table IV presents estimates of Equation (1) using all observations for

which all required data are available (12,346 loan facilities). In this column, the coefficient on the non-

bank syndicate member indicator variable is 56.4, and is statistically significantly different from zero.

This coefficient indicates that holding other things constant, loan facilities with at least one non-bank

syndicate member have spreads that are 56.4 basis points higher than bank-only loan facilities. This

spread difference is relatively large, given the average spread of 249 basis points, so the estimated non-

bank premium equals 22.7% of the total spread.11

         The coefficients on the other variables, which control for other factors that potentially affect

spreads, are consistent with the notion that spreads are a function of borrower and loan risk. Larger loan

facilities with more syndicate members, especially when the participants have past relationships with the

borrowers, tend to be less risky and therefore have lower spreads. Secured and second-lien facilities tend

to be more risky, and hence have higher spreads.12 Z-Score has a negative coefficient and leverage a

positive one, suggesting that riskier firms have loan facilities with higher spreads, and profitability in the

form of industry-adjusted ROA, not surprisingly, is associated with lower spreads. We also control for

market-wide risk premium by including the high-yield credit spread, measured as the difference between

the average spread on AAA-rated loan index and the average spread on BB-rated loan index in the month

of loan origination. Not surprisingly, since our sample is relatively risky leveraged loans, the high yield

spread is positively (and statistically-significantly) related to the all-in-drawn spread.

         In Column (2) of Panel A of Table IV, we present estimates of Equation (1) for the sub-sample of

revolvers, in Column (3) for all term loan facilities, and in Column (4) for only the Term Loan B facilities.

In each column, the coefficient on the non-bank syndicate member indicator variable is positive and


11
  The average spread for the 12,346 facilities that have all required data is 249 basis points (Appendix B).
12
  Security by itself lowers the risk of a loan. However, secured loans tend to be issued by younger, riskier firms
with lower cash flows, so the positive relation with spreads likely reflects this additional risk. See Berger and Udell
(1990) and Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2012).

                                                         13
statistically significantly different from zero. For revolvers, this coefficient implies that loan facilities

having non-bank syndicate members have 47.5 basis-point higher spreads than bank-only loan facilities.

For all term loans pooled together (Column (3)), the premium is 70.3 basis points, and for just Term Loan

B facilities (Column (4)), it is 76.2 basis points. These results imply that there is a positive premium

associated with different types of non-bank loan facilities.

        In these equations, we control for default risk based on the borrowing firm’s financial data using

measures such as leverage and the firm’s Z-Score. An alternative way of controlling for risk is to use the

issuer’s credit rating. Since credit ratings are constructed by professionals to measure firms’

comprehensive default risk, it is likely a preferable approach. However, credit ratings are not available for

all firms, so the use of credit ratings is limited to those firms that have them.

        Panel B of Table IV presents coefficient estimates of Equation (1) for different credit ratings

(Columns (1) through (4)) and for issuers with no credit ratings (Column (5)). Column (1) contains

estimates for all facilities from issuers with credit ratings, including indicator variables for different credit

rating categories. Columns (2), (3), and (4) present estimates for BBB- and above rated firms, BB-rated

firms, and B-rated firms and below rated firms, respectively. As in Panel A, we include control variables

for facility and firm characteristics, facility-type, facility-purpose and year fixed effects. The reported

standard error estimates are clustered by borrowing firm.

        In each column in Panel B of Table IV, the coefficient on the non-bank syndicate member

indicator variable is positive and statistically significantly from zero. For all firms with ratings (Column

(1)), the estimates indicate that there is about a 23.6 basis-point premium for facilities with non-bank

participation. This premium equals 28.1 basis points for firms rated BBB and higher, 21.8 basis points for

BB-rated firms, and 24.1 basis points for B-rated and below firms. In addition, for firms without ratings,

there is an estimated non-bank premium of 78.6 basis points.



3.3. Within-loan estimates.



                                                       14
        One clear pattern emerging from Table IV is that the estimates of the non-bank premium are

substantially smaller when ratings are used to control for risk when we use borrower-level controls (Panel

A), or for the subsample of firms without ratings in (Panel B, Column (5)). This observation suggests that

the estimated non-bank premium could reflect borrower risk. Credit ratings are themselves imperfect

measures of default risk, since there is variation in risk within rating classes and errors in assigning

ratings to firms. It is unclear if the positive estimated premium for non-bank participation reflects residual

risk not reflected in ratings, or if it reflects an economic premium to attract non-bank institutional lenders

with relatively high required rates of return.

        A method of measuring non-bank syndicate member premiums that is unlikely to be affected by

risk or other potential unobserved firm-level heterogeneity comes from the relative pricing of different

facilities within the same loan.13 Since each facility of a multiple facility loan has the same seniority and

covenants, the default risk of facilities and the creditor rights attached to the facilities in the same loan is

essentially the same. Different facilities in the same loan will generally have different maturities and

implicit options from one another that will affect their pricing. However, once these other differences are

controlled for econometrically, the incremental effect of a non-bank participant on the relative pricing of

facilities within a given loan should reflect the impact of non-bank syndicate participation. This approach

will not be affected by differences in risk or some other form of unobservable firm-level heterogeneity

causing a spurious relation between the existence of non-bank institutions in the facility’s syndicate and

the facility’s spread.

        Within-loan estimates can help to distinguish between alternative explanations for the non-bank

premium. Any firm-level factor that potentially affects its attractiveness to a lender such as its historical

cash flows, future projects and risks, should affect the spreads on all facilities of the loan similarly. In

contrast, a systematic difference in the relative spread between different facilities that depends on

syndicate composition for a particular facility has to be a function of facility-level rather than firm-level


13
  This approach was developed by Ivashina and Sun (2011a) and was recently adopted by Nadauld and Weisbach
(2012).

                                                      15
factors. One such possibility would be if different types of facilities have different liquidity and demand.

For example, banks, typically the lead arrangers, hold the Term Loan A or revolver portion of the loan

and sell the Term Loan B portion to non-bank institutional investors. If the lead arranger is worried about

being able to sell a particular Term Loan B facility to banks, it can increase the spread, making the facility

more attractive to non-bank investors such as hedge funds or finance companies. In this situation, the

facilities with non-bank syndicate members are likely to receive unusually high spreads, measured

relative to the Term Loan A or revolver facility of the same loan.

        To estimate the incremental effect of a non-bank investor on the differences in spreads between

facilities of a given loan, we estimate the following equation:



            Spread Gap      Facility has non-bank syndicate member    X                         (2)



where X includes differences in facility-specific characteristics such as facility size, the number of

participating lenders, maturity, and whether the facility is secured by collateral, as well as firm-level

characteristics and the high-yield spread. The dependent variable in Equation (2) is the difference

between the spreads of different facilities within the same loan (spread gap). The indicator variable

denoting which facility has a non-bank syndicate member measures the incremental effect of a non-bank

institution on the spread gap, and the control variables are intended to capture other differences between

the facilities that could be related to spreads. We estimate Equation (2) on the sample of loans that have

multiple facilities of the type considered in that specification.

        Term Loan B facilities tend to have a longer effective maturity than Term Loan A facilities

because the vast majority of Term Loan A facilities are amortizing while Term Loan B facilities are more

often bullet (see Appendix C). With a longer duration, Term Loan B facilities will have higher spreads

regardless of whether there is a non-bank institution participating in the facility. Consistent with this

argument, Nandy and Shao (2010) document that Term Loan B facilities have higher spreads than Term



                                                      16
Loan A facilities or revolvers. The hypothesis that non-bank investors receive premiums relative to

otherwise similar bank-only facilities implies that there should be an additional premium over the

corresponding Term Loan A facility for the Term Loan B facilities in which non-bank institutions invest,

relative to that of an otherwise similar bank-only Term Loan B facility.

        Column (1) of Panel A of Table V presents estimates of Equation (2) for the subsample of 246

loans that have both Term Loan A and Term Loan B facilities.14 In this subsample, the non-bank investor

usually participates in the Term Loan B portion of the loan: Of the 246 loans, there were 59 in which non-

bank institutions were syndicate members in the Term Loan B facility and only nine in which the non-

bank institutions participated in the Term Loan A facility. Therefore, we estimate whether the existence

of a non-bank syndicate member in the Term B facility affects the difference in spreads between the two

facilities. The coefficient estimates indicate the presence of a non-bank investor in the Term Loan B

facility increases the difference in spreads between Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities by 5.3 basis

points. However, this estimated difference in spreads is not statistically significantly different from zero at

conventional levels.

        There are 1,608 loans in our sample that have complete data and contain both a Term Loan B

facility and a revolver. 15 Of these 1,608 cases, it was more common for the non-bank investor to

participate in the syndicate of the Term Loan B portion of the loan than the revolver portion: non-bank

institutions participated in the syndicates of 131 Term Loan B facilities and only 34 of those of the

revolvers. For this reason, we estimate Equation (2) on this subsample of loans, considering the effect of

the non-bank institution participating in the syndicate of the Term Loan B facility in Column (2). The

dependent variable in these equations is the difference in spreads between the Term Loan B facility and

the revolver. Therefore, the coefficient estimate of 42.3 on the non-bank syndicate member indicator




14
   We exclude cases in which non-bank investors are present on both Term Loan A facilities and Term Loan B
facilities.
15
   Again, we exclude cases in which non-bank investors are present on both Term Loan B facility and revolver.


                                                       17
variable in Column (2) implies that the spread between Term Loan B facilities and revolvers is 42.3 basis-

points higher when a non-bank institution is present in syndicate of the Term Loan B facility.

        A potentially cleaner test of the hypothesis that non-bank institutions receive premiums when

investing in syndicated loan facilities comes from cases in which the non-bank invests in one of multiple

facilities of the same type in a particular loan. Our sample contains 217 such facilities, in which non-

banking institutions invested in 106 facilities. In Panel B of Table V, we estimate equations similar to Eqn.

(1) on this sub-sample of loan facilities. In Column (1) we present estimates of Equation (1) without firm-

level controls and in Column (2), we report estimates including these controls. In each equation, the

coefficient estimate on the non-bank syndicate member indicator variable is positive and statistically

significantly different from zero, implying 40.6 and 27.9 basis point premiums to facilities with a non-

bank institutional investor.

        Finally, there are 841 cases in which a borrower issues more than one of the same facility type in

the same year, but not necessarily in the same loan. We re-estimate the equation for this subsample in

Columns (3) and (4) of Panel B of Table V. In these equations, the estimated non-bank premium is 33.8

and 34.0 basis points, respectively, each of which is statistically significantly different from zero.

        Overall the results from Table V, in which we compare facilities within a given loan, or across

similar facilities from the same borrower within a short period of time, are consistent with the results in

Table IV that are based on comparisons across different facilities. When a non-banking institution

participates in a syndicated loan facility, syndicate members receive a premium on the particular facility

in which non-bank institution invests relative to bank-only facilities. These premiums do not appear to be

a result of unobserved heterogeneity across facilities that is correlated with the facilities’ risk.



4. Types of non-bank institutional syndicate members and spreads

        The within-loan results suggest that the premiums to loan facilities that include non-bank

investors in their syndicate occur because of facility-specific and not firm-specific factors. The most

plausible explanation for these premiums is that facilities in which non-bank institutions participate are

                                                       18
relatively more difficult to market than bank-only facilities. When the arranger can structure a syndicate

made up entirely of banks, he can charge the borrower a relatively low spread. However, if banks are not

willing to provide the necessary capital, then the arranger will have to charge the borrower a higher

spread to attract capital from investors with higher required rates of return.

        This argument has a clear prediction about the premiums we should observer when different types

of non-bank institutional investors are part of the loan facility syndicate. When investors like hedge funds

or private equity funds with high required rates of return invest in a loan facility, it means that the

facility’s arranger had to increase the facility’s spread beyond what would have been necessary if only

banks were the investors. In addition, hedge funds and private fund managers have unusually high

pecuniary incentives, which are likely to motivate them to seek out investments in facilities with

unusually high spreads.16 In contrast, non-bank institutional investors such as insurance companies have

required returns similar to banks, and tend to focus on ensuring that their loan portfolio has the right term

structure and risk profile, rather than seeking out unusual opportunities to achieve abnormal returns.

Therefore, we expect that, controlling for risk, facilities for which hedge and private equity funds are in

the syndicate to have higher spreads than those for which insurance companies invest.



4.1. Abnormal spreads across types of non-bank institutional syndicate members.

        In Columns (1) and (2) of Table VI, we re-estimate Equation (1) with the non-bank syndicate

members broken down by institutional type. To do so, we include separate indicator variables for

insurance companies, finance companies, hedge and private equity funds, mutual funds, and other non-

bank investors who could not be classified or are of a type that participated in less than 1% of the full

sample for which all required data are available (about 123 facilities). Column (1) presents estimates of



16
  General partners of private equity and hedge funds receive direct incentives through carried interest that usually
equals 20% of profits. In addition, they receive indirect incentives because their performance affects their future
incomes. These indirect incentives are likely to be of similar magnitude as the direct incentives. [See Chung,
Sensoy, Stern and Weisbach (2012) for estimates for private equity funds and Lim, Sensoy and Weisbach (2012) for
estimates for hedge funds.]

                                                        19
this equation using all loan facilities, while Column (2) restricts the sample to just those facilities with at

least one non-bank syndicate member.

        The coefficient estimates indicate that the premiums vary substantially between types of non-

bank institutional investor. The largest premiums appear to be for facilities with hedge and private equity

fund syndicate members. In Column (1), the coefficient on hedge and private equity funds indicator

variable is 47.2, which implies that loan facilities in which hedge and private equity funds invest have an

abnormal spread of 47.2 basis points relative to the sample of all facilities. When we restrict the sample to

facilities with non-bank syndicate members, the coefficient declines to 29.4, but is still significantly

different from zero. The difference between the two coefficients comes from the implied benchmark from

the sample used; since Column (2) contains only facilities which have non-bank syndicate members, the

sample average spread is higher than for bank-only facilities (controlling for other characteristics).

        The other significantly positive premiums occur for facilities with “other” non-bank syndicate

members, which potentially includes hedge funds that we could not classify, and finance companies

(significant only in Column (1)). The coefficients on insurance companies and mutual funds are small and

not statistically significantly different from zero. These results imply that the spread premium varies

across non-bank institutional investor types, and is highest for hedge and private equity funds.



4.2. Within-loan estimates by type of non-bank institutional investor.

        The spread premium estimates in Table VI control for the risk of the loan using the borrower’s

financial data. As discussed above, while this approach captures the risk of the facility to some extent, it

does so imperfectly, and it is possible that some of the measured premiums to facilities associated with

non-bank institutional investors could reflect the fact that these investors tend to invest in loans of riskier

firms. To evaluate the extent to which this effect is important, we also estimate spread gap premiums for

different types of non-bank institutional investors using the within-loan approach that compares spreads

of facilities of the same loan.



                                                      20
        We present the within-loan estimates of the spread gap premiums by type of non-bank

institutional investor in Table VII. Column (1) presents estimates of the difference between the spreads on

the Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities of the same loan for the loans in our sample that contain

both types of facilities, and Column (2) presents comparable estimates for the difference between Term

Loan B facilities and Revolvers. The positive and statistically significant coefficients on the variable that

indicates that a hedge or private equity fund participated in the syndicate of the Term Loan B facility

implies that when a hedge or private equity fund invests in the Term Loan B facility, the spread gap

between the Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities appears to be 20 basis points abnormally high.

None of the comparable coefficients indicating that other types of non-bank institutional investors

participated in the syndicate of the Term Loan B facilities are statistically significant. These results

suggest that loan facilities in which hedge and private equity funds invest have higher spreads than

otherwise similar facilities in which other types of institutions invest.



4.3. The size of the non-bank syndicate members’ loan share.

        The results so far are consistent with the view that when arrangers are concerned about being able

to raise capital from banks, they increase spreads to attract non-bank institutional investors. An additional

implication of this logic is that arrangers should increase spreads by a larger amount when they require a

greater quantity of capital from the non-bank institutional investors. Therefore, we expect to observe

higher spreads when non-bank stakes in loan facilities are larger.

        We evaluate this prediction in Table VIII, using the sub-sample of 3,826 loan facilities for which

DealScan contains data on syndicate member ownership and all other required data are available.17 In

Columns (1) and (2), we include all facilities for which ownership data are available and in Columns (3)

and (4) we restrict the sample to non-bank facilities. Columns (1) and (3) contain the non-bank syndicate



17
  We only include facilities for which more than 90% of ownership can be identified. When we further restrict the
sample to facilities having 100% of ownership identified, the sample size decreases to 3,641. The results when we
re-estimate all equations in Table VIII using this smaller sample are similar to those reported in Table VIII.

                                                        21
members’ facility share, while Columns (2) and (4) contain an indicator variable that indicates whether

the non-bank institutional investor purchased the largest stake in the loan facility.

        The coefficient estimates in Table VIII all suggest that when the non-bank institutional investor

takes a larger stake in the loan facility, spreads are higher. The coefficients on the non-bank syndicate

members’ loan shares in Columns (1) and (3) are positive and statistically significant, as are the

coefficients in Columns (2) and (4) on the indicator variable indicating whether the non-bank institutional

investor has the largest loan share in the loan facility. These results are consistent with the view that

arrangers increase the loan facility’s spread to attract non-bank institutional investors, and the more

capital they have to raise from these investors, the greater the arrangers increase the spread.



4.4. “Dual” holders of both debt and equity.

        A number of non-bank investors in syndicated loan facilities also are equity holders in the firm.

Such “dual holding” has become increasingly common in recent years (see Jiang, Li and Shao (2010)).

Presumably, institutional equity holders would utilize their informational or strategic advantage inside the

borrowing firm to improve their other investments including those in the firm’s syndicated loan facilities.

In addition, larger equity ownership implies that the investor will share a larger fraction of the gains

created through a value-increasing loan. We evaluate the extent to which equity ownership influences the

size of the non-bank premium.

          To identify whether the non-bank institutional lender held an equity stake in the borrower prior

to the loan origination, we create a list of shareholders of the borrowing company from Thompson Reuters

Institutional Holding Database (13F) for the one-year period leading up to the current loan, as well as the

list of lenders who are participating in the current loan. For example, for a loan originated in April 2000,

we create a list of equity holders using four 13F filings: filings for the quarters that end in June 1999,

September 1999, December 1999, and March 2000, respectively. An institutional investor’s equity stake

is measured as the average of the holdings that appear in these four filings. We focus on the equity stake

held by lenders prior to loan origination because we wish to evaluate the effect of holding an equity

                                                      22
position on the loan decision. We then match lender information from DealScan to the institutional

investors in the 13F by the lender’s name, and the lender’s ultimate parent’s name.

         In Column (1) of Table IX, we re-estimate Equation (1) including a variable indicating whether

there is a non-bank syndicate member that is a dual holder. The regression includes 314 loan facilities

with participation by a non-bank dual holder. The coefficient on this variable is positive, but not

statistically significantly different from zero. In Column (2) of Table IX, we break up this variable by

type of non-bank institutional investor, and also include the type indicator variables.18 When a hedge fund

or private equity fund is a member of the facility’s syndicate facility’s spread is 29.3 basis points higher.

When a hedge fund or private equity fund also owns at least 0.1% of the borrowing firm’s equity the

facility trades at a premium of 57.7 basis points (= 29.29 + 28.46), which is significant at the 1% level.

This finding suggests that, especially when they are equity holders, hedge and private equity funds can be

viewed as lenders of last resort, and will lend to firms but only at a large premium.



5. The Uses of Funds

         Thus far the results indicate that arrangers increase the loan facility spread when it is necessary to

attract non-bank institutional investors who have a relatively high required rates of return. An additional

implication of this result is that firms are likely to seek out non-bank institutional investors as participants

in the loan facility if the hard-to-fund facility also is particularly important to the firm. The idea is that, if

it is difficult to raise a specific facility, firms will only be willing to pay a higher spread to get a non-bank

institutional investor to participate if the capital being raised has a valuable use that cannot be delayed to a

point in time in the future when it could be unnecessary to pay an additional premium to acquire capital.

This argument predicts that firms borrowing at abnormally high spreads will spend a higher proportion of

the raised cash relatively quickly, rather than saving it as additional cash.



18
  The regression includes 17 facilities with insurance company dual holders, 105 facilities with finance company
dual holders, 47 facilities with hedge fund and private equity fund dual holders, 215 facilities with mutual fund dual
holders, and 23 facilities with other types of non-bank institutional dual holders.

                                                          23
         To test this prediction, we estimate models similar to those in Kim and Weisbach (2008) that

predict the change in cash holdings in a particular time period following the capital raising. The idea is

that an abnormally high spread should lead firms to spend the capital they raise more quickly, so that they

should save less of it in cash. The measure of abnormal spread we use is the residual from the equation

presented in Column (1) of Panel A of Table IV, but excluding the non-bank syndicate member indicator.

We estimate whether it predicts the change in cash holdings subsequently, using the following equation:



            casht  cash0                       loan proceed  
        ln                 1  β0  β1  ln                 1
            total assets0                       total assets0  
                                             loan proceed                                                  (3)
                                   β2  ln                  1  Spread Residual
                                              total assets0   
                                                                                       2007Q4
                                   β3  Spread Residual  β4  lntotal assets0         θ Year - Qtr  ε
                                                                                               i
                                                                                       i 1997Q1




where time is indexed by quarters subsequent to the loan issuance quarter.

         We present estimates of this equation in Panel A of Table X. Each row of this table represents a

regression predicting the change in normalized cash as over a specified time period. The top row predicts

the change in cash during the first quarter following the capital raising, the second, the change in cash

during the four quarters following the capital raise, and the third row the change in cash during the eight

quarters following the capital raising. In the first row, the positive coefficient on β1 means that a

significant portion of capital raised is used to increase cash holdings in the first quarter following a loan

facility. However, the negative coefficient on β2 implies that the fraction of loan facility used to increase

cash holdings is smaller for firms that raised capital at higher spreads, consistent with the view that when

spreads are higher, firms are more likely to spend a higher fraction of the money raised and save less as

cash.

         We also test the prediction that the effect of higher loan facility pricing on the uses of funds

should be larger when a non-bank investor is included in the syndicate. To perform this test, we estimate

                                                             24
Equation (3) separately for non-bank participated facilities and bank-only facilities. The results using this

specification are presented in Panel B and C of Table X. The coefficients on the spread residual (β2) are

all negative for non-bank participated facilities, while they are mostly positive for bank-only facilities.

The differences in β2 are statistically significant at the 10% level for first quarter and for the four quarters

subsequent to the capital raising. These results suggest that firms are willing to pay a higher spread to

attract non-bank institutional investors when raising capital is particularly important to the firm.



6. Conclusion

        Participation by non-bank institutions has become a major part of the syndicated loan market. In

our sample of 20,031 “leveraged” loan facilities originated between 1997 and 2007 from the DealScan

database, 6,279 facilities have at least one a non-bank institution syndicate member. Some of these non-

bank institutions have substantially higher required returns than banks, yet both banks and non-bank

institutions invest in the same loan facilities. One explanation for this phenomenon is that loan arrangers

approach non-bank institutional investors when they cannot fill the syndicate with banks, and

consequently have to offer a higher spread to attract non-bank institutional investors.

        We estimate the abnormal spread that a non-bank institutional investor receives by comparing

spreads on loan facilities with non-bank institutional investors to those on observationally equivalent

facilities that do not have a non-bank institutional investor. Our estimates indicate, holding all else equal,

that loan facilities with a non-bank syndicate member receive a higher spread than otherwise similar

facilities with bank-only syndicates. The positive spread is statistically and economically significant for

revolvers as well as term loan facilities and for loan facilities to borrowers of different credit ratings as

well as unrated borrowers.

        It is possible that the presence of a non-bank institutional investor is correlated with other,

potentially unobservable factors related to the loan facility’s spread, which could drive the non-bank

premiums. For example, it is possible that the risk of the firms in which non-bank institutions tend to

invest tends to be higher than is reflected in their ratings. To address this possibility, we use a “within-

                                                      25
loan” estimation approach that compares differences in spreads across facilities of the same loan. Since

different facilities of the same loan share the same underlying risk and have the same seniority,

unobservable differences in risk cannot explain differences in spreads of facilities of the same loan.

        Because factors such as maturity and implicit options affect the spreads of different types of

facilities, we test whether the existence of a non-bank institutional investor affects the relative difference

in spreads, holding other factors constant. Our results suggest that in a loan with both a Term Loan B

facility and a revolver, if a non-bank institution invests in a Term Loan B facility, the spread between the

two is higher than would be expected without non-bank participation. In the subsample of non-bank loans

that have multiple tranches of the same type, the facilities with non-bank institutional investor

participation have higher spreads than the facilities without non-bank participation. These results are not

consistent with the view that non-bank premiums reflect unobservable risk. Instead, they suggest that non-

bank institutional investors can be viewed as lenders of last resort, and receive higher spreads because

they are willing to provide capital at times when banks are not.

        Our results suggest that there are substantial differences in premiums going to different types of

non-bank institutional investors. When private equity and hedge funds are non-bank investors, they

receive a 47.2 basis-point premium over other loan facilities. In contrast, other types of non-banks

institutional investors such as insurance companies or mutual funds receive essentially no abnormal

premium at all. In addition, abnormal spreads are higher when the hedge or private equity funds have

equity positions in the firm, and when they purchase a larger share of the loan facility.

        Non-bank institutional investors, especially private equity and hedge funds, have become

important lenders to corporations through their role in the syndicated loan market. The evidence in this

paper suggests that the non-bank institutions obtain higher interest rates than other investors. This spread

premium appears to be due to the circumstances under which capital is provided rather than unobserved

borrower risk.

        As debt markets mature, it seems evident that non-traditional players will provide capital to a

larger degree than has been true historically. Our results suggest that non-bank institutions provide capital

                                                     26
when capital raising is important to firms and receive a premium for providing the financing. Why is it

optimal to have different types of investors providing the capital for the same loans? To what extent does

borrower performance depend on the provider of capital? Is there important variation across banks that

leads some to be more prone to co-invest with hedge funds and private equity funds in loans with higher

spreads? Understanding the answers to these and related questions would be a useful direction for future

research.




                                                   27
                                             References

Altman, E. I. (1968) “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction of Corporate
Bankruptcy,” Journal of Finance 23, 589–609.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, (1990) “Collateral, loan quality, and bank risk,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 25, 21-42.

Brophy, David J., Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm (2009) “Hedge Funds as Investors of Last Resort?”
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 541-574.

Chava, S., and M. R. Roberts. (2008) “How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
covenants,” The Journal of Finance 63 (5): 2085-121.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa H. Stern, and Michael S. Weisbach (2012), “Pay for
Performance from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity,” Review of Financial Studies,
forthcoming.

Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Macroeconomic Conditions and
Capital Raising,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 341-376.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun. (2011a) “Institutional Demand Pressure and the Cost of Corporate
Loans,” Journal of Financial Economics 99, 500-522.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun (2011b) “Institutional Stock Trading on Loan Market Information,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 100, 284-303.

Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Peng Shao (2010) “When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the simultaneous
holding of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions,” Review of Financial Studies 23,
3595-3637.

Kim, Woojin and Michael S. Weisbach (2008) “Motivations for Public Equity Offers: An International
Perspective,” Journal of Financial Economics, 87, 281-307.

Lim, Jongha, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Total Incentives of Hedge Fund
Managers,” Research in Progress, Ohio State University.

Massoud, N., D. Nandy, A. Saunders, and K. Song (2010) “Do hedge funds trade on private information?
Evidence from syndicated lending and short selling.” Journal of Financial Economics.

Nadauld, Taylor D. and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Did Securitization Affect the Cost of Corporate
Debt?” Journal of Financial Economics, 105, 332-352.

Nandy, D., and P. Shao (2010) “Institutional investment in syndicated loans.” Working Paper, Brandeis
University.




                                                 28
Table I. Trends in non-bank institutional participation in leveraged loan facilities

This table presents the trends in the distribution of loan facility originations during 1997-2007 by number (Panel A) and dollar value (Panel B). Column (1)
reports the total number (value) of all leveraged loan facilities from the DealScan database. Column (2) reports the total number of loan facilities in which only
commercial or investment banks participated. Columns (3) and reports the total number (value) of loan facilities in which at least one non-bank institution is a
member of the facility’s syndicate. Columns (4) – (10) report the total number (value) of loan facilities by type of institutional syndicate member. The sum of
columns (4) to (10) do not add to the total number (value) in column (1) because than one type of institution can participate in the syndicate.

                                                                                              Type of institutional syndicate member
                                            Non-bank       Commercial      Investment        Insurance         Finance        HF/PE    Mutual   Other
  Year of                       Bank-only   syndicate        Bank             Bank           Company         Company                   Fund
 Origination   All facilities   syndicate    member
                                                        Panel A: Number of loan facilities
    1997           2,706          2,267        439          2,527            708               79              331            146       128       42
    1998           2,264          1,783        481          2,111            598               80              357            154       111       73
    1999           1,915          1,424        491          1,791            606               82              394            192       137       73
    2000           1,780          1,324        456          1,656            524               48              349            174       93        68
    2001           1,777          1,328        449          1,628            603               57              317            192       67        72
    2002           1,800          1,178        622          1,653            623               73              442            280       85        79
    2003           1,778           982         796          1,644            745               120             565            420       106      106
    2004           1,818           941         877          1,643            879               90              638            484       142      119
    2005           1,626           921         705          1,463            920               30              539            304       71        63
    2006           1,365           805         560          1,198            806               21              406            228       43        27
    2007           1,202           799         403          1,087            711               18              265            180       27        29
    Total         20,031         13,752       6,279        18,401           7,723              698            4,603          2,754     1,010     751
                                                Panel B: Value of loan facilities (in $ billions)
    1997           298             242         57            294             192               16              45              20       27        8
    1998           258             182         76            254             158               21              58              28       24        14
    1999           255             182         73              252            167              20              57              31       32        15
    2000           237             159         78              232            139              13              61              32       27        17
    2001           256             180         76              246            177              14              65              30       15        13
    2002           231             132         99              222            162              17              79              45       20        16
    2003           257             115         141             247            181              36              115             83       30        25
    2004           327             155         172             307            251              22              138             95       38        22
    2005           349             196         153             326            278              10              125             60       22        15
    2006           342             210         132             318            272               6              107             40       18        6
    2007           345             235         110             328            285               7              85              39       12        6
    Total         3,160           1,990       1,170           3,026          2,262             182             935            501       266      156

                                                                                   29
Table II. Selected facility and lender characteristics

This table presents sample averages of selected facility (Panel A) and lender characteristics (Panel B, C, and D).
Averages are reported for the full sample of facilities and for the sub-samples of Revolers, Term Loan A facilities,
and Term Loan B facilities. Panel B, C and D include only loan facilities for which more than 90% of loan shares
can be identified (5,624 facilities). The sample of leveraged loan facilities is from the DealScan database, originated
between 1997 and 2007.All continuous variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% level. Definitions of the variables
are provided in Appendix A.

                                                                                            Facility Type
                                                      All Facilities      Revolver         Term Loan A      Term Loan B
 Panel A: Facility Characteristics
 N                                                       20,031              12,421              956           6,654
 Non-bank participated                                    0.313               0.249             0.482          0.409
 Facility amount ($M)                                     158.0               153.0             174.0          164.0
 Number of participating lenders                          6.110               5.836             9.476          6.136
 % of participating lenders with past relationship        0.304               0.302             0.338          0.303
 Maturity                                                 46.87               39.91             58.19          58.22
 Secured Indicator                                        0.701               0.666             0.719          0.763
 Second-lien Indicator                                    0.014               0.000             0.005          0.041
 Covenants Indicator                                      0.756               0.762             0.715          0.750
 Syndicated Indicator                                     0.876               0.862             0.978          0.886
 All-in-drawn spread (bps)                                256.6               230.1             271.4          305.8
 Panel B: Participation by syndicate member type - conditional on having loan share information
 All bank                                                 5,333               3,938              134           1,261
 Commercial bank                                          5,274               3,910              133           1,231
 Investment bank                                          1,535               1,127               83            325
 All non-bank                                             1,282                784                61            437
 Insurance company                                         119                  27                 6             86
 Finance company                                           981                 619                53            309
 HF/PE                                                     463                 246                19            198
 Mutual fund                                               184                  47                 6            131
 Other lenders                                             125                  44                 3             78
 Panel C Average loan share - conditional on participation (%)
 All bank                                                  94.7                96.0              91.8          90.9
      Commercial bank                                      89.8                91.2              80.0          86.3
      Investment bank                                      20.8                19.2              20.0          26.4
 All non-bank                                              44.2                42.2              24.9          50.6
      Insurance company                                    13.6                13.2              6.9           14.2
      Finance company                                      35.2                35.7              19.3          36.9
      HF/PE                                                31.8                35.6              19.0          28.3
      Mutual fund                                          10.8                6.8               17.2          15.2
      Other lenders                                        31.9                18.7              20.9          24.7
 Panel D % of syndicate member type as largest lender - conditional on participation
 All bank                                                  96.5                97.2              97.0          94.4
      Commercial bank                                      94.2                95.5              89.5          90.3
      Investment bank                                      28.9                26.4              32.5          36.6
 All non-bank                                              46.4                48.5              19.7          46.5
      Insurance company                                    13.4                18.5              16.7          11.6
      Finance company                                      40.9                44.3              15.1          38.5
      HF/PE                                                29.6                37.0              15.8          21.7
      Mutual fund                                          15.2                17.0              0.0           15.3
      Other lenders                                        23.2                27.3              33.3          20.5


                                                                30
Table III. Differences in attributes of non-bank facilities and bank-only facilities

This table shows the differences in various attributes between non-bank loan facilities and bank-only loan facilities
in our sample. A non-bank facility is a facility for which there is at least one non-bank institution in the syndicate.
Definitions of the variables are provided in Appendix A. The total number of loan facilities in our sample with a full
set of data is 20,031 of which 13,752 are bank-only facilities and 6,279 are non-bank facilities. Panel A, B, C and D
present the differences in the type of facility purchased, issuer credit rating, facility characteristics and borrowing
firm characteristics, respectively.

                                                       Non-bank            Bank-only
                                                                                                    Difference
                                                        facilities          facilities
                                                                                                     (1) - (2)
                                                           (1)                 (2)
                                                      N        Mean       N         Mean    Diff.   (t-value)
 Panel A. Facility type
 % of Revolver                                       6,279    49.3     13,752      67.8     -18.5   (-25.36)***
 % of Term A                                         6,279     7.3     13,752      3.6        3.7   (11.56)***
 % of Term B                                         6,279    43.3     13,752      28.6     14.7    (20.73)***
 Panel B. S&P Issuer credit rating
 % of having a credit rating                         6,279    52.6     13,752      34.8     17.7    (24.06)***
 Conditional on having a credit rating:
     % of BBB and above                              3,301     5.1      4,792      19.4     -14.3   (-18.79)***
     % of BB                                         3,301    38.9      4,792      44.6      -5.7   (-5.07)***
     % of B and below                                3,301    56.0      4,792      36.0     19.9    (18.08)***
 Panel C. Facility characteristics
 Facility amount ($M)                                6,279    186.0    13,752     145.0     41.0    (10.81)***
 Number of participating lenders                     6,279    8.882    13,752     4.844    4.038    (37.84)***
 % of participating lenders with past relationship   6,279    27.19    13,752     31.88    -0.047   (-8.31)***
 Maturity (months)                                   6,279    54.40    13,752     43.43    10.97    (30.91)***
 Secured indicator                                   6,279    0.791    13,752     0.659    0.131    (18.99)***
 Second-lien indicator                               6,279    0.025    13,752     0.009    0.016    (9.11)***
 Covenants indicator                                 6,279    0.753    13,752     0.757    -0.004   (-0.63)
 Syndicated facility indicator                       6,279    0.944    13,752     0.844    0.100    (20.0)***
 Panel D. Borrowing firm characteristics
 Total assets ($M)                                   5,519   1,975.9   12,910    1,602.2   373.8    (5.48)***
 Fixed assets/total assets                           5,437    0.319    12,678     0.320    0.000    (-0.11)
 Z-score                                             4,032    2.182    10,144     3.546    -1.363   (-19.95)***
 Leverage                                            4,957    0.781    11,979     0.610    0.171    (26.73)***
 Industry-adjusted ROA                               5,428   -0.110    12,739    -0.074    -0.036   (-10.34)***
 Number of analysts following                        6,279    3.289    13,752     3.870    -0.581   (-8.03)***
 Institutional holdings                              6,279    0.290    13,752     0.332    -0.042   (-8.42)***




                                                             31
Table IV. Do loan facilities with non-bank syndicate members have higher or lower spreads?

This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A.
The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at the loan facility level. Panel A reports the
results for regressions estimated by type of facility. Panel B reports the results for regression estimated by credit rating groupings for the sub-sample of firms
with S&P issuer credit ratings. The number of loan facilities for which all required data are not missing is 12,346. All specifications include facility-purpose
fixed effects and year fixed effects. The specifications in Column (1) of Panel A and all columns in Panel B additionally include facility-type fixed effects,
because they consider the full sample of all facility types. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: By Facility type
                                                                                                                 All Term Loan
                                                         All Facility Types             Revolvers                   facilities           Term Loan B facilities
 Dependent Var.= All-in-drawn spread                            (1)                        (2)                         (3)                       (4)
                                                               coef.    (p-val)           coef.    (p-val)            coef.   (p-val)            coef.    (p-val)
 Non-bank syndicate member                               56.414***      (0.000)     47.460***      (0.000)     70.287***      (0.000)      76.155***      (0.000)
 Log(Facility amount)                                   -13.840***      (0.000)    -22.128***      (0.000)         -3.205     (0.147)         -4.317*     (0.067)
 Log(Number of participating lenders)                   -13.755***      (0.000)     -5.460***      (0.001)    -25.956***      (0.000)     -26.447***      (0.000)
 % of participating lenders with past relationship           -0.452     (0.885)          3.817     (0.195)         -7.963     (0.160)          -6.920     (0.246)
 Log(Maturity)                                          -16.118***      (0.000)     -9.976***      (0.000)    -27.457***      (0.000)     -25.811***      (0.000)
 Secured Indicator                                       43.085***      (0.000)     46.731***      (0.000)     35.420***      (0.000)      35.137***      (0.000)
 Second-lien Indicator                                  303.904***      (0.000)    252.803***      (0.001)    300.028***      (0.000)     295.064***      (0.000)
 Covenants Indicator                                    -13.517***      (0.000)    -15.885***      (0.000)        -11.107     (0.119)          -8.707     (0.228)
 Syndicated facility Indicator                            -9.354**      (0.030)         -6.170     (0.124)         -9.568     (0.290)         -11.823     (0.201)
 Log(Total assets)                                           -0.656     (0.655)          0.133     (0.927)         -1.684     (0.478)          -1.174     (0.642)
 Fixed assets/total assets                                    1.628     (0.759)          0.405     (0.936)         -0.516     (0.957)          -3.377     (0.738)
 Z-score                                                 -2.361***      (0.000)     -2.328***      (0.000)     -2.257***      (0.004)      -2.349***      (0.005)
 Leverage                                                31.058***      (0.000)     34.549***      (0.000)     21.877***      (0.009)      24.194***      (0.006)
 Industry-adjusted ROA                                  -81.533***      (0.000)    -77.107***      (0.000)    -88.939***      (0.000)     -87.586***      (0.000)
 Log(Number of analyst following)                        -5.872***      (0.005)      -4.087**      (0.036)      -9.207**      (0.011)       -7.835**      (0.035)
 Institutional holdings                                 -16.004***      (0.001)    -20.306***      (0.000)        -10.433     (0.207)          -8.201     (0.346)
 High-yield spread                                        0.089***      (0.000)      0.063***      (0.002)      0.140***      (0.001)       0.142***      (0.001)
 Term A facility                                                                                                -8.866**      (0.028)
 Number of observations                                        12,346                      8,065                      4,281                       3,752
 Adjusted R2                                                   0.464                       0.451                      0.426                       0.421

                                                                                   32
Panel B: By issuer credit rating
                                                         All ratings          BBB-rated and Above           BB-rated             B-rated and Below         No credit rating
 Dependent Var.= All-in-drawn spread                         (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                      (5)
                                                          coef.     (p-val)        coef.     (p-val)        coef.     (p-val)        coef.     (p-val)        coef.     (p-val)
 Non-bank syndicate member                            23.554***     (0.000)     28.147**     (0.010)    21.752***     (0.000)    24.109***     (0.000)    78.639***     (0.000)
 Log(Facility amount)                                -15.929***     (0.000)       -6.207     (0.137)   -12.236***     (0.000)   -20.405***     (0.000)   -13.524***     (0.000)
 Log(Number of participating lenders)                -12.451***     (0.000)   -13.534***     (0.003)   -15.397***     (0.000)    -9.116***     (0.007)   -10.800***     (0.000)
 % of participating lenders with past relationship     -9.734**     (0.015)       -1.247     (0.899)     -8.782**     (0.050)    -14.546**     (0.041)        0.021     (0.995)
 Log(Maturity)                                        -9.979***     (0.001)        2.268     (0.637)        4.085     (0.305)   -32.726***     (0.000)   -16.284***     (0.000)
 Secured Indicator                                    36.413***     (0.000)    49.944***     (0.000)    39.559***     (0.000)     21.736**     (0.012)    36.267***     (0.000)
 Second-lien Indicator                               265.633***     (0.000)   305.210***     (0.000)   227.651***     (0.000)   264.135***     (0.000)   314.732***     (0.000)
 Covenants Indicator                                     -4.086     (0.380)     -15.352*     (0.050)       -7.288     (0.189)        9.845     (0.305)   -17.065***     (0.000)
 Syndicated facility Indicator                        38.407***     (0.007)       45.672     (0.126)       39.432     (0.198)     41.564**     (0.020)     -9.927**     (0.020)
 Log(Total assets)                                     7.016***     (0.000)    11.181***     (0.008)      5.199**     (0.027)     7.329***     (0.007)    -4.909***     (0.005)
 Fixed assets/total assets                                9.326     (0.129)       21.570     (0.122)       -0.966     (0.899)       16.117     (0.130)        2.417     (0.700)
 Leverage                                             18.067***     (0.001)       -7.818     (0.619)    20.478***     (0.006)     18.923**     (0.013)    23.077***     (0.000)
                                                                                                                -
 Industry-adjusted ROA                               -66.103***     (0.000)      -45.137     (0.423)                  (0.000)   -47.351***     (0.006)   -77.780***     (0.000)
                                                                                                       114.122***
 Log(Number of analyst following)                      -4.835**     (0.029)       -6.550     (0.177)     -6.227**     (0.023)       -3.085     (0.396)       -3.646     (0.127)
 Institutional holdings                                 -8.321*     (0.087)        5.589     (0.590)       -9.945     (0.116)      -10.766     (0.205)   -17.551***     (0.006)
 High-yield spread                                     0.163***     (0.000)        0.109     (0.169)     0.181***     (0.000)     0.163***     (0.001)       0.050*     (0.068)
 BB-rated                                             32.023***     (0.000)
 B-rated and below                                    83.975***     (0.000)
 Number of observations                                     6,879                    926                      2,984                    2,969                    8,646
              2
 Adjusted R                                                 0.540                    0.382                    0.485                    0.417                    0.434




                                                                                    33
Table V. Is the non-bank premium driven by unobservable heterogeneity across firms?

Panel A presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (2) and corresponding p-values on the sample
of loans that have multiple facilities. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A. The dependent
variable is the spread gap between the all-in-drawn spreads of different facilities within the same loan in basis points.
The indicator variable denoting the non-bank facility measures the incremental effect on spread gap of the non-bank
institution participating in the syndicate of the loan facility, and the control variables are intended to capture other
differences between the facilities. Column (1) of Panel A presents estimates for the sub-sample of 246 facility pairs
that have both Term Loan A and Term Loan B facilities, and Columns (2) and (3) present estimates for the sub-
sample of 1,608 facility pairs that have both a Term Loan B facility and a Revolver. Panel B presents the OLS
regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values on the sample of non-bank loan
facilities and the matched bank-only loan facilities of the same facility type. Column (1) employs 106 loans (217
facilities) that have both a non-bank facility and a bank-only facility of the same facility type within the same loan.
Column (3) considers 420 non-bank loan facilities and 421 matched bank-only loan facilities of the same facility
type issued by the same borrower in the same year, but not necessarily in the same loan. Number of observations
drops in Column (2) and (4), as we include firm-level control variables. All specifications include facility-purpose
fixed effects and year fixed effects. All regressions in Panel B additionally include facility type fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

Panel A. Within-deal spread gap between facilities
                                                                            (Term B facility – Term A        (Term B facility - Revolver)
                                                                         facility) spread in the same loan     spread in the same loan

 Dependent Var.: Within-loan spread gap between facilities                               (1)                                (2)
                                                                                 coef.     (p-val)                  coef.         (p-val)
 Non-bank syndicate member in Term B facility                                    5.298     (0.546)            42.291***           (0.000)
 Differences in Log(Facility amount)                                            -0.788     (0.889)             -7.177***          (0.000)
 Differences in Log(Number of participating lenders)                             3.473     (0.525)             -10.178**          (0.018)
 Differences in % of participating lenders with past relationship                2.824     (0.898)                13.057          (0.320)
 Differences in Log(Maturity)                                                 -24.965      (0.191)                -1.287          (0.699)
 Differences in Security                                                      -47.639      (0.233)               -12.709          (0.246)
 Differences in Second-lien                                               246.379***       (0.000)           255.352***           (0.000)
 High-yield spread                                                              -0.102     (0.365)                 0.039          (0.240)

 Firm-level controls                                                                     Yes                             Yes

 Number of observations                                                                  246                            1,608
 # Non-bank syndicate member in Term B facility                                          59                              131
              2
 Adjusted R                                                                           0.234                             0.196




                                                                    34
Panel B. Differences in spreads between non-bank facilities and matching bank-only facilities
                                                       Same facility type                     Same facility type to the same borrower in the
Matching
                                                      within the same oan                                  same calendar year
Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread            (1)                           (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                            coef.     (p-val)           coef.       (p-val)        coef.     (p-val)         coef.     (p-val)
Non-bank syndicate member               40.618***     (0.001)      27.851**         (0.048)    33.800***     (0.000)    34.021***      (0.005)
Log(Facility amount)                   -13.308***     (0.009)         -6.867        (0.254)   -22.525***     (0.000)     -14.430*      (0.056)
Log(Number of participating lenders)   -28.216***     (0.000)    -21.715***         (0.005)   -25.112***     (0.000)   -25.901***      (0.004)
% of participating lenders with past
                                        -37.405**     (0.028)       -30.042         (0.156)    -28.295**     (0.031)      -14.573      (0.403)
relationship
Log(Maturity)                              17.845     (0.184)         6.948         (0.728)       -9.238     (0.279)      -13.282      (0.206)
Secured Indicator                       40.528***     (0.007)      39.763**         (0.021)     30.491**     (0.022)      30.709*      (0.063)
Second-lien Indicator                  329.106***     (0.000)    256.792***         (0.000)   278.000***     (0.000)   299.089***      (0.000)
Covenants Indicator                        -9.758     (0.781)      -59.703*         (0.090)        2.183     (0.889)       16.528      (0.408)
Syndicated facility Indicator             -19.072     (0.576)      -63.791*         (0.079)       36.358     (0.340)      -25.584      (0.602)
High-yield spread                           0.110     (0.379)         0.105         (0.432)        0.088     (0.358)        0.078      (0.571)
Firm-level controls                            No                           Yes                       No                       Yes
Number of observations                        217                           130                       841                      496
# Non-bank facilities                         106                            64                       420                      243
Adjusted R2                                   0.715                         0.763                    0.418                     0.441




                                                                   35
Table VI. Does the type of non-bank syndicate member affect the pricing of the loan facility?

This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values, with the
non-bank institutions broken down by the type of institution. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A.
The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at
the loan facility level. Column (1) uses the full sample of loan facilities and column (2) uses the sub-sample of non-
bank loan facilities. All specifications include facility-type fixed effects, facility-purpose fixed effects, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                               All loan facilities     Non-bank loan facilities
 Dependent Var.= All-in-drawn spread                                  (1)                       (2)
                                                                    coef.    (p-val)           coef.    (p-val)
 Insurance company syndicate member                               -3.544     (0.655)          0.463     (0.947)
 Finance company syndicate member                           30.906***        (0.000)          3.587     (0.539)
 HF/PE syndicate member                                     47.169***        (0.000)     29.399***      (0.000)
 MF syndicate member                                               0.709     (0.906)          6.587     (0.259)
 Other non-bank institutional syndicate member              32.746***        (0.000)     27.337***      (0.000)
 Log(Facility amount)                                      -13.642***        (0.000)    -26.093***      (0.000)
 Log(Number of participating lenders)                      -15.340***        (0.000)    -21.939***      (0.000)
 % of participating lenders with past relationship                 0.957     (0.760)     -16.211**      (0.024)
 Log(Maturity)                                             -14.975***        (0.000)    -19.765***      (0.000)
 Secured Indicator                                          44.047***        (0.000)      18.138**      (0.020)
 Second-lien Indicator                                     301.199***        (0.000)    304.136***      (0.000)
 Covenants Indicator                                       -14.155***        (0.000)          0.393     (0.962)
 Syndicated facility Indicator                                 -8.852**      (0.042)        -16.253     (0.249)
 Log(Total assets)                                                -0.522     (0.725)         -1.247     (0.642)
 Fixed assets/total assets                                        -0.072     (0.989)       18.508*      (0.094)
 Z-score                                                    -2.441***        (0.000)     -3.017***      (0.006)
 Leverage                                                   31.533***        (0.000)         10.928     (0.206)
 Industry-adjusted ROA                                     -82.095***        (0.000)    -66.242***      (0.000)
 Log(Number of analyst following)                           -6.230***        (0.003)        -7.174*     (0.067)
 Institutional holdings                                    -15.433***        (0.002)        -12.937     (0.134)
 High-yield spread                                             0.092***      (0.000)       0.089**      (0.042)
 Number of observations                                             12,346                      3,460
 Adjusted R2                                                         0.461                      0.500




                                                          36
Table VII. Does the type of non-bank syndicate member affect the pricing of the loan facility? – Within-loan
analysis

This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (2) and corresponding p-values on the
sample of loans that have multiple facilities. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A. The dependent
variable is the spread gap between the all-in-drawn spreads of different facilities within the same loan in basis points.
The indicator variable indicating the type of non-bank syndicate member measures the incremental effect on spread
gap of that type of non-bank institution participating in the syndicate of the loan facility, and the control variables
are intended to capture other differences between the facilities. Column (1) presents estimates for the sub-sample of
252 facility pairs that have both Term Loan A and Term Loan B facilities, and Column (2) estimates for the sub-
sample of 1,615 facility pairs that have both a Term Loan B facility and a Revolver. All specifications include firm-
level control variables, facility-purpose fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                      Term loan B facility
                                                                                                Term loan B facility
                                                                     spread – Term loan A
                                                                                              spread - Revolver spread
                                                                         facility spread
 Dependent Var.: Within-loan spread gap between facilities                      (1)                     (2)
                                                                          coef.     (p-val)         coef.     (p-val)
 Insurance company syndicate member in Term loan B facility              19.298     (0.142)        8.263      (0.465)
 Finance company syndicate member in Term loan B facility              -18.905*     (0.096)        -8.551     (0.530)
 HF/PE syndicate member in Term loan B facility                        20.049**     (0.049)    66.224***      (0.005)
 Mutual fund syndicate member in Term loan B in facility                 -6.489     (0.436)      -24.694      (0.200)
 Other non-bank syndicate member in Term loan B facility                  1.818     (0.864)        -0.859     (0.953)
 Differences in Log(Facility amount)                                      0.543     (0.925)    -7.187***      (0.000)
 Differences in Log(Number of participating lenders)                      4.695     (0.410)    -10.768**      (0.018)
 Differences in % of participating lenders with past relationship        13.948     (0.523)        6.886      (0.600)
 Differences in Log(Maturity)                                           -25.348     (0.181)        -0.891     (0.786)
 Differences in Security                                                -48.607     (0.227)      -14.581      (0.171)
 Differences in Second-lien                                          252.945***     (0.000)   271.356***      (0.000)
 High-yield spread                                                       -0.114     (0.303)        0.032      (0.334)
 Constant                                                            123.074***     (0.009)     24.271**      (0.036)
 Firm-level controls                                                         Yes                        Yes
 Adjusted R2                                                                0.199                      0.222
 Number of observations                                                      252                       1,615
 # Insurance company syndicate members in Term loan B facility                32                         54
 # Finance company syndicate members in Term loan B facility                  45                         87
 # HF/PE syndicate members in Term loan B facility                            53                        110
 # Mutual fund syndicate members in Term loan B facility                      55                         87
 # Other non-bank syndicate members in Term loan B facility                   30                         59




                                                                37
Table VIII. Does the size of non-bank institutional syndicate members’ loan facility share affect the pricing of the loan facility?

This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values. Equation (1) is augmented to include a measure of the non-
bank syndicate members’ share in the loan facility (Columns (1) and (3)) and whether a non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender (Columns (2) and (4)).
Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A. The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is
conducted at the loan facility level. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample of loan facilities and Columns (3) and (4) use the sub-sample of non-bank loan facilities.
All specifications include facility-type fixed effects, facility-purpose fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, *
correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                        All loan facilities                                    Non-bank facilities
 Dependent Var.= All-in-drawn spread                              (1)                          (2)                      (3)                           (4)
                                                                coef.    (p-val)              coef.   (p-val)          coef.    (p-val)              coef.   (p-val)
 Non-bank syndicate members’ loan facility share           96.360***    (0.000)                                  95.442***     (0.000)
 Non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender                                      44.121***       (0.000)                                  21.531*       (0.051)
 Non-bank syndicate member                                 21.610***    (0.002)       43.891***       (0.000)
 Log(Facility amount)                                     -16.257***    (0.000)      -16.048***       (0.000)    -11.581**     (0.032)       -12.961**       (0.019)
 Log(Number of participating lenders)                          -4.573   (0.208)         -7.256**      (0.044)         1.179    (0.904)         -11.279       (0.204)
 % of participating lenders with past relationship             -4.232   (0.387)           -5.280      (0.281)       -12.195    (0.392)         -19.783       (0.169)
 Log(Maturity)                                            -18.358***    (0.000)      -18.268***       (0.000)   -30.948***     (0.005)     -28.810***        (0.008)
 Secured Indicator                                         45.898***    (0.000)       44.991***       (0.000)    36.537***     (0.006)      39.759***        (0.003)
 Second-lien Indicator                                   284.408***     (0.000)     299.114***        (0.000)   289.119***     (0.000)     309.414***        (0.000)
 Covenants Indicator                                           -8.334   (0.279)           -9.435      (0.224)       -27.690    (0.157)         -28.110       (0.149)
 Syndicated facility Indicator                            -21.655***    (0.001)      -21.290***       (0.001)       -22.460    (0.344)        -41.793*       (0.063)
 Log(Total assets)                                             -2.852   (0.250)           -3.081      (0.215)       -9.943*    (0.100)          -9.474       (0.114)
 Fixed assets/total assets                                     -6.842   (0.388)           -6.051      (0.449)         2.849    (0.890)           2.099       (0.921)
 Z-score                                                   -2.438***    (0.000)       -2.573***       (0.000)    -5.299***     (0.008)       -5.712***       (0.004)
 Leverage                                                  32.343***    (0.000)       33.998***       (0.000)        13.609    (0.453)          18.148       (0.319)
 Industry-adjusted. ROA                                   -89.406***    (0.000)      -92.710***       (0.000)    -51.907**     (0.026)       -53.511**       (0.023)
 Log(Number of analyst following)                             -5.924*   (0.061)          -5.831*      (0.067)       -10.790    (0.143)         -10.513       (0.159)
 Institutional holdings                                        -9.483 (0.226)             -10.184 (0.199)            -3.576 (0.828)            -11.146 (0.496)
 High-yield spread                                          0.101*** (0.005)            0.096*** (0.008)             0.161* (0.084)              0.145 (0.123)
 Number of observations                                          3,826                       3,826                      855                        855
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.544                       0.537                     0.564                      0.553

                                                                                   38
Table IX. Do the equity holdings by non-bank syndicate members affect the pricing of the loan facility?

This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values with
indicator variables denoting whether the type of non-bank institution also owned at least 0.1% of the firm’s
outstanding equity during the one-year prior to the origination of the loan (non-bank syndicate member is a dual-
holder). Column (1) includes an indicator variable measuring whether any type of non-bank syndicate member is a
dual-holder. Column (2) includes indicator variables denoting the type of non-bank institution and whether that type
of non-bank institution is a dual-holder. Column (3) includes indicator variables denoting the non-bank syndicate
member is the largest lender and a dual-holder. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix A. The
dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at the
loan facility level. All specifications include facility-type fixed effects, facility-purpose fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                      Facilities with non-bank syndicate members
Dependent Var.= All-in-drawn spread                             (1)                      (2)                        (3)
                                                            coef.     (p-val)          coef.    (p-val)        coef.       (p-val)
Non-bank syndicate member is a dual-holder                  9.159     (0.178)                                32.710*       (0.078)
Insurance company syndicate member                                                   -0.378     (0.957)
Insurance company syndicate member is a dual-holder                                  -9.315     (0.676)
Finance company syndicate member                                                      4.162     (0.483)
Finance company syndicate member is a dual-holder                                    -7.836     (0.403)
HF/PE syndicate member                                                           29.288***      (0.000)
HF/PE syndicate member is a dual-holder                                              28.460     (0.120)
MF syndicate member                                                                   7.671     (0.253)
MF syndicate member is a dual-holder                                                 -1.939     (0.833)
Other non-bank syndicate member                                                  29.244***      (0.000)
Other non-bank syndicate member is a dual-holder                                   -49.216*     (0.059)
Non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender                                                              22.911*       (0.058)
Non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender and
                                                                                                             -28.837       (0.287)
a dual-holder
Log(Facility amount)                                  -26.771***      (0.000)   -26.072***      (0.000)    -12.351**       (0.025)
Log(Number of participating lenders)                  -15.266***      (0.000)   -21.709***      (0.000)      -11.709       (0.191)
% of participating lenders with past relationship     -25.320***      (0.000)     -15.612**     (0.029)      -19.516       (0.176)
Log(Maturity)                                         -20.602***      (0.000)   -19.799***      (0.000)   -29.327***       (0.007)
Secured Indicator                                       20.314**      (0.010)     18.152**      (0.020)    38.862***       (0.004)
Second-lien Indicator                                 308.408***      (0.000)   302.906***      (0.000)   307.149***       (0.000)
Covenants Indicator                                        -1.214     (0.883)         0.601     (0.941)      -29.019       (0.142)
Syndicated facility Indicator                             -16.347     (0.246)       -16.225     (0.251)     -41.372*       (0.066)
Log(Total assets)                                          -1.282     (0.637)        -1.430     (0.594)     -10.413*       (0.087)
Fixed assets/total assets                                21.216*      (0.061)      18.271*      (0.098)        3.716       (0.860)
Z-score                                                -3.290***      (0.003)     -3.009***     (0.007)    -5.522***       (0.006)
Leverage                                                   11.699     (0.180)        10.761     (0.216)       17.794       (0.329)
Industry-adjusted ROA                                 -69.581***      (0.000)   -66.632***      (0.000)    -54.158**       (0.021)
Log(Number of analyst following)                         -8.142**     (0.044)       -6.848*     (0.082)      -11.813       (0.115)
Institutional holdings                                   -15.271*     (0.088)       -12.887     (0.139)      -10.894       (0.507)
High-yield spread                                        0.090**      (0.040)      0.090**      (0.040)        0.140       (0.142)
Number of observations                                        3,460                     3,460                       855
Adjusted R2                                                   0.487                     0.501                      0.553


                                                           39
Table X. Uses of loan facility proceeds
This table presents the results from the following regression specification:

                                            casht  cash0                     loan proceed                      loan proceed           
                                        ln                 1  β0  β1 ln                      1  β2 ln                         1  Spread residual
                                            total asets0                    total assets0                   total assets0          
                                                                                                                                20074Q

                                                                            β3 Spread residual  β4 lntotal assets0          θ YearQtr  ε
                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                               i  19971Q




t=1, 4, 8 corresponds to the fiscal quarter following the issuing quarter. All regressions include year-quarter fixed effects. Loan facility proceeds are aggregated
within a calendar-quarter. Dollar changes are the implied change in the dependent variable when loan facility proceeds are increased by $1 (calculations are based
on a median-sized firm/facility in the sample. Year-quarter fixed-effects are for 2003Q3). ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

                                1                          2                          3                            4                                 $Change

                                                                                                                                                Median        Median                   Wald-test
    t        N         Coeff.        (p-val)         Coeff.      (p-val)         Coeff.      (p-val)           Coeff.      (p-val)               Spread       Spread        adj-R2   (H0: 2,Non-bank
                                                                                                                                                Residual    Residual + σ              = 2, Bank-only)

 Panel A: All facilities
  1Q       7,816      0.1025         (0.208)       -0.0004       (0.321)         0.0001      (0.290)          0.0044       (0.069)               0.088         0.062        0.032
  4Q       7,338      0.1154         (0.146)      -0.0007*       (0.091)       0.0002*       (0.070)          0.0027       (0.287)               0.101         0.050        0.034
  8Q       6,698      0.0421         (0.337)      -0.0009*       (0.077)       0.0002*       (0.052)     -0.0050***        (0.008)               0.045         -0.021       0.018
 Panel B: Non-bank facilities
  1Q       2,019      0.1654         (0.208)      -0.0018        (0.187)       0.0005        (0.199)        0.0020         (0.363)               0.122         -0.025       0.110    3.63*    (0.057)
  4Q       1,872      0.1564         (0.257)      -0.0020        (0.148)       0.0005        (0.166)        -0.0020        (0.552)               0.106         -0.056       0.106    3.41*    (0.065)
  8Q       1,686      0.1704         (0.248)      -0.0019        (0.200)       0.0005        (0.194)        -0.0042        (0.187)               0.116         -0.033       0.112    0.45     (0.502)
 Panel C: Bank-only facilities
  1Q       5,797      0.1184         (0.319)        0.0004       (0.238)        -0.0001      (0.419)         0.0058*       (0.096)               0.091         0.118        0.034
  4Q       5,466      0.1417         (0.208)        0.0001       (0.903)         0.0000      (0.843)          0.0051       (0.149)               0.117         0.121        0.033
  8Q       5,012      0.0013         (0.968)       -0.0008       (0.209)         0.0002      (0.103)        0.0058**       (0.043)               0.017         -0.038       0.010




                                                                                                       40
                                         Appendix A: Variable definitions

Variables                                              Definition
Non-bank syndicate member                              An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan facility least one
                                                       non-bank (neither commercial bank nor investment bank) institutional
                                                       syndicate member, and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Non-bank syndicate members’ loan share                 Sum of loan shares held by non-bank (neither commercial bank nor
                                                       investment bank) institutional investors.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender        An indicator variable that takes a value of one if non-bank (neither
                                                       commercial bank nor investment bank) institutional investor(s) funded the
                                                       largest share of the facility, zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Non-bank syndicate member is a dual-holder             An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan facility has the
                                                       participation of at least one non-bank (neither commercial bank nor
                                                       investment bank) syndicate member who held at least 0.1% of equity stake
                                                       in the same borrowing company during the1-year period leading up to the
                                                       current loan, and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding

Non-bank syndicate member is the largest lender        An indicator variable that takes a value of one if non-bank (neither
and a dual-holder                                      commercial bank nor investment bank) institutional syndicate member(s)
                                                       in the facility is the largest lender and also held at least 0.1% of equity
                                                       stake in the same borrowing company during the1-year period leading up
                                                       to the current loan, and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holdings

All-in-drawn spread                                    Basis point spread over LIBOR plus the annual fee and the up-front fee
                                                       spread, if there is any-.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Log(Facility Amount)                                   Natural log of the facility size.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Log(Number of participating lenders )                  Natural log of the number of participating lenders in the facility syndicate.
                                                       Source: DealScan
% of participating lenders with past relationship      The portion of lenders in the loan facility syndicate that have made loans to
                                                       the borrower within the 36-month period prior to the current loan.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Log(Maturity)                                          Natural log of the maturity of the facility in months.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Secured Indicator                                      An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the facility is secured, and
                                                       zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Second-lien Indicator                                  An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the facility is second-lien,
                                                       and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Covenant Indicator                                     An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan has covenants,
                                                       and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
Syndicated Indicator                                   An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan is distributed to a
                                                       syndicate of lenders, and zero otherwise.
                                                       Source: DealScan
                                                    (Continues to the next page)




                                                                41
                                   (Appendix A continued from the previous page)
Revolver Indicator                             An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the facility type is
                                               revolving line of credit (Revolver/Line, Revolver, 364-Day Facility,
                                               Demand Loan, Limited Line in DealScan), and zero otherwise.
                                               Source: DealScan
Term Loan A facility Indicator                 An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the facility type is Term
                                               Loan A facility, and zero otherwise.
                                               Source: DealScan
Term Loan B facility Indicator                 An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the facility type is Term
                                               Loan B facility or higher (C, D, …., H) or unlabeled, and zero otherwise.
                                               Source: DealScan
Log(total assets)                              Natural log of the total assets of the borrower at the end of fiscal year prior
                                               to the current loan.
                                               Source: Compustat
Fixed assets/Total assets                      The borrower's asset tangibility at the end of fiscal year prior to the current
                                               loan, calculated as Net Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E)/total assets
                                               Source: Compustat
Z-score                                        Altman's Z-score for the borrower at the end of fiscal year prior to the
                                               current loan.. Z-score is calculated as Z=1.2X1 + 1.4X2 + 3.3X3 + 0.6X4 +
                                               0.99X5, where X1 is working capital/total assets, X2 is retained
                                               earnings/total assets, X3 is EBIT/total assets, X4 is market value of
                                               equity/book value of total liabilities, and X5 is sales/total assets (Altman
                                               (1968)).
                                               Source: Compustat
Leverage                                       The borrower's book leverage at the end of fiscal year prior to the current
                                               loan, calculated as book value of total debt/book value of total assets.
                                               Source: Compustat
Industry-adusted ROA                           The borrower's ROA in excess of the median of the corresponding 2-digit
                                               SIC industry ROA at the end of fiscal year prior to the current loan.
                                               Source: Compustat
Log(Number of analyst following)               Natural log of the number of analysts following the borrower's stock.
                                               Missing values are coded as zero.
                                               Source: I/B/E/S
Institutional holdings                         The sum of the borrower's stock held by all institutional investors at the
                                               end of fiscal year prior to the current loan. Missing values are coded as
                                               zero.
                                               Source: Thompson Reuters Institutional Holdings
S&P Issuer Rating                              The borrower’s S&P long-term domestic issuer credit rating. A lower
                                               value corresponds to a lower rating, with the highest rating (AAA)
                                               receiving a value of 22 and the lowest rating (D) receiving a value of 1.
                                               Missing ratings are assigned a value of zero.
                                               Source: Compustat
High-yield Spread                              Market credit spread in the month of loan issuance. The credit spread is
                                               measured as (Bank of America Merrill Lynch US Corporate High Yield
                                               BB Option-Adjusted Spread – Bank of America Merrill Lynch US
                                               Corporate AAA Option-Adjusted Spread) in basis points.
                                               Source: Federal Reserve Bank




                                                        42
                                               Appendix B: Summary statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the final sample that has a full set of data (12,346 facilities). All
continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% level.

                                                                         N      Mean     25th Pct.   Median   75th Pct.   Std. Dev.
Panel A: Facility characteristics
    Facility amount ($MM)                                              12,346    159       17         65        200         253
    Number of participating lenders                                    12,346    6.18     1.00       3.00      8.00         7.31
    % of participating lender with past relationship                   12,346   30.53     0.00       9.52      57.14       37.08
    Maturity (months)                                                  12,346   45.68     27.00      47.00     60.00       23.12
    Secured indicator                                                  12,346   0.731     0.000      1.000     1.000       0.443
    Second-lien indicator                                              12,346   0.010     0.000      0.000     0.000       0.099
    Covenant indicator                                                 12,346   0.821     1.000      1.000     1.000       0.383
    Syndicated indicator                                               12,346   0.877     1.000      1.000     1.000       0.329
    Revolver indicator                                                 12,346   0.653     0.000      1.000     1.000       0.476
    All-in-drawn spread                                                12,346   249.4     155.0      225.0     300.0       127.4
    Non-bank participated                                              12,346   0.280     0.000      0.000     1.000       0.449
Panel B: Borrowing firm characteristics
    Total Assets ($MM)                                                 12,346    1,640      96         333      1,128      4,053
    Fixed assets/total assets                                          12,346    0.314     0.120      0.251     0.462      0.236
    Z-score                                                            12,346    3.170     1.315      2.462     3.992      3.684
    Leverage                                                           12,346    0.598     0.393      0.562     0.731      0.329
    Industry adjusted ROA                                              12,346   -0.080    -0.107     -0.030     0.015      0.202
    Number of analyst following                                        12,346    4.415     1.000      2.833     6.333      4.884
    Institutional holdings                                             12,346    0.427     0.124      0.407     0.702      0.321
    Has S&P issuer credit rating                                       12,346    0.426     0.000      0.000     1.000      0.494
    S&P issuer credit rating (conditional on having a credit rating)    5,255    9.944     9.000     10.000    11.000      2.658

Panel C: % of average loan share (conditional on participation)
    All bank syndicate members                                         3,664    94.8      100.0      100.0     100.0        14.3
         Commercial bank                                               3,620    90.0      85.5       100.0     100.0        17.7
         Investment bank                                               1,034    21.0       9.1       15.1      25.0         20.0
    All non-bank syndicate members                                      855     44.2      13.3       33.3      80.0         35.8
         Insurance company                                              77      11.2       4.0        8.0      13.3         13.6
         Finance company                                                654     35.3       8.2       20.0      50.0         34.7
         HF/PE                                                          297     34.5       9.2       19.6      50.0         33.9
         Mutual fund                                                    111     16.6       4.0        9.5      20.0         19.0
         Other non-bank syndicate members                               78      22.4       2.5        6.5      25.8         32.2
Panel D: % of being largest lender (conditional on participation)
    All bank syndicate members                                         3,664    96.6      100.0      100.0     100.0        18.2
         Commercial bank                                               3,620    94.3      100.0      100.0     100.0        23.3
         Investment bank                                               1,034    28.0       0.0        0.0      100.0        44.9
    All non-bank syndicate members                                      855     47.0       0.0        0.0      100.0        49.9
         Insurance company                                              77       7.8       0.0        0.0       0.0         27.0
         Finance company                                                654     41.4       0.0        0.0      100.0        49.3
         HF/PE                                                          297     34.3       0.0        0.0      100.0        47.6
         Mutual fund                                                    111     19.8       0.0        0.0       0.0         40.0
         Other non-bank syndicate members                               78      20.5       0.0        0.0       0.0         40.6




                                                                       43
                  Appendix C: Spread and payment schedule by facility type


                                                                                Facility type
                                                     Revolver      Term A                Term B             Term Loans
Total number of facilities in sample                 12,421             956               2,890               3,764
Avg. all-in-drawn spread
     Mean                                              230              271                311                   301
     Median                                            225              250                275                   275
Payment Schedule                                 N       (%)        N      (%)           N       (%)           N    (%)
Payment Schedule information available          27        (0.2)   558     (58.4)     1,655      (57.3)     1,750   (46.5)
Payment Period
    Bullet / Final Payment                       3       (11.1)    61     (10.9)       707      (42.7)      397    (22.7)
    Annually                                     2        (7.4)     9      (1.6)        11       (0.7)       33     (1.9)
    Semi-annually                                0        (0.0)    25      (4.5)        59       (3.6)       49     (2.8)
    Quarterly                                   16       (59.3)   432     (77.4)       815      (49.2)      798    (45.6)
    Monthly                                      6       (22.2)    29      (5.2)        59       (3.6)      463    (26.5)
    Other                                        0        (0.0)     2      (0.4)         4       (0.2)       10     (0.6)




                 Figure A.1. Distribution of Payment Period by Facility Type

    100%                                     (0.4)                      (0.2)                      (0.6)
                                             (5.2)                      (3.6)
                     (22.2)
                                                                                                   (26.5)
     80%
                                                                        (49.2)

     60%
                                            (77.4)
                     (59.3)                                                                        (45.6)
                                                                        (3.6)
                                                                        (0.7)
     40%

                                                                                                   (2.8)
                                                                        (42.7)                     (1.9)
     20%
                      (7.4)                  (4.5)
                                             (1.6)                                                 (22.7)
                     (11.1)                 (10.9)
       0%
                    Revolver                Term A                  Term B                      Term Loans

              Bullet/Final Pmt   Annually       Semi-annually       Quarterly           Monthly          Other




                                                        44
